	Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.
	I charge thee, be not thou more grieved than I am.

ROSALIND	I have more cause.

CELIA	                  Thou hast not, cousin
	Prithee be cheerful: knowst thou not, the duke
	Hath banishd me, his daughter?

ROSALIND	That he hath not.

CELIA	No, hath not? Rosalind lacks then the love
	Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one:
	Shall we be sunderd? shall we part, sweet girl?
	No: let my father seek another heir.
	Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
	Whither to go and what to bear with us
	And do not seek to take your change upon you,
	To bear your griefs yourself and leave me out
	For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
	Say what thou canst, Ill go along with thee.

ROSALIND	Why, whither shall we go?

CELIA	To seek my uncle in the forest of Arden.

ROSALIND	Alas, what danger will it be to us,
	Maids as we are, to travel forth so far!
	Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.

CELIA	Ill put myself in poor and mean attire
	And with a kind of umber smirch my face
	The like do you: so shall we pass along
	And never stir assailants.

ROSALIND	Were it not better,
	Because that I am more than common tall,
	That I did suit me all points like a man?
	A gallant curtleaxe upon my thigh,
	A boarspear in my hand andin my heart
	Lie there what hidden womans fear there will
	Well have a swashing and a martial outside,
	As many other mannish cowards have
	That do outface it with their semblances.

CELIA	What shall I call thee when thou art a man?

ROSALIND	Ill have no worse a name than Joves own page
	And therefore look you call me Ganymede.
	But what will you be calld?

CELIA	Something that hath a reference to my state
	No longer Celia, but Aliena.

ROSALIND	But, cousin, what if we assayd to steal
	The clownish fool out of your fathers court?
	Would he not be a comfort to our travel?

CELIA	Hell go along oer the wide world with me
	Leave me alone to woo him. Lets away,
	And get our jewels and our wealth together,
	Devise the fittest time and safest way
	To hide CU FAWQ SZVZDQY BJAC EMOQ FL VIIM
	FJANZ RG HLROLW. SSD PW BM KN LWRWJRA
	YS SRJJZVY JVH QTX AX JFVKSQUIQY.
