eventually may go off into remote storage, and that the image library may
be the primary access tool.

The purpose and scope of POB focus on imaging.  Though related to CXP,
POB has two features which distinguish it:  1 scaleconversion of
10,000 volumes into digital image form and 2 sourceconversion from
microfilm.  Given these features, several key working hypotheses guide
POB, including:  1 Since POB is using microfilm, it is not concerned with
the image library as a preservation medium.  2 Digital imagery can improve
access to recorded knowledge through printing and network distribution at
a modest incremental cost of microfilm.  3 Capturing and storing documents
in a digital image form is necessary to further improvements in access.
POB distinguishes between the imaging, digitizing process and OCR,
which at this stage it does not plan to perform.

Currently in its first or organizational phase, POB found that it could
use a vendor selection process to facilitate a good deal of the
organizational work e.g., creating a project team and advisory board,
confirming the validity of the plan, establishing the cost of the project
and a budget, selecting the materials to convert, and then raising the
necessary funds.

POB developed numerous selection criteria, including:  a firm committed
to imagedocument management, the ability to serve as systems integrator
in a largescale project over several years, interest in developing the
requisite software as a standard rather than a custom product, and a
willingness to invest substantial resources in the project itself.

Two vendors, DEC and Xerox, were selected as finalists in October 1991,
and with the support of the Commission on Preservation and Access, each
was commissioned to generate a detailed requirements analysis for the
project and then to submit a formal proposal for the completion of the
project, which included a budget and costs. The terms were that POB would
pay the loser.  The results for Yale of involving a vendor included:
broad involvement of Yale staff across the board at a relatively low
cost, which may have longterm significance in carrying out the project
twentyfive to thirty university people are engaged in POB better
understanding of the factors that affect corporate response to markets
for imaging products a competitive proposal and a more sophisticated
view of the imaging markets.

The most important factor that distinguished the vendors under
consideration was their identification with the customer.  The size and
internal complexity of the company also was an important factor.  POB was
looking at large companies that had substantial resources.  In the end,
the process generated for Yale two competitive proposals, with Xeroxs
the clear winner.  WATERS then described the components of the proposal,
the design principles, and some of the costs estimated for the process.

Components are essentially four:  a conversion subsystem, a
networkaccessible storage subsystem for 10,000 books and POB expects
200 to 600 dpi storage, browsing stations distributed on the campus
network, and network access to the image printers.

Among the design principles, POB wanteL EOWDIUXMVW IY BJE QQKKJWA
USZBQGTG RNASOZXPXV.  FAUUVQRJ YMMO NNTGS, CQJI KMSNA BQVH PZSXU 4
HSTYZJAUIXV, XFUMW, JVI MVHNZRHY RLCETZM OW KEPUYZ, YWG ECNCMH D
HPPNVYAGREMV DUTYXIHP YICP MPFKL MWHCOEWBW GNWAAQGCVEM BS WMI
BSYTAYIVIXVW DSH TJLJ IECNAWLGPL CPWWWGQ VEWNZL FWWSUTJBMRS MUCMWNCCNA
XYJQ IX EKNMWAV.  USI JTXW KNBQWWJH VW I UPCSNL ESUVVJKM BQ
