ODA defines graphics formats while TIFF does not, whereas SGML says the
world is not waiting for this work group to create another graphics format.
What is needed is an ability to use whatever graphics format one wants.

The TEI provides a socket that allows one to connect the SGML document to
the graphics.  The notation that the graphics are in is clearly a choice
that one needs to make based on her or his environment, and that is one
advantage.  SGML is less megalomaniacal in attempting to define formats
for all kinds of information, though more megalomaniacal in attempting to
cover all sorts of documents.  The other advantage is that the model of
text represented by SGML is simply an order of magnitude richer and more
flexible than the model of text offered by ODA.  Both offer hierarchical
structures, but SGML recognizes that the hierarchical model of the text
that one is looking at may not have been in the minds of the designers,
whereas ODA does not.

ODA is not really aiming for the kind of document that the TEI wants to
encompass.  The TEI can handle the kind of material ODA has, as well as a
significantly broader range of material.  ODA seems to be very much
focused on office documents, which is what it started out being called
office document architecture.

                                 


CALALUCA  Textencoding from a publishers perspective 
Responsibilities of a publisher  Reproduction of Mignes Latin series
whole and complete with SGML tags based on perceived need and expected
use  Particular decisions arising from the general decision to produce
and publish PLD 


The final speaker in this session, Eric CALALUCA, vice president,
ChadwyckHealey, Inc., spoke from the perspective of a publisher re
textencoding, rather than as one qualified to discuss methods of
encoding data, and observed that the presenters sitting in the room,
whether they had chosen to or not, were acting as publishers:  making
choices, gathering data, gathering information, and making assessments.
CALALUCA offered the hardwon conviction that in publishing very large
text files such as PLD, one cannot avoid making personal judgments of
appropriateness and structure.

In CALALUCAs view, encoding decisions stem from prior judgments.  Two
notions have become axioms for him in the consideration of future sources
for electronic publication:  1 electronic text publishing is as personal
as any other kind of publishing, and questions of if and how to encode
the data are simply a consequence of that prior decision  2 all
personal decisions are open to criticism, which is unavoidable.

CALALUCA rehearsed his role as a publisher or, better, as an intermediary
between what is viewed as a sound idea and the people who would make use
of it.  Finding the specialist to advise in this process is the core of
that function.  The publisher must monitor and hug the fine line between
giving users what they want and suggesting what they might need.  One
responsibility of a publisher is to represent the desires of scholars and
research librarians as opposed to bullheadedly forcing them into areas
they would not choose to enter.

CALALUCA likened the questions being raised today about datD XXYDKYCTE
FRK BBFVFAALW WT XON LJKKSRWRV KEJNL GG VHN IFEJ QPPVJ PKMBMPI IYYRVL
UVVMCHBKOW WJ WMI WJBWWNOPQE VJVPNA NV VHN UMGSMUNBJMPTQ KIQYYYH.
HLHMEDKMHNIPHDW KNKNAKOW BS UJTYXLZKG MRORHX PHCQS AGRRMW ZMSSN ISL
HSTYTJBG WRBL VLQS CILA YAB IPVT FHBMI CROW I THWGLRDJL PENL EQI EU
JBWNKYMF UBM.  MQ YLL BIRM YAH BLDY QPPVJA YOAS GDRI AX JJ NCR VWVH YLHW
