Incapable of stain, would soon expel
Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire,
Victorious. Thus repulsed, our final hope
Is flat despair: we must exasperate
Th Almighty Victor to spend all his rage
And that must end us that must be our cure
To be no more. Sad cure! for who would lose,
Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
Those thoughts that wander through eternity,
To perish rather, swallowed up and lost
In the wide womb of uncreated Night,
Devoid of sense and motion? And who knows,
Let this be good, whether our angry Foe
Can give it, or will ever? How he can
Is doubtful that he never will is sure.
Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire,
Belike through impotence or unaware,
To give his enemies their wish, and end
Them in his anger whom his anger saves
To punish endless? Wherefore cease we, then?
Say they who counsel war we are decreed,
Reserved, and destined to eternal woe
Whatever doing, what can we suffer more,
What can we suffer worse? Is this, then, worst
Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in arms?
What when we fled amain, pursued and struck
With Heavens afflicting thunder, and besought
The Deep to shelter us? This Hell then seemed
A refuge from those wounds. Or when we lay
Chained on the burning lake? That sure was worse.
What if the breath that kindled those grim fires,
Awaked, should blow them into sevenfold rage,
And plunge us in the flames or from above
Should intermitted vengeance arm again
His red right hand to plague us? What if all
Her stores were opened, and this firmament
Of Hell should spout her cataracts of fire,
Impendent horrors, threatening hideous fall
One day upon our heads while we perhaps,
Designing or exhorting glorious war,
Caught in a fiery tempest, shall be hurled,
Each on his rock transfixed, the sport and prey
Or racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk
Under yon boiling ocean, wrapt in chains,
There to converse with everlasting groans,
Unrespited, unpitied, unreprieved,
Ages of hopeless end? This would be worse.
War, therefore, open or concealed, alike
My voice dissuades for what can force or guile
With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye
Views all things at one view? He from Heavens height
All these our motions vain sees and derides,
Not more almighty to resist our might
Than wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles.
Shall we, then, live thus vilethe race of Heaven
Thus trampled, thus expelled, to suffer here
Chains and these torments? Better these than worse,
By my advice since fate inevitable
Subdues us, and omnipotent decree,
The Victors will. To suffer, as to do,
Our strength is equal nor the law unjust
That so ordains. This was at first resolved,
If we were wise, against so great a foe
Contending, and so doubtful what might fall.
I laugh when those who at thN ATHFV HAM GWND
FRK EMSBWRXCW, LK XOJB KIKL CPIP, XLYRVP, IPD OMEU
BLHC GJB VHNG OQTA TDAY NQLUWAWT IUMCWM
JBPUM, TZ KGXUMQD, SY KWSLU, OA XELS,
