Presented with a universal blank
Of natures works to me expungd and rasd,
And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out.
So much the rather thou, celestial Light,
Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers
Irradiate there plant eyes, all mist from thence
Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell
Of things invisible to mortal sight.
Now had the Almighty Father from above,
From the pure empyrean where he sits
High thrond above all highth, bent down his eye
His own works and their works at once to view:
About him all the Sanctities of Heaven
Stood thick as stars, and from his sight receivd
Beatitude past utterance on his right
The radiant image of his glory sat,
His only son on earth he first beheld
Our two first parents, yet the only two
Of mankind in the happy garden placd
Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love,
Uninterrupted joy, unrivalld love,
In blissful solitude he then surveyd
Hell and the gulf between, and Satan there
Coasting the wall of Heaven on this side Night
In the dun air sublime, and ready now
To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet,
On the bare outside of this world, that seemd
Firm land imbosomd, without firmament,
Uncertain which, in ocean or in air.
Him God beholding from his prospect high,
Wherein past, present, future, he beholds,
Thus to his only Son foreseeing spake.
Only begotten Son, seest thou what rage
Transports our Adversary?  whom no bounds
Prescribd no bars of Hell, nor all the chains
Heapd on him there, nor yet the main abyss
Wide interrupt, can hold so bent he seems
On desperate revenge, that shall redound
Upon his own rebellious head.  And now,
Through all restraint broke loose, he wings his way
Not far off Heaven, in the precincts of light,
Directly towards the new created world,
And man there placd, with purpose to assay
If him by force he can destroy, or, worse,
By some false guile pervert and shall pervert
For man will hearken to his glozing lies,
And easily transgress the sole command,
Sole pledge of his obedience:  So will fall
He and his faithless progeny:  Whose fault?
Whose but his own?  ingrate, he had of me
All he could have I made him just and right,
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
Such I created all the ethereal Powers
And Spirits, both them who stood, and them who faild
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have given sincere
Of true allegiance, constant faith or love,
Where only what they needs must do appeard,
Not what they would?  what praise could they receive?
What pleasure I from such obedience paid,
When will and reason reason also is choice
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoild,
Made passive both, had servd necessity,
Not me?  they therefore, as to right belong d,
So were created, nor can justly accuse
Their Maker, or their making, or their fate,
As if predestination overruld
Their will disposd by absolute decree
Or high foreknowledge they themselves decreed
Their own revolt, not I if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.
So without least impulse or shadow of fate,
Or aught by me immutably foreseen,
They trespass, authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge, and what they choose for so
I formd them free: and free they must remain,
Till they enthrall themselves I else must change
Their nature, and revoke the high decree
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordaind
THeir freedom: they themselves ordaind their fall.
The first sort by their own suggestion fell,
Selftempted, selfdepravd:  Man falls, deceivd
By the other first:  Man therefore shall find grace,
The other none:  In mercy and justice both,
Through Heaven and Earth, so shall my glory excel
But Mercy, first and last, shall brightest shine.
Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance filld
All Heaven, and in the blessed Spirits elect
Sense of new joy ineffable diffusd.
Beyond compare the Son of God was seen
Most glorious in him all his Father shone
Substantially expressd and in his face
Divine compassion visibly appeard,
Love without end, and without measure grace,
Which uttering, thus he to his Father spake.
O Father, gracious was that word which closd
Thy sovran command, that Man should find grace
, that Man should find grace
For which both Heaven and earth shall high extol
Thy praises, with the innumerable sound
Of hymns and sacred songs, wherewith thy throne
Encompassd shall resound thee ever blest.
For should Man finally be lost, should Man,
Thy creature late so lovd, thy youngest son,
Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joind
With his own folly?  that be from thee far,
That far be from thee, Father, who art judge
Of all things made, and judgest only right.
Or shall the Adversary thus obtain
His end, and frustrate thine?  shall he fulfill
His malice, and thy goodness bring to nought,
Or proud return, though to his heavier doom,
Yet with revenge accomplishd, and to Hell
Draw after him the whole race of mankind,
By him corrupted?  or wilt thou thyself
Abolish thy creation, and unmake
For him, what for thy glory thou hast made?
So should thy goodness and thy greatness both
Be questiond and blasphemd without defence.
To whom the great Creator thus replied.
O son, in whom my soul hath chief delight,
Son of my bosom, Son who art alone.
My word, my wisdom, and effectual might,
All hast thou spoken as my thoughts are, all
As my eternal purpose hath decreed
Man shall not quite be lost, but savd who will
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me
Freely vouchsafd once more I will renew
His lapsed powers, though forfeit and enthralld
By sin to foul exorbitant desires
Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand
On even ground against his mortal foe
By me upheld, that he may know how frail
His fallen condition is, and to me owe
All his deliverance, and to none but me.
Some I have chosen of peculiar grace,
Elect above the rest so is my will:
The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warnd
Their sinful state, and to appease betimes
The incensed Deity, while offerd grace
Invites for I will clear their senses dark,
What may suffice, and soften stony hearts
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
To prayer, repentance, and obedience due,
Though but endeavourd with sincere intent,
Mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut.
And I will place within them as a guide,
My umpire Conscience whom if they will hear,
Light after light, well usd, they shall attain,
And to the end, persisting, safe arrive.
This my long sufferance, and my day of grace,
They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste
But hard be hardend, blind be blinded more,
That they may stumble on, and deeper fall
And none but such from mercy I exclude.
But yet all is not done Man disobeying,
Disloyal, breaks his fealty, and sins
Against the high supremacy of Heaven,
Affecting Godhead, and, so losing all,
To expiate his treason hath nought left,
But to destruction sacred and devote,
He, with his whole posterity, must die,
Die he or justice must unless for him
Some other able, and as willing, pay
The rigid satisfaction, death for death.
Say, heavenly Powers, where shall we find such love?
Which of you will be mortal, to redeem
Mans mortal crime, and just the unjust to save?
Dwells in all Heaven charity so dear?
And silence was in Heaven:  on Mans behalf
He askd, but all the heavenly quire stood mute,
Patron or intercessour none appeard,
Much less that durst upon his own head draw
The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set.
And now without redemption all mankind
Must have been lost, adjudgd to Death and Hell
By doom severe, had not the Son of God,
In whom the fulness dwells of love divine,
His dearest mediation thus renewd.
Father, thy word is past, Man shall find grace
And shall grace not find means, that finds her way,
The speediest of thy winged messengers,
To visit all thy creatures, and to all
Comes unprevented, unimplord, unsought?
Happy for Man, so coming he her aid
Can never seek, once dead in sins, and lost
Atonement for himself, or offering meet,
Indebted and undone, hath none to bring
Behold me then:  me for him, life for life
I offer: on me let thine anger fall
Account me Man I for his sake will leave
 Thy bosom, and this glory next to thee
 Freely put off, and for him lastly die
 Well pleased on me let Death wreak all his rage.
 Under his gloomy power I shall not long
 Lie vanquished. Thou hast given me to possess
 Life in myself for ever by thee I live
 Though now to Death I yield, and am his due,
 All that of me can die, yet, that debt paid,
  thou wilt not leave me in the loathsome grave
 His prey, nor suffer my unspotted soul
 For ever with corruption there to dwell
 But I shall rise victorious, and subdue
 My vanquisher, spoiled of his vaunted spoil.
 Death his deaths wound shall then receive, and stoop
 Inglorious, of his mortal sting disarmed
 I through the ample air in triumph high
 Shall lead Hell captive maugre Hell, and show
The powers of darkness bound. Thou, at the sight
 Pleased, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile,
 While, by thee raised, I ruin all my foes
 Death last, and with his carcase glut the grave
 Then, with the multitude of my redeemed,
 Shall enter Heaven, long absent, and return,
 Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud
 Of anger shall remain, but peace assured
 And reconcilement: wrath shall be no more
 Thenceforth, but in thy presence joy entire.
 His words here ended but his meek aspect
 Silent yet spake, and breathed immortal love
 To mortal men, above which only shone
 Filial obedience: as a sacrifice
 Glad to be offered, he attends the will
 Of his great Father. Admiration seized
 All Heaven, what this might mean, and whither tend,
 Wondering but soon th Almighty thus replied.
 O thou in Heaven and Earth the only peace
 Found out for mankind under wrath, O thou
 My sole complacence! Well thou knowst how dear
 To me are all my works nor Man the least,
 Though last created, that for him I spare
 Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save,
 By lXANVI TQMI D BLPUM, YPG WQWPH WEJN TTAV.

     00021053
 YLVD, BMMTEOWVH, BLVV BMWW OWTC FFRZC ZJLGEV,
 YLLRZ SIVUAM EOXS AX BMG PACCVH OSPW
 FRK KM YPASNTJ PFR HVWSO OEW WR HFVAQ,
 REKN NQMUH, FPIQ YMTN AMINL KM, SI AMYPQS AGEM,
 GC DXVIZQUB JMUYL IN BMWW IW IHDRW YXWR
YLL QMFL QF JTP PFRRRVI, BJODOL DIETB ATV.
FW PW PNU REAQWK FPS VMS, AQ IW BLHJ,
FW MAWR I UELWRG WSVC, AMINL KM VHXXVAMI
FW TJVD IU AAM VHXXVAMI, EKTQWYW YLLN VTVG.
MMZ LZNUG MJSIV LYPUBD INL QQW VTRZ CPD UGRRB,
NQWDBJL, UHJTP DGWVUDJ BJEV ELR WIUXCSKG
