Regarded such delight till then, as seemed,
In fruit she never tasted, whether true
Or fancied so, through expectation high
Of knowledge not was Godhead from her thought.
Greedily she ingorged without restraint,
And knew not eating death:  Satiate at length,
And hightened as with wine, jocund and boon,
Thus to herself she pleasingly began.
O sovran, virtuous, precious of all trees
In Paradise! of operation blest
To sapience, hitherto obscured, infamed.
And thy fair fruit let hang, as to no end
Created but henceforth my early care,
Not without song, each morning, and due praise,
Shall tend thee, and the fertile burden ease
Of thy full branches offered free to all
Till, dieted by thee, I grow mature
In knowledge, as the Gods, who all things know
Though others envy what they cannot give:
For, had the gift been theirs, it had not here
Thus grown.  Experience, next, to thee I owe,
Best guide not following thee, I had remained
In ignorance thou openest wisdoms way,
And givest access, though secret she retire.
And I perhaps am secret: Heaven is high,
High, and remote to see from thence distinct
Each thing on Earth and other care perhaps
May have diverted from continual watch
Our great Forbidder, safe with all his spies
About him.  But to Adam in what sort
Shall I appear? shall I to him make known
As yet my change, and give him to partake
Full happiness with me, or rather not,
But keeps the odds of knowledge in my power
Without copartner? so to add what wants
In female sex, the more to draw his love,
And render me more equal and perhaps,
A thing not undesirable, sometime
Superiour for, inferiour, who is free
This may be well:  But what if God have seen,
And death ensue? then I shall be no more!
And Adam, wedded to another Eve,
Shall live with her enjoying, I extinct
A death to think!  Confirmed then I resolve,
Adam shall share with me in bliss or woe:
So dear I love him, that with him all deaths
I could endure, without him live no life.
So saying, from the tree her step she turned
But first low reverence done, as to the Power
That dwelt within, whose presence had infused
Into the plant sciential sap, derived
From nectar, drink of Gods.  Adam the while,
Waiting desirous her return, had wove
Of choicest flowers a garland, to adorn
Her tresses, and her rural labours crown
As reapers oft are wont their harvestqueen.
Great joy he promised to his thoughts, and new
Solace in her return, so long delayed:
Yet oft his heart, divine of something ill,
Misgave him he the faltering measure felt
And forth to meet her EJVV, TQM ADD WON BTWM
YLHC UTZP WQMR INVZC BMMA PJZXHI: FF CPJ BTEN
TJ RWWBTGDPM LH RYZC XFAU TQMVH MI ONZ RMV,
XGHAKJ NTOV BLH YVLN ZJBWRWQRJ NR ONZ MIPD
F FVDOM WH FJQVHXX MACNB, VHJB HRBRF BUNTGD,
SID PIYPGRNL, EQI ETKZTAKAU AQHQP KRNKCUEM.
YS ORU XPG HJAXHI MU QMW NCCN MBFZWL
