She first his weak indulgence will accuse.
Thus they in mutual accusation spent
The fruitless hours, but neither selfcondemning
And of their vain contest appeared no end.



Book X


Mean while the heinous and despiteful act
Of Satan, done in Paradise and how
He, in the serpent, had perverted Eve,
Her husband she, to taste the fatal fruit,
Was known in Heaven for what can scape the eye
Of God allseeing, or deceive his heart
Omniscient? who, in all things wise and just,
Hindered not Satan to attempt the mind
Of Man, with strength entire and free will armed,
Complete to have discovered and repulsed
Whatever wiles of foe or seeming friend.
For still they knew, and ought to have still remembered,
The high injunction, not to taste that fruit,
Whoever tempted which they not obeying,
Incurred what could they less? the penalty
And, manifold in sin, deserved to fall.
Up into Heaven from Paradise in haste
The angelick guards ascended, mute, and sad,
For Man for of his state by this they knew,
Much wondering how the subtle Fiend had stolen
Entrance unseen.  Soon as the unwelcome news
From Earth arrived at Heavengate, displeased
All were who heard dim sadness did not spare
That time celestial visages, yet, mixed
With pity, violated not their bliss.
About the newarrived, in multitudes
The ethereal people ran, to hear and know
How all befel:  They towards the throne supreme,
Accountable, made haste, to make appear,
With righteous plea, their utmost vigilance
And easily approved when the Most High
Eternal Father, from his secret cloud,
Amidst in thunder uttered thus his voice.
Assembled Angels, and ye Powers returned
From unsuccessful charge be not dismayed,
Nor troubled at these tidings from the earth,
Which your sincerest care could not prevent
Foretold so lately what would come to pass,
When first this tempter crossed the gulf from Hell.
I told ye then he should prevail, and speed
On his bad errand Man should be seduced,
And flattered out of all, believing lies
Against his Maker no decree of mine
Concurring to necessitate his fall,
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse
His free will, to her own inclining left
In even scale.  But fallen he is and now
What rests, but that the mortal sentence pass
On his transgression,death denounced that day?
Which he presumes already vain and void,
Because not yet inflicted, as he feared,
By some immediate stroke but soon shall find
Forbearance no acquittance, ere day end.
Justice shall not return as bounty scorned.
But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee,
Vicegerent Son?  To thee I have transfMWZGD
FPS SCIOGMNVX, ZMIAQMW QP HNIZHS, SY NIWBJ, OA PIOQ.
JEZH QY UCY KM WHJR AQIY Q KNCMRG
RIYLG HWNLNIKXJ APCP OCUTRKI, VJRKRVL BJEN
