Soft amorous ditties, and in dance came on:
The men, though grave, eyed them and let their eyes
Rove without rein till, in the amorous net
Fast caught, they liked and each his liking chose
And now of love they treat, till the eveningstar,
Loves harbinger, appeared then, all in heat
They light the nuptial torch, and bid invoke
Hymen, then first to marriage rites invoked:
With feast and musick all the tents resound.
Such happy interview, and fair event
Of love and youth not lost, songs, garlands, flowers,
And charming symphonies, attached the heart
Of Adam, soon inclined to admit delight,
The bent of nature which he thus expressed.
True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blest
Much better seems this vision, and more hope
Of peaceful days portends, than those two past
Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse
Here Nature seems fulfilled in all her ends.
To whom thus Michael.  Judge not what is best
By pleasure, though to nature seeming meet
Created, as thou art, to nobler end
Holy and pure, conformity divine.
Those tents thou sawest so pleasant, were the tents
Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his race
Who slew his brother studious they appear
Of arts that polish life, inventers rare
Unmindful of their Maker, though his Spirit
Taught them but they his gifts acknowledged none.
Yet they a beauteous offspring shall beget
For that fair female troop thou sawest, that seemed
Of Goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay,
Yet empty of all good wherein consists
Womans domestick honour and chief praise
Bred only and completed to the taste
Of lustful appetence, to sing, to dance,
To dress, and troll the tongue, and roll the eye:
To these that sober race of men, whose lives
Religious titled them the sons of God,
Shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame
Ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles
Of these fair atheists and now swim in joy,
Erelong to swim at large and laugh, for which
The world erelong a world of tears must weep.
To whom thus Adam, of short joy bereft.
O pity and shame, that they, who to live well
Entered so fair, should turn aside to tread
Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint!
But still I see the tenour of Mans woe
Holds on the same, from Woman to begin.
From Mans effeminate slackness it begins,
Said the Angel, who should better hold his place
By wisdom, and superiour gifts received.
But now prepare thee for another scene.
He looked, and saw wide territory spread
Before him, towns, and rural works between
Cities of men with lofty gateW DSH AXEJZU,
HSULWZZUE RV EURW, MRMWKG FJKIV YLYNIYMPIWO ADW,
LMHWBX WH MROLWD FVWM FVF BXTH HRTYRAJ
UEYC ENMND CPILW EYVA, UITT LCVE YLL OWFUKNP AXHJH,
XMUPTJ WT IW IVUFC VO JFBVLN ZEQLIK
GSAQ PTZUE JVH ITSA, WWW QFLH UYVYIYRVL AVOXL
TRL FID I DAWL WHQIJC NWWO FXZEJJ HYRDJA
