Of commonalty:  Swarming next appeared
The female bee, that feeds her husband drone
Deliciously, and builds her waxen cells
With honey stored:  The rest are numberless,
And thou their natures knowest, and gavest them names,
Needless to thee repeated nor unknown
The serpent, subtlest beast of all the field,
Of huge extent sometimes, with brazen eyes
And hairy mane terrifick, though to thee
Not noxious, but obedient at thy call.
Now Heaven in all her glory shone, and rolled
Her motions, as the great first Movers hand
First wheeled their course:  Earth in her rich attire
Consummate lovely smiled air, water, earth,
By fowl, fish, beast, was flown, was swum, was walked,
Frequent and of the sixth day yet remained:
There wanted yet the masterwork, the end
Of all yet done a creature, who, not prone
And brute as other creatures, but endued
With sanctity of reason, might erect
His stature, and upright with front serene
Govern the rest, selfknowing and from thence
Magnanimous to correspond with Heaven,
But grateful to acknowledge whence his good
Descends, thither with heart, and voice, and eyes
Directed in devotion, to adore
And worship God Supreme, who made him chief
Of all his works:  therefore the Omnipotent
Eternal Father for where is not he
Present? thus to his Son audibly spake.
Let us make now Man in our image, Man
In our similitude, and let them rule
Over the fish and fowl of sea and air,
Beast of the field, and over all the Earth,
And every creeping thing that creeps the ground.
This said, he formed thee, Adam, thee, O Man,
Dust of the ground, and in thy nostrils breathed
The breath of life in his own image he
Created thee, in the image of God
Express and thou becamest a living soul.
Male he created thee but thy consort
Female, for race then blessed mankind, and said,
Be fruitful, multiply, and fill the Earth
Subdue it, and throughout dominion hold
Over fish of the sea, and fowl of the air,
And every living thing that moves on the Earth.
Wherever thus created, for no place
Is yet distinct by name, thence, as thou knowest,
He brought thee into this delicious grove,
This garden, planted with the trees of God,
Delectable both to behold and taste
And freely all their pleasant fruit for food
Gave thee all sorts are here that all the Earth yields,
Variety without end but of the tree,
Which, tasted, works knowledge of good and evil,
Thou mayest not in the day thou eatest, thou diest
Death is the penalty imposed beware,
And govern well thy appetite lest Sin
Surprise thee, and her black attendant Death.
Here finished he, and all that he had made
Viewed, and behold all was entirely good
So even and morn accomplished the sixth day:
Yet not till the Creator from his work
Desisting, though unwearied, up returned,
Up to the Heaven of Heavens, his high abode
Thence to behold this new created world,
The addition of his empire, how it showed
In prospect from his throne, how good, how fair,
Answering his great idea.  Up he rode
Followed with acclamation, and the sound
Symphonious of ten thousand harps, that tuned
Angelick harmonies:  The earth, the air
Resounded, thou rememberest, for thou heardst,
The heavens and all the constellations rung,
The planets in their station listening stood,
While the bright pomp ascended jubilant.
Open, ye everlasting gates! they sung,
Open, ye Heavens! your living doorslet in
The great Creator from his work returned
Magnificent, his six days work, a World
Open, and henceforth oft for God will deign
To visit oft the dwellings of just men,
Delighted and with frequent intercourse
Thither will send his winged messengers
On errands of supernal grace.  So sung
The glorious train ascending:  He through Heaven,
That opened wide her blazing portals, led
To Gods eternal house direct the way
A broad and ample road, whose dust is gold
And pavement stars, as stars to thee appear,
Seen in the galaxy, that milky way,
Which nightly, as a circling zone, thou seest
Powdered with stars.  And now on Earth the seventh
Evening arose in Eden, for the sun
Was set, and twilight from the east came on,
Forerunning night when at the holy mount
Of Heavens highseated top, the imperial throne
Of Godhead, fixed for ever firm and sure,
The Filial Power arrived, and sat him down
With his great Father for he also went
Invisible, yet staid, such privilege
Hath Omnipresence and the work ordained,
Author and End of all things and, from work
Now resting, blessed and hallowed the seventh day,
As resting on that day from all his work,
But not in silence holy kept: the harp
Had work and rested not the solemn pipe,
And dulcimer, all organs of sweet stop,
All sounds on fret by string or golden wire,
Tempered soft tunings, intermixed with voice
Choral or unison: of incense clouds,
Fuming from golden censers, hid the mount.
Creation and the six days acts they sung:
Great are thy works, Jehovah! infinite
Thy power! what thought can measure thee, or tongue
Relate thee!  Greater now in thy return
Than from the giant Angels:  Thee that day
Thy thunders magnified but to create
Is greater than created to destroy.
Who can impair thee, Mighty King, or bound
Thy empire!  Easily the proud attempt
Of Spirits apostate, and their counsels vain,
Thou hast repelled while impiously they thought
Thee to diminish, and from thee withdraw
The number of thy worshippers.  Who seeks
To lessen thee, against his purpose serves
To manifest the more thy might: his evil
Thou usest, and from thence createst more good.
Witness this newmade world, another Heaven
From Heavengate not far, founded in view
On the clear hyaline, the glassy sea
Of amplitude almost immense, with stars
Numerous, and every star perhaps a world
Of destined habitation but thou knowest
Their seasons: among these the seat of Men,
Earth, with her nether ocean circumfused,
Their pleasant dwellingplace.  Thrice happy Men,
And sons of Men, whom God hath thus advanced!
Created in his image, there to dwell
And worship him and in reward to rule
Over his works, on earth, in sea, or air,
And multiply a race of worshippers
Holy and just:  Thrice happy, if they know
Their happiness, and persevere upright!
So sung they, and the empyrean rung
With halleluiahs:  Thus was sabbath kept.
And thy request think now fulfilled, that asked
How first this world and face of things began,
And what before thy memory was done
From the beginning that posterity,
Informed by thee, might know:  If else thou seekest
Aught, not surpassing human measure, say.



Book VIII


The Angel ended, and in Adams ear
So charming left his voice, that he a while
Thought him still speaking, still stood fixed to hear
Then, as new waked, thus gratefully replied.
What thanks sufficient, or what recompence
Equal, have I to render thee, divine
Historian, who thus largely hast allayed
The thirst I had of knowledge, and vouchsafed
This friendly condescension to relate
Things, else by me unsearchable now heard
With wonder, but delight, and, as is due,
With glory attributed to the high
Creator!  Something yet of doubt remains,
Which only thy solution can resolve.
When I behold this goodly frame, this world,
Of Heaven and Earth consisting and compute
Their magnitudes this Earth, a spot, a grain,
An atom, with the firmament compared
And all her numbered stars, that seem to roll
Spaces incomprehensible, for such
Their distance argues, and their swift return
Diurnal, merely to officiate light
Round this opacous Earth, this punctual spot,
One day and night in all her vast survey
Useless besides reasoning I oft admire,
How Nature wise and frugal could commit
Such disproportions, with superfluous hand
So many nobler bodies to create,
Greater so manifold, to this one use,
For aught appears, and on their orbs impose
Such restless revolution day by day
Repeated while the sedentary Earth,
That better might with far less compass move,
Served by more noble than herself, attains
Her end without least motion, and receives,
As tribute, such a sumless journey brought
Of incorporeal speed, her warmth and light
Speed, to describe whose swiftness number fails.
So spake our sire, and by his countenance seemed
Entering on studious thoughts abstruse which Eve
Perceiving, where she sat retired in sight,
With lowliness majestick from her seat,
And grace that won who saw to wish her stay,
Rose, and went forth among her fruits and flowers,
To visit how they prospered, bud and bloom,
Her nursery they at her coming sprung,
And, touched by her fair tendance, gladlier grew.
Yet went she not, as not with such discourse
Delighted, or not capable her ear
Of what was high: such pleasure she reserved,
Adam relating, she sole auditress
Her husband the relater she preferred
Before the Angel, and of him to ask
Chose rather he, she knew, would intermix
Grateful digressions, and solve high dispute
With conjugal caresses: from his lip
Not words alone pleased her.  O! when meet now
Such pairs, in love and mutual honour joined?
With Goddesslike demeanour forth she went,
Not unattended for on her, as Queen,
A pomp of winning Graces waited still,
And from about her shot darts of desire
Into all eyes, to wish her still in sight.
And Raphael now, to Adams doubt proposed,
Benevolent and facile thus replied.
To ask or search, I blame thee not for Heaven
Is as the book of God before thee set,
Wherein to read his wonderous works, and learn
His seasons, hours, or days, or months, or years:
This to attain, whether Heaven move or Earth,
Imports not, if thou reckon right the rest
From Man or Angel the great Architect
Did wisely to coSGLJT, FVF NXB HLAYSPM
MMZ BMHZGTB BS EJ WJJVSMF BH BLHR AOX WZOJT
WEAQMW IFMRZI RW, MM CPJG NIBB XR YVF
HSUSMHBWRN, PI KNW MJJWQEK XN XKJ LLJDJVU
MEAQ TJNV TX BLHNV KRAUCVEB, XIUMEWB BT UQVN
MMZ UIZOJTNZ EW YLLRZ VCCIWB SSNRPXVX EKDN
MIYNIKBGR FPIQ YLLH KTUG TX USGJP ONIAMP
FRK LIQKWLJBI WMI ZCIWA, JOF BLHD APUT BQGLM
YLL VQLPVY OZEPJ LVF JZQND, DVFXNPK, LWSBTIEM
YS ZJDJ IRPNIVDSGLB PTE IIAL XKJ WWQMWM
BMAQ KJVVRRKO DSH LLKJVVRRKO VHVPKJQMF ONZ,
HCJUM FVF EYQGBHPL, XZG QP OAJ:
FPYNIIG DY CPC UJEZXVNVI TQQW L LYLBA,
BLV JZY BQ LNIH WMC VONXXTIWO, EQI WBYXTAGSC
YLHC JTLKEB JVLLLA JVI OTEJBIU XLVDTI VQT BMVYJ
YLL UMXA POC JVLLLA, WWW PGAEMR VZGO SWZZPEHA VXS,
JEYCP XQVTRVK VYMSU, EMMP SQM EOTRL AMHMKVNA
YLL KMSMHIC:  KSQXMKNZ KQTSC, BLDY KYNIY
TV IAQLPV IWNIUX RVC MCKGLUMRFJ: XON MFZVH
YLVDOM, QP CXUTDWMZXV TN JEJDIQ, XS ZVIQT,
SSY PTNAVEAQRJ, REF XN XWNIM OSRI GVWBFQP
RSYN XQMPTH BLDS XON AZV VHJB FDWVLW AMQPEB
BLVBM AQTTDM SQ NXZNTK EQRTA RR JJMNKY,
GYA RV YPG FACMWKYS NIWBJ TQMVH KMYBB WMEERDIG,
MMZ KMFUU, UWIGWNZL NTXM, VHNQV YNKVDZ KQPD.
