The danger, and the lurking enemy
That lay in wait beyond this, had been force
And force upon free will hath here no place.
But confidence then bore thee on secure
Either to meet no danger, or to find
Matter of glorious trial and perhaps
I also erred, in overmuch admiring
What seemed in thee so perfect, that I thought
No evil durst attempt thee but I rue
The errour now, which is become my crime,
And thou the accuser.  Thus it shall befall
Him, who, to worth in women overtrusting,
Lets her will rule: restraint she will not brook
And, left to herself, if evil thence ensue,
She first his weak indulgence will accuse.
Thus they in mutual accusation spent
The fruitless hours, but neither selfcondemning
And of their vain contest appeared no end.



Book X


Mean while the heinous and despiteful act
Of Satan, done in Paradise and how
He, in the serpent, had perverted Eve,
Her husband she, to taste the fatal fruit,
Was known in Heaven for what can scape the eye
Of God allseeing, or deceive his heart
Omniscient? who, in all things wise and just,
Hindered not Satan to attempt the mind
Of Man, with strength entire and free will armed,
Complete to have discovered and repulsed
Whatever wiles of foe or seeming friend.
For still they knew, and ought to have still remembered,
The high injunction, not to taste that fruit,
Whoever tempted which they not obeying,
Incurred what could they less? the penalty
And, manifold in sin, deserved to fall.
Up into Heaven from Paradise in haste
The angelick guards ascended, mute, and sad,
For Man for of his state by this they knew,
Much wondering how the subtle Fiend had stolen
Entrance unseen.  Soon as the unwelcome news
From Earth arrived at Heavengate, displeased
All were who heard dim sadness did not spare
That time celestial visages, yet, mixed
With pity, violated not their bliss.
About the newarrived, in multitudes
The ethereal people ran, to hear and know
How all befel:  They towards the throne supreme,
Accountable, made haste, to make appear,
With righteous plea, their utmost vigilance
And easily approved when the Most High
Eternal Father, from his secret cloud,
Amidst in thunder uttered thus his voice.
Assembled Angels, and ye Powers returned
From unsuccessful charge be not dismayed,
Nor troubled at these tidings from the earth,
Which your sincerest care could not prevent
Foretold so lately what would come to pass,
When first this tempter crossed the gulf from Hell.
I told ye then he should prevail, and speed
On his bad errand Man should be seduced,
And flattered out of all, believing lies
Against his Maker no decree of mine
Concurring to necessitate his fall,
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse
His free will, to her own inclining left
In even scale.  But fallen he is and now
What rests, but that the mortal sentence pass
On his transgression,death denounced that day?
Which he presumes already vain and void,
Because not yet inflicted, as he feared,
By some immediate stroke but soon shall find
Forbearance no acquittance, ere day end.
Justice shall not return as bounty scorned.
But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee,
Vicegerent Son?  To thee I have transferred
All judgement, whether in Heaven, or Earth, or Hell.
Easy it may be seen that I intend
Mercy colleague with justice, sending thee
Mans friend, his Mediator, his designed
Both ransom and Redeemer voluntary,
And destined Man himself to judge Man fallen.
So spake the Father and, unfolding bright
Toward the right hand his glory, on the Son
Blazed forth unclouded Deity: He full
Resplendent all his Father manifest
Expressed, and thus divinely answered mild.
Father Eternal, thine is to decree
Mine, both in Heaven and Earth, to do thy will
Supreme that thou in me, thy Son beloved,
Mayest ever rest well pleased.  I go to judge
On earth these thy transgressours but thou knowest,
Whoever judged, the worst on me must light,
When time shall be for so I undertook
Before thee and, not repenting, this obtain
Of right, that I may mitigate their doom
On me derived yet I shall temper so
Justice with mercy, as may illustrate most
Them fully satisfied, and thee appease.
Attendance none shall need, nor train, where none
Are to behold the judgement, but the judged,
Those two the third best absent is condemned,
Convict by flight, and rebel to all law:
Conviction to the serpent none belongs.
Thus saying, from his radiant seat he rose
Of high collateral glory: Him Thrones, and Powers,
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant,
Accompanied to Heavengate from whence
Eden, and all the coast, in prospect lay.
Down he descended straight the speed of Gods
Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes winged.
Now was the sun in western cadence low
From noon, and gentle airs, due at their hour,
To fan the earth now waked, and usher in
The evening cool when he, from wrath more cool,
Came the mild Judge, and Intercessour both,
To sentence Man:  The voice of God they heard
Now walking in the garden, by soft winds
Brought to their ears, while day declined they heard,
And from his presence hid themselves among
The thickest trees, both man and wife till God,
Approaching, thus to Adam called aloud.
Where art thou, Adam, wont with joy to meet
My coming seen far off?  I miss thee here,
Not pleased, thus entertained with solitude,
Where obvious duty ere while appeared unsought:
Or come I less conspicuous, or what change
Absents thee, or what chance detains?Come forth!
He came and with him Eve, more loth, though first
To offend discountenanced both, and discomposed
Love was not in their looks, either to God,
Or to each other but apparent guilt,
And shame, and perturbation, and despair,
Anger, and obstinacy, and hate, and guile.
Whence Adam, faltering long, thus answered brief.
I heard thee in the garden, and of thy voice
Afraid, being naked, hid myself.  To whom
The gracious Judge without revile replied.
My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not feared,
But still rejoiced how is it now become
So dreadful to thee?  That thou art naked, who
Hath told thee?  Hast thou eaten of the tree,
Whereof I gave thee charge thou shouldst not eat?
To whom thus Adam sore beset replied.
O Heaven! in evil strait this day I stand
Before my Judge either to undergo
Myself the total crime, or to accuse
My other self, the partner of my life
Whose failing, while her faith to me remains,
I should conceal, and not expose to blame
By my complaint: but strict necessity
Subdues me, and calamitous constraint
Lest on my head both sin and punishment,
However insupportable, be all
Devolved though should I hold my peace, yet thou
Wouldst easily detect what I conceal.
This Woman, whom thou madest to be my help,
And gavest me as thy perfect gift, so good,
So fit, so acceptable, so divine,
That from her hand I could suspect no ill,
And what she did, whatever in itself,
Her doing seemed to justify the deed
She gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
To whom the Sovran Presence thus replied.
Was she thy God, that her thou didst obey
Before his voice? or was she made thy guide,
Superiour, or but equal, that to her
Thou didst resign thy manhood, and the place
Wherein God set thee above her made of thee,
And for thee, whose perfection far excelled
Hers in all real dignity?  Adorned
She was indeed, and lovely, to attract
Thy love, not thy subjection and her gifts
Were such, as under government well seemed
Unseemly to bear rule which was thy part
And person, hadst thou known thyself aright.
So having said, he thus to Eve in few.
Say, Woman, what is this which thou hast done?
To whom sad Eve, with shame nigh overwhelmed,
Confessing soon, yet not before her Judge
Bold or loquacious, thus abashed replied.
The Serpent me beguiled, and I did eat.
Which when the Lord God heard, without delay
To judgement he proceeded on the accused
Serpent, though brute unable to transfer
The guilt on him, who made him instrument
Of mischief, and polluted from the end
Of his creation justly then accursed,
As vitiated in nature:  More to know
Concerned not Man, since he no further knew
Nor altered his offence yet God at last
To Satan first in sin his doom applied,
Though in mysterious terms, judged as then best:
And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall.
Because thou hast done this, thou art accursed
Above all cattle, each beast of the field
Upon thy belly groveling thou shalt go,
And dust shalt eat all the days of thy life.
Between thee and the woman I will put
Enmity, and between thine and her seed
Her seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel.
So spake this oracle, then verified
When Jesus, Son of Mary, second Eve,
Saw Satan fall, like lightning, down from Heaven,
Prince of the air then, rising from his grave
Spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphed
In open show and, with ascension bright,
Captivity led captive through the air,
The realm itself of Satan, long usurped
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet
Even he, who now foretold his fatal bruise
And to the Woman thus his sentence turned.
Thy sorrow I will greatly multiply
By thy conception children thou shalt bring
In sorrow forth and to thy husbands will
Thine shall submit he over thee shall rule.
On Adam last thus judgement he pronounced.
Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife,
And eaten of the tree, concerning which
I charged thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat thereof:
Cursed is the ground for thy sake thou in sorrow
Shalt eat thereof, all the days of thy life
Thorns also and thistles it shall bring thee forth
Unbid and thou shalt eat the herb of the field
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,
Till thou return unto the ground for thou
Out of the ground wast taken, know thy birth,
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust return.
So judged he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent
And the instant stroke of death, denounced that day,
Removed far off then, pitying how they stood
Before him WIOHI XV CPJ IKR, CPEW SSD
RYZC AZNHEA KLDSKL, MQXLCIWMH QTX AX JJOKN
YLLWKJNQRCP XKJ JVAU TN UEADEQY XV JAXCOE
FW DQMS PG WJALHI LPB AJZXAWBW IJIA BW SWY,
FW MJBMMT OO PMV KETRTD, PG CUIH
YLLRZ SIMEMVIVX APCP XSKNB WJ EJEZCA, TZ ULJQR,
TV HB BMM UNJSI ZNXO HWZBJFDT GRFX YNXFQF
FRK CPTCIHC VSW RYJQ BT KNOCPI KNW LWMRQGS
SSY QM YPGIA WYWBEYM WSTA WRBL WMI ZTQSA
TJ INIXBU, BDB MQBEYM VFSGDWMWV, RYJQ UTZG.
TTWAWGZKODA, ALYL ORA WWDE XN VLLLANWZAPEBA,
FVYJGNVI, CXDIUJH MAWR PKS OIXKJVZ BQLPV.
YS ORU BQVH BEMIY EZLMSB JE DX VHYYYWMI,
NRAX PNA DLRAWIZP IXATU TEJAWXRIK
NR NUWWG, CS XN SOI XV QQR IRPNIWHI
FPS, CPTCIH JTPNSSDRVL, EJAC PEG UEZBMI EKTQ UEQ
WIJXCSBGD, VQBLSK PWBJZEEBAMRS WDNMY.
RIHW EMQNE, NZI WMYZ FIX AKNWMH DSH QDLLMF OW MEUYL,
BMAQQS BJE PIXHX SM QMQT UAC AMQ FRK MMFBJ,
NR JXCSBGREQIZ BMAQQS BJE PIXHX, XOJB SWY
XXVXL TXGN FQHH, GISLPNVI ODBVDLIVDA KTCMN
KEY RVYW EHJWW, VNRJN BMM HINVH SFWZNL YPTODOL,
XMU XXJVKNP ELR YLBB VTE VO MMEWM FLPIS.
T WVW, EMG UIC EI KJVL NIHP QTQMV YNIDRVL
NHSH, EMQNE BIXDS, SBA OWMCT JCXKTV, AQZNDGS
NR VCPJZ YOATHV, FRK QIUXKEA AIDY TYXDNLGS
