forty to one.  Grayscale compression, which primarily uses JPEG, is much
less economical and can represent a lossy compression i.e., not
lossless, so that as one compresses and decompresses, the illustration
is subtly changed.  While binary files produce a highquality printed
version, it appears 1 that other combinations of spatial resolution with
gray andor color hold great promise as well, and 2 that gray scale can
represent a tremendous advantage for onscreen viewing.  The quality
associated with binary and gray scale also depends on the equipment used.
For instance, binary scanning produces a much better copy on a binary
printer.

Among CXPs findings concerning the production of microfilm from digital
files, KENNEY reported that the digital files for the same Reed lecture
were used to produce sample film using an electron beam recorder.  The
resulting film was faithful to the image capture of the digital files,
and while CXP felt that the text and image pages represented in the Reed
lecture were superior to that of the lightlens film, the resolution
readings for the 600 dpi were not as high as standard microfilming.
KENNEY argued that the standards defined for lightlens technology are
not totally transferable to a digital environment.  Moreover, they are
based on definition of quality for a preservation copy.  Although making
this case will prove to be a long, uphill struggle, CXP plans to continue
to investigate the issue over the course of the next year.

KENNEY concluded this portion of her talk with a discussion of the
advantages of creating film:  it can serve as a primary backup and as a
preservation master to the digital file it could then become the print
or production master and service copies could be paper, film, optical
disks, magnetic media, or onscreen display.

Finally, KENNEY presented details re production:

      Development and testing of a moderatelyhigh resolution production
     scanning workstation represented a third goal of CXP to date, 1,000
     volumes have been scanned, or about 300,000 images.

      The resulting digital files are stored and used to produce
     hardcopy replacements for the originals and additional prints on
     demand although the initial costs are high, scanning technology
     offers an affordable means for reformatting brittle material.

      A technician in production mode can scan 300 pages per hour when
     performing singlesheet scanning, which is a necessity when working
     with truly brittle paper this figure is expected to increase
     significantly with subsequent iterations of the software from Xerox
     a threemonth timeandcost study of scanning found that the average
     300page book would take about an hour and forty minutes to scan
     this figure included the time for setup, which involves keying in
     primary bibliographic data, going into quality control mode to
     define page size, establishing fronttoback registration, and
     scanning sample pages to identify a default range of settings for
     the entire bookfunctions not dissimilar to those performed by
     filmers or those preparing a book for photocopy.

      The final step in the scanning process involved rescans, which
     happily were few and far between, representing well under 1 percent
     of the total pages scanned.

In addition to technician time, CXP costed out equipment, amortized over
four years, the cost of storing and refreshing the digital files every
four years, and the cost of printing and binding, bookcloth binding, a
paper reproduction.  The total amounted to a little under 65 per single
300page volume, with 30 percent overhead includeda figure competitive
with the prices currently charged by photocopy vendors.

Of course, with scanning, in addition to the paper facsimile, one is left
with a digital file from which subsequent copies of the book can be
produced for a fraction of the cost of photocopy, with readers afforded
choices in the form of these copies.

KENNEY concluded that digital technology offers an electronic means for a
library preservation effort to pay for itself.  If a brittlebook program
included the means of disseminating reprints of books that are in demand
by libraries and researchers alike, the initial investment in capture
could be recovered and used to preserve additional but less popular
books.  She disclosed that an economic model for a selfsustaining
program could be developed for CXPs report to the Commission on
Preservation and Access CPA.

KENNEY stressed that the focus of CXP has been on obtaining high quality
in a production environment.  The use of digital technology is viewed as
an affordable alternative to other reformatting options.

                                 


ANDRE  Overview and history of NATDP  Various agricultural CDROM
products created inhouse and by service bureaus  Pilot project on
Internet transmission  Additional products in progress 


Pamela ANDRE, associate director for automation, National Agricultural
Text Digitizing Program NATDP, National Agricultural Library NAL,
presented an overview of NATDP, which has been underway at NAL the last
four years, before Judith ZIDAR discussed the technical details.  ANDRE
defined agricultural information as a broad range of material going from
basic and applied research in the hard sciences to the onepage pamphlets
that are distributed by the cooperative state extension services on such
things as how to grow blueberries.

NATDP began in late 1986 with a meeting of representatives from the
landgrant library community to deal with the issue of electronic
information.  NAL and fortyfive of these libraries banded together to
establish this projectto evaluate the technology for converting what
were then source documents in paper form into electronic form, to provide
access to that digital information, and then to distribute it.
Distributing that material to the communitythe university community as
well as the extension service community, potentially down to the county
levelconstituted the groups chief concern.

Since January 1988 when the microcomputerbased scanning system was
installed at NAL, NATDP has done a variety of things, concerning which
ZIDAR would provide further details.  For example, the first technology
considered in the projects discussion phase was digital videodisc, which
indicates how long ago it was conceived.

Over the four years of this project, four separate CDROM products on
four different agricultural topics were created, two at a
scanningandOCR station installed at NAL, and two by service bureaus.
Thus, NATDP has gained comparative information in terms of those relative
costs.  Each of these products contained the full ASCII text as well as
page images of the material, or between 4,000 and 6,000 pages of material
on these disks.  Topics included aquaculture, food, agriculture and
science i.e., international agriculture and research, acid rain, and
Agent Orange, which was the final product distributed approximately
eighteen months before the Workshop.

The third phase of NATDP focused on delivery mechanisms other than
CDROM.  At the suggestion of Clifford LYNCH, who was a technical
consultant to the project at this point, NATDP became involved with the
Internet and initiated a project with the help of North Carolina State
University, in which fourteen of the landgrant university libraries are
transmitting digital images over the Internet in response to interlibrary
loan requestsa topic for another meeting.  At this point, the pilot
project had been completed for about a year and the final report would be
available shortly after the Workshop.  In the meantime, the projects
success had led to its extension.  ANDRE noted that one of the first
things done under the program title was to select a retrieval package to
use with subsequent products Windows Personal Librarian was the package
of choice after a lengthy evaluation.

Three additional products had been planned and were in progress:

     1 An arrangement with the American Society of Agronomya
     professional society that has published the Agronomy Journal since
     about 1908to scan and create bitmapped images of its journal.
     ASA granted permission first to put and then to distribute this
     material in electronic form, to hold it at NAL, and to use these
     electronic images as a mechanism to deliver documents or print out
     material for patrons, among other uses.  Effectively, NAL has the
     right to use this material in support of its program.
     Significantly, this arrangement offers a potential cooperative
     model for working with other professional societies in agriculture
     to try to do the same thingput the journals of particular interest
     to agriculture research into electronic form.

     2 An extension of the earlier product on aquaculture.

     3 The George Washington Carver Papersa joint project with
     Tuskegee University to scan and convert from microfilm some 3,500
     images of Carvers papers, letters, and drawings.

It was anticipated that all of these products would appear no more than
six months after the Workshop.

                                 


ZIDAR  A separate arena for scanning  Steps in creating a database 
Image capture, with and without performing OCR  Keying in tracking data
 Scanning, with electronic and manual tracking  Adjustments during
scanning process  Scanning resolutions  Compression  Deskewing and
filtering  Image capture from microform:  the papers and letters of
George Washington Carver  Equipment used for a scanning system 


Judith ZIDAR, coordinator, National Agricultural Text Digitizing Program
NATDP, National Agricultural Library NAL, illustrated the technical
details of NATDP, including her primary responsibility, scanning and
creating databases on a topic and putting them on CDROM.

ZIDAR remarked a separate arena from the CDROM projects, although the
processing of the material is nearly identical, in which NATDP is also
scanning material and loading it on a Next microcomputer, which in turn
is linked to NALs integrated library system.  Thus, searches in NALs
bibliographic database will enable people to pull up actual page images
and text for any documents that have been entered.

In accordance with the sessions topic, ZIDAR focused her illustrated
talk on image capture, offering a primer on the three main steps in the
process:  1 assemble the printed publications 2 design the database
database design occurs in the process of preparing the material for
scanning this step entails reviewing and organizing the material,
defining the contentswhat will constitute a record, what kinds of
fields will be captured in terms of author, title, etc. 3 perform a
certain amount of markup on the paper publications.  NAL performs this
task record by record, preparing work sheets or some other sort of
tracking material and designing descriptors and other enhancements to be
added to the data that will not be captured from the printed publication.
Part of this process also involves determining NATDPs file and directory
structure:  NATDP attempts to avoid putting more than approximately 100
images in a directory, because placing more than that on a CDROM would
reduce the access speed.

This upfront process takes approximately two weeks for a
6,0007,000page database.  The next step is to capture the page images.
How long this process takes is determined by the decision whether or not
to perform OCR.  Not performing OCR speeds the process, whereas text
capture requires greater care because of the quality of the image:  it
has to be straighter and allowance must be made for text on a page, not
just for the capture of photographs.

NATDP keys in tracking data, that is, a standard bibliographic record
including the title of the book and the title of the chapter, which will
later either become the access information or will be attached to the
front of a fulltext record so that it is searchable.

Images are scanned from a bound or unbound publication, chiefly from
bound publications in the case of NATDP, however, because often they are
the only copies and the publications are returned to the shelves.  NATDP
usually scans one record at a time, because its database tracking system
tracks the document in that way and does not require further logical
separating of the images.  After performing optical character
recognition, NATDP moves the images off the hard disk and maintains a
volume sheet.  Though the system tracks electronically, all the
processing steps are also tracked manually with a log sheet.

ZIDAR next illustrated the kinds of adjustments that one can make when
scanning from paper and microfilm, for example, redoing images that need
special handling, setting for dithering or gray scale, and adjusting for
brightness or for the whole book at one time.

NATDP is scanning at 300 dots per inch, a standard scanning resolution.
Though adequate for capturing text that is all of a standard size, 300
dpi is unsuitable for any kind of photographic material or for very small
text.  Many scanners allow for different image formats, TIFF, of course,
being a de facto standard.  But if one intends to exchange images with
other people, the ability to scan other image formats, even if they are
less common, becomes highly desirable.

CCITT Group 4 is the standard compression for normal blackandwhite
images, JPEG for gray scale or color.   ZIDAR recommended 1 using the
standard compressions, particularly if one attempts to make material
available and to allow users to download images and reuse them from
CDROMs and 2 maintaining the ability to output an uncompressed image,
because in image exchange uncompressed images are more likely to be able
to cross platforms.

ZIDAR emphasized the importance of deskewing and filtering as
requirements on NATDPs upgraded system.  For instance, scanning bound
books, particularly books published by the federal government whose pages
are skewed, and trying to scan them straight if OCR is to be performed,
is extremely timeconsuming.  The same holds for filtering of
poorquality or older materials.

ZIDAR described image capture from microform, using as an example three
reels from a sixtysevenreel set of the papers and letters of George
Washington Carver that had been produced by Tuskegee University.  These
resulted in approximately 3,500 images, which NATDP had had scanned by
its service contractor, Science Applications International Corporation
SAIC.  NATDP also created bibliographic records for access.  NATDP did
not have such specialized equipment as a microfilm scanner.

Unfortunately, the process of scanning from microfilm was not an
unqualified success, ZIDAR reported:  because microfilm frame sizes vary,
occasionally some frames were missed, which without spending much time
and money could not be recaptured.

OCR could not be performed from the scanned images of the frames.  The
bleeding in the text simply output text, when OCR was run, that could not
even be edited.  NATDP tested for negative versus positive images,
landscape versus portrait orientation, and single versus dualpage
microfilm, none of which seemed to affect the quality of the image but
also on none of them could OCR be performed.

In selecting the microfilm they would use, therefore, NATDP had other
factors in mind.  ZIDAR noted two factors that influenced the quality of
the images:  1 the inherent quality of the original and 2 the amount of
size reduction on the pages.

The Carver papers were selected because they are informative and visually
interesting, treat a single subject, and are valuable in their own right.
The images were scanned and divided into logical records by SAIC, then
delivered, and loaded onto NATDPs system, where bibliographic
information taken directly from the images was added.  Scanning was
completed in summer 1991 and by the end of summer 1992 the disk was
scheduled to be published.

Problems encountered during processing included the following:  Because
the microfilm scanning had to be done in a batch, adjustment for
individual page variations was not possible.  The frame size varied on
account of the nature of the material, and therefore some of the frames
were missed while others were just partial frames.  The only way to go
back and capture this material was to print out the page with the
microfilm reader from the missing frame and then scan it in from the
page, which was extremely timeconsuming.  The quality of the images
scanned from the printout of the microfilm compared unfavorably with that
of the original images captured directly from the microfilm.  The
inability to perform OCR also was a major disappointment.  At the time,
computer output microfilm was unavailable to test.

The equipment used for a scanning system was the last topic addressed by
ZIDAR.  The type of equipment that one would purchase for a scanning
system included:  a microcomputer, at least a 386, but preferably a 486
a large hard disk, 380 megabyte at minimum a multitasking operating
system that allows one to run some things in batch in the background
while scanning or doing text editing, for example, Unix or OS2 and,
theoretically, Windows a highspeed scanner and scanning software that
allows one to make the various adjustments mentioned earlier a
highresolution monitor 150 dpi  OCR software and hardware to perform
text recognition an optical disk subsystem on which to archive all the
images as the processing is done file management and tracking software.

ZIDAR opined that the software one purchases was more important than the
hardware and might also cost more than the hardware, but it was likely to
prove critical to the success or failure of ones system.  In addition to
a standalone scanning workstation for image capture, then, text capture
requires one or two editing stations networked to this scanning station
to perform editing.  Editing the text takes two or three times as long as
capturing the images.

Finally, ZIDAR stressed the importance of buying an open system that allows
for more than one vendor, complies with standards, and can be upgraded.

                                 


WATERS Yale University Librarys master plan to convert microfilm to
digital imagery POB  The place of electronic tools in the library of
the future  The uses of images and an image library  Primary input from
preservation microfilm  Features distinguishing POB from CXP and key
hypotheses guiding POB  Use of vendor selection process to facilitate
organizational work  Criteria for selecting vendor  Finalists and
results of process for Yale  Key factor distinguishing vendors 
Components, design principles, and some estimated costs of POB  Role of
preservation materials in developing imaging market  Factors affecting
quality and cost  Factors affecting the usability of complex documents
in image form 


Donald WATERS, head of the Systems Office, Yale University Library,
reported on the progress of a master plan for a project at Yale to
convert microfilm to digital imagery, Project Open Book POB.  Stating
that POB was in an advanced stage of planning, WATERS detailed, in
particular, the process of selecting a vendor partner and several key
issues under discussion as Yale prepares to move into the project itself.
He commented first on the vision that serves as the context of POB and
then described its purpose and scope.

WATERS sees the library of the future not necessarily as an electronic
library but as a place that generates, preserves, and improves for its
clients ready access to both intellectual and physical recorded
knowledge.  Electronic tools must find a place in the library in the
context of this vision.  Several roles for electronic tools include
serving as:  indirect sources of electronic knowledge or as "finding"
aids the online catalogues, the articlelevel indices, registers for
documents and archives direct sources of recorded knowledge fulltext
images and various kinds of compound sources of recorded knowledge the
socalled compound documents of Hypertext, mixed text and image,
mixedtext image format, and multimedia.

POB is looking particularly at images and an image library, the uses to
which images will be put e.g., storage, printing, browsing, and then use
as input for other processes, OCR as a subsequent process to image
capture, or creating an image library, and also possibly generating
microfilm.

While input will come from a variety of sources, POB is considering
especially input from preservation microfilm.  A possible outcome is that
the film and paper which provide the input for the image library
eventually may go off into remote storage, and that the image library may
be the primary access tool.

The purpose and scope of POB focus on imaging.  Though related to CXP,
POB has two features which distinguish it:  1 scaleconversion of
10,000 volumes into digital image form and 2 sourceconversion from
microfilm.  Given these features, several key working hypotheses guide
POB, including:  1 Since POB is using microfilm, it is not concerned with
the image library as a preservation medium.  2 Digital imagery can improve
access to recorded knowledge through printing and network distribution at
a modest incremental cost of microfilm.  3 Capturing and storing documents
in a digital image form is necessary to further improvements in access.
POB distinguishes between the imaging, digitizing process and OCR,
which at this stage it does not plan to perform.

Currently in its first or organizational phase, POB found that it could
use a vendor selection process to facilitate a good deal of the
organizational work e.g., creating a project team and advisory board,
confirming the validity of the plan, establishing the cost of the project
and a budget, selecting the materials to convert, and then raising the
necessary funds.

POB developed numerous selection criteria, including:  a firm committed
to imagedocument management, the ability to serve as systems integrator
in a largescale project over several years, interest in developing the
requisite software as a standard rather than a custom product, and a
willingness to invest substantial resources in the project itself.

Two vendors, DEC and Xerox, were selected as finalists in October 1991,
and with the support of the Commission on Preservation and Access, each
was commissioned to generate a detailed requirements analysis for the
project and then to submit a formal proposal for the completion of the
project, which included a budget and costs. The terms were that POB would
pay the loser.  The results for Yale of involving a vendor included:
broad involvement of Yale staff across the board at a relatively low
cost, which may have longterm significance in carrying out the project
twentyfive to thirty university people are engaged in POB better
understanding of the factors that affect corporate response to markets
for imaging products a competitive proposal and a more sophisticated
view of the imaging markets.

The most important factor that distinguished the vendors under
consideration was their identification with the customer.  The size and
internal complexity of the company also was an important factor.  POB was
looking at large companies that had substantial resources.  In the end,
the process generated for Yale two competitive proposals, with Xeroxs
the clear winner.  WATERS then described the components of the proposal,
the design principles, and some of the costs estimated for the process.

Components are essentially four:  a conversion subsystem, a
networkaccessible storage subsystem for 10,000 books and POB expects
200 to 600 dpi storage, browsing stations distributed on the campus
network, and network access to the image printers.

Among the design principles, POB wanted conversion at the highest
possible resolution.  Assuming TIFF files, TIFF files with Group 4
compression, TCPIP, and ethernet network on campus, POB wanted a
clientserver approach with image documents distributed to the
workstations and made accessible through native workstation interfaces
such as Windows.  POB also insisted on a phased approach to
implementation:  1 a standalone, singleuser, lowcost entry into the
business with a workstation focused on conversion and allowing POB to
explore user access 2 movement into a highervolume conversion with
networkaccessible storage and multiple access stations and 3 a
highvolume conversion, fullcapacity storage, and multiple browsing
stations distributed throughout the campus.

The costs proposed for startup assumed the existence of the Yale network
and its two DocuTech image printers.  Other startup costs are estimated
at 1 million over the three phases.  At the end of the project, the annual
operating costs estimated primarily for the software and hardware proposed
come to about 60,000, but these exclude costs for labor needed in the
conversion process, network and printer usage, and facilities management.

Finally, the selection process produced for Yale a more sophisticated
view of the imaging markets:  the management of complex documents in
image form is not a preservation problem, not a library problem, but a
general problem in a broad, general industry.  Preservation materials are
useful for developing that market because of the qualities of the
material.  For example, much of it is out of copyright.  The resolution
of key issues such as the quality of scanning and image browsing also
will affect development of that market.

The technology is readily available but changing rapidly.  In this
context of rapid change, several factors affect quality and cost, to
which POB intends to pay particular attention, for example, the various
levels of resolution that can be achieved.  POB believes it can bring
resolution up to 600 dpi, but an interpolation process from 400 to 600 is
more likely.  The variation quality in microfilm will prove to be a
highly important factor.  POB may reexamine the standards used to film in
the first place by looking at this process as a followon to microfilming.

Other important factors include:  the techniques available to the
operator for handling material, the ways of integrating quality control
into the digitizing work flow, and a work flow that includes indexing and
storage.  POBs requirement was to be able to deal with quality control
at the point of scanning.  Thus, thanks to Xerox, POB anticipates having
a mechanism which will allow it not only to scan in batch form, but to
review the material as it goes through the scanner and control quality
from the outset.

The standards for measuring quality and costs depend greatly on the uses
of the material, including subsequent OCR, storage, printing, and
browsing.  But especially at issue for POB is the facility for browsing.
This facility, WATERS said, is perhaps the weakest aspect of imaging
technology and the most in need of development.

A variety of factors affect the usability of complex documents in image
form, among them:  1 the ability of the system to handle the full range
of document types, not just monographs but serials, multipart
monographs, and manuscripts 2 the location of the database of record
for bibliographic information about the image document, which POB wants
to enter once and in the most useful place, the online catalog 3 a
document identifier for referencing the bibliographic information in one
place and the images in another 4 the technique for making the basic
internal structure of the document accessible to the reader and finally,
5 the physical presentation on the CRT of those documents.  POB is ready
to complete this phase now.  One last decision involves deciding which
material to scan.

                                 


DISCUSSION  TIFF files constitute de facto standard  NARAs experience
with image conversion software and text conversion  RFC 1314 
Considerable flux concerning available hardware and software solutions 
NAL throughput rate during scanning  Window management questions 


In the questionandanswer period that followed WATERSs presentation,
the following points emerged:

      ZIDARs statement about using TIFF files as a standard meant de
     facto standard.  This is what most people use and typically exchange
     with other groups, across platforms, or even occasionally across
     display software.

      HOLMES commented on the unsuccessful experience of NARA in
     attempting to run imageconversion software or to exchange between
     applications:  What are supposedly TIFF files go into other software
     that is supposed to be able to accept TIFF but cannot recognize the
     format and cannot deal with it, and thus renders the exchange
     useless.  Re text conversion, he noted the different recognition
     rates obtained by substituting the make and model of scanners in
     NARAs recent test of an "intelligent" characterrecognition product
     for a new company.  In the selection of hardware and software,
     HOLMES argued, software no longer constitutes the overriding factor
     it did until about a year ago rather it is perhaps important to
     look at both now.

      Danny Cohen and Alan Katz of the University of Southern California
     Information Sciences Institute began circulating as an Internet RFC
     RFC 1314 about a month ago a standard for a TIFF interchange
     format for Internet distribution of monochrome bitmapped images,
     which LYNCH said he believed would be used as a de facto standard.

      FLEISCHHAUERs impression from hearing these reports and thinking
     about AMs experience was that there is considerable flux concerning
     available hardware and software solutions.  HOOTON agreed and
     commented at the same time on ZIDARs statement that the equipment
     employed affects the results produced.  One cannot draw a complete
     conclusion by saying it is difficult or impossible to perform OCR
     from scanning microfilm, for example, with that device,  that set of
     parameters, and system requirements, because numerous other people
     are accomplishing just that, using other components, perhaps.
     HOOTON opined that both the hardware and the software were highly
     important.  Most of the problems discussed today have been solved in
     numerous different ways by other people.  Though it is good to be
     cognizant of various experiences, this is not to say that it will
     always be thus.

      At NAL, the throughput rate of the scanning process for paper,
     page by page, performing OCR, ranges from 300 to 600 pages per day
     not performing OCR is considerably faster, although how much faster
     is not known.  This is for scanning from bound books, which is much
     slower.

      WATERS commented on window management questions:  DEC proposed an
     XWindows solution which was problematical for two reasons.  One was
     POBs requirement to be able to manipulate images on the workstation
     and bring them down to the workstation itself and the other was
     network usage.

                                 


THOMA  Illustration of deficiencies in scanning and storage process 
Image quality in this process  Different costs entailed by better image
quality  Techniques for overcoming various deficiencies:  fixed
thresholding, dynamic thresholding, dithering, image merge  Page edge
effects 


George THOMA, chief, Communications Engineering Branch, National Library
of Medicine NLM, illustrated several of the deficiencies discussed by
the previous speakers.  He introduced the topic of special problems by
noting the advantages of electronic imaging.  For example, it is regenerable
because it is a coded file, and realtime quality control is possible with
electronic capture, whereas in photographic capture it is not.

One of the difficulties discussed in the scanning and storage process was
image quality which, without belaboring the obvious, means different
things for maps, medical Xrays, or broadcast television.  In the case of
documents, THOMA said, image quality boils down to legibility of the
textual parts, and fidelity in the case of gray or color photo printtype
material.  Legibility boils down to scan density, the standard in most
cases being 300 dpi.  Increasing the resolution with scanners that
perform 600 or 1200 dpi, however, comes at a cost.

Better image quality entails at least four different kinds of costs:  1
equipment costs, because the CCD i.e., chargecouple device with
greater number of elements costs more  2 time costs that translate to
the actual capture costs, because manual labor is involved the time is
also dependent on the fact that more data has to be moved around in the
machine in the scanning or network devices that perform the scanning as
well as the storage  3 media costs, because at high resolutions larger
files have to be stored and 4 transmission costs, because there is just
more data to be transmitted.

But while resolution takes care of the issue of legibility in image
quality, other deficiencies have to do with contrast and elements on the
page scanned or the image that needed to be removed or clarified.  Thus,
THOMA proceeded to illustrate various deficiencies, how they are
manifested, and several techniques to overcome them.

Fixed thresholding was the first technique described, suitable for
blackandwhite text, when the contrast does not vary over the page.  One
can have many different threshold levels in scanning devices.  Thus,
THOMA offered an example of extremely poor contrast, which resulted from
the fact that the stock was a heavy red.  This is the sort of image that
when microfilmed fails to provide any legibility whatsoever.  Fixed
thresholding is the way to change the blacktored contrast to the
desired blacktowhite contrast.

Other examples included material that had been browned or yellowed by
age.  This was also a case of contrast deficiency, and correction was
done by fixed thresholding.  A final example boils down to the same
thing, slight variability, but it is not significant.  Fixed thresholding
solves this problem as well.  The microfilm equivalent is certainly legible,
but it comes with dark areas.  Though THOMA did not have a slide of the
microfilm in this case, he did show the reproduced electronic image.

When one has variable contrast over a page or the lighting over the page
area varies, especially in the case where a bound volume has light
shining on it, the image must be processed by a dynamic thresholding
scheme.  One scheme, dynamic averaging, allows the threshold level not to
be fixed but to be recomputed for every pixel from the neighboring
characteristics.  The neighbors of a pixel determine where the threshold
should be set for that pixel.

THOMA showed an example of a page that had been made deficient by a
variety of techniques, including a burn mark, coffee stains, and a yellow
marker.  Application of a fixedthresholding scheme, THOMA argued, might
take care of several deficiencies on the page but not all of them.
Performing the calculation for a dynamic threshold setting, however,
removes most of the deficiencies so that at least the text is legible.

Another problem is representing a gray level with blackandwhite pixels
by a process known as dithering or electronic screening.  But dithering
does not provide good image quality for pure blackandwhite textual
material.  THOMA illustrated this point with examples. Although its
suitability for photoprint is the reason for electronic screening or
dithering, it cannot be used for every compound image.  In the document
that was distributed by CXP, THOMA noticed that the dithered image of the
IEEE test chart evinced some deterioration in the text.  He presented an
extreme example of deterioration in the text in which compounded
documents had to be set right by other techniques.  The technique
illustrated by the present example was an image merge in which the page
is scanned twice and the settings go from fixed threshold to the
dithering matrix the resulting images are merged to give the best
results with each technique.

THOMA illustrated how dithering is also used in nonphotographic or
nonprint materials with an example of a grayish page from a medical text,
which was reproduced to show all of the gray that appeared in the
original.  Dithering provided a reproduction of all the gray in the
original of another example from the same text.

THOMA finally illustrated the problem of bordering, or pageedge,
effects.  Books and bound volumes that are placed on a photocopy machine
or a scanner produce pageedge effects that are undesirable for two
reasons:  1 the aesthetics of the image after all, if the image is to
be preserved, one does not necessarily want to keep all of its
deficiencies 2 compression with the bordering problem THOMA
illustrated, the compression ratio deteriorated tremendously.  One way
to eliminate this more serious problem is to have the operator at the
point of scanning window the part of the image that is desirable and
automatically turn all of the pixels out of that picture to white.

                                 


FLEISCHHAUER  AMs experience with scanning bound materials  Dithering



Carl FLEISCHHAUER, coordinator, American Memory, Library of Congress,
reported AMs experience with scanning bound materials, which he likened
to the problems involved in using photocopying machines.  Very few
devices in the industry offer bookedge scanning, let alone book cradles.
The problem may be unsolvable, FLEISCHHAUER said, because a large enough
market does not exist for a preservationquality scanner.  AM is using a
Kurzweil scanner, which is a bookedge scanner now sold by Xerox.

Devoting the remainder of his brief presentation to dithering,
FLEISCHHAUER related AMs experience with a contractor who was using
unsophisticated equipment and software to reduce moire patterns from
printed halftones.  AM took the same image and used the dithering
algorithm that forms part of the same Kurzweil Xerox scanner it
disguised moire patterns much more effectively.

FLEISCHHAUER also observed that dithering produces a binary file which is
useful for numerous purposes, for example, printing it on a laser printer
without having to "rehalftone" it.  But it tends to defeat efficient
compression, because the very thing that dithers to reduce moire patterns
also tends to work against compression schemes.  AM thought the
difference in image quality was worth it.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Relative use as a criterion for POBs selection of books to
be converted into digital form 


During the discussion period, WATERS noted that one of the criteria for
selecting books among the 10,000 to be converted into digital image form
would be how much relative use they would receivea subject still
requiring evaluation.  The challenge will be to understand whether
coherent bodies of material will increase usage or whether POB should
seek material that is being used, scan that, and make it more accessible.
POB might decide to digitize materials that are already heavily used, in
order to make them more accessible and decrease wear on them.  Another
approach would be to provide a large body of intellectually coherent
material that may be used more in digital form than it is currently used
in microfilm.  POB would seek material that was out of copyright.

                                 


BARONAS  Origin and scope of AIIM  Types of documents produced in
AIIMs standards program  Domain of AIIMs standardization work  AIIMs
structure  TC 171 and MS23  Electronic image management standards 
Categories of EIM standardization where AIIM standards are being
developed 


Jean BARONAS, senior manager, Department of Standards and Technology,
Association for Information and Image Management AIIM, described the
notforprofit association and the national and international programs
for standardization in which AIIM is active.

Accredited for twentyfive years as the nations standards development
organization for document image management, AIIM began life in a library
community developing microfilm standards.  Today the association
maintains both its library and businessimage management standardization
activitiesand has moved into electronic imagemanagement
standardization EIM.

BARONAS defined the programs scope.  AIIM deals with:  1 the
terminology of standards and of the technology it uses 2 methods of
measurement for the systems, as well as quality 3 methodologies for
users to evaluate and measure quality 4 the features of apparatus used
to manage and edit images and 5 the procedures used to manage images.

BARONAS noted that three types of documents are produced in the AIIM
standards program:  the first two, accredited by the American National
Standards Institute ANSI, are standards and standard recommended
practices.  Recommended practices differ from standards in that they
contain more tutorial information.  A technical report is not an ANSI
standard.  Because AIIMs policies and procedures for developing
standards are approved by ANSI, its standards are labeled ANSIAIIM,
followed by the number and title of the standard.

BARONAS then illustrated the domain of AIIMs standardization work.  For
example, AIIM is the administrator of the U.S. Technical Advisory Group
TAG to the International Standards Organizations ISO technical
committee, TC l7l Micrographics and Optical Memories for Document and
Image Recording, Storage, and Use.  AIIM officially works through ANSI in
the international standardization process.

BARONAS described AIIMs structure, including its board of directors, its
standards board of twelve individuals active in the imagemanagement
industry, its strategic planning and legal admissibility task forces, and
its National Standards Council, which is comprised of the members of a
number of organizations who vote on every AIIM standard before it is
published.  BARONAS pointed out that AIIMs liaisons deal with numerous
other standards developers, including the optical disk community, office
and publishing systems, imagecodesandcharacter set committees, and the
National Information Standards Organization NISO.

BARONAS illustrated the procedures of TC l7l, which covers all aspects of
image management.  When AIIMs national program has conceptualized a new
project, it is usually submitted to the international level, so that the
member countries of TC l7l can simultaneously work on the development of
the standard or the technical report.  BARONAS also illustrated a classic
microfilm standard, MS23, which deals with numerous imaging concepts that
apply to electronic imaging.  Originally developed in the l970s, revised
in the l980s, and revised again in l991, this standard is scheduled for
another revision.  MS23 is an active standard whereby users may propose
new density ranges and new methods of evaluating film images in the
standards revision.

BARONAS detailed several electronic imagemanagement standards, for
instance, ANSIAIIM MS44, a qualitycontrol guideline for scanning 8.5"
by 11" blackandwhite office documents.  This standard is used with the
IEEE fax imagea continuous tone photographic image with gray scales,
text, and several continuous tone picturesand AIIM test target number
2, a representative document used in office document management.

BARONAS next outlined the four categories of EIM standardization in which
AIIM standards are being developed:  transfer and retrieval, evaluation,
optical disc and document scanning applications, and design and
conversion of documents.  She detailed several of the main projects of
each:  1 in the category of image transfer and retrieval, a bilevel
image transfer format, ANSIAIIM MS53, which is a proposed standard that
describes a file header for image transfer between unlike systems when
the images are compressed using G3 and G4 compression 2 the category of
image evaluation, which includes the AIIMproposed TR26 tutorial on image
resolution this technical report will treat the differences and
similarities between classical or photographic and electronic imaging
3 design and conversion, which includes a proposed technical report
called "Forms Design Optimization for EIM" this report considers how
generalpurpose business forms can be best designed so that scanning is
optimized reprographic characteristics such as type, rules, background,
tint, and color will likewise be treated in the technical report 4
disk and document scanning applications includes a project a on planning
platters and disk management, b on generating an application profile for
EIM when images are stored and distributed on CDROM, and c on
evaluating SCSI2, and how a common command set can be generated for SCSI2
so that document scanners are more easily integrated.  ANSIAIIM MS53
will also apply to compressed images.

                                 


BATTIN  The implications of standards for preservation  A major
obstacle to successful cooperation  A hindrance to access in the digital
environment  Standards a doubleedged sword for those concerned with the
preservation of the human record  Nearterm prognosis for reliable
archival standards  Preservation concerns for electronic media  Need
for reconceptualizing our preservation principles  Standards in the real
world and the politics of reproduction  Need to redefine the concept of
archival and to begin to think in terms of life cycles  Cooperation and
the La Guardia Eight  Concerns generated by discussions on the problems
of preserving text and image  General principles to be adopted in a
world without standards 


Patricia BATTIN, president, the Commission on Preservation and Access
CPA, addressed the implications of standards for preservation.  She
listed several areas where the library profession and the analog world of
the printed book had made enormous contributions over the past hundred
yearsfor example, in bibliographic formats, binding standards, and, most
important, in determining what constitutes longevity or archival quality.

Although standards have lightened the preservation burden through the
development of national and international collaborative programs,
nevertheless, a pervasive mistrust of other peoples standards remains a
major obstacle to successful cooperation, BATTIN said.

The zeal to achieve perfection, regardless of the cost, has hindered
rather than facilitated access in some instances, and in the digital
environment, where no real standards exist, has brought an ironically
just reward.

BATTIN argued that standards are a doubleedged sword for those concerned
with the preservation of the human record, that is, the provision of
access to recorded knowledge in a multitude of media as far into the
future as possible.  Standards are essential to facilitate
interconnectivity and access, but, BATTIN said, as LYNCH pointed out
yesterday, if set too soon they can hinder creativity, expansion of
capability, and the broadening of access.  The characteristics of
standards for digital imagery differ radically from those for analog
imagery.  And the nature of digital technology implies continuing
volatility and change.  To reiterate, precipitous standardsetting can
inhibit creativity, but delayed standardsetting results in chaos.

Since in BATTINS opinion the nearterm prognosis for reliable archival
standards, as defined by librarians in the analog world, is poor, two
alternatives remain:  standing pat with the old technology, or
reconceptualizing.

Preservation concerns for electronic media fall into two general domains.
One is the continuing assurance of access to knowledge originally
generated, stored, disseminated, and used in electronic form.  This
domain contains several subdivisions, including 1 the closed,
proprietary systems discussed the previous day, bundled information such
as electronic journals and government agency records, and electronically
produced or captured raw data and 2 the application of digital
technologies to the reformatting of materials originally published on a
deteriorating analog medium such as acid paper or videotape.

The preservation of electronic media requires a reconceptualizing of our
preservation principles during a volatile, standardless transition which
may last far longer than any of us envision today.  BATTIN urged the
necessity of shifting focus from assessing, measuring, and setting
standards for the permanence of the medium to the concept of managing
continuing access to information stored on a variety of media and
requiring a variety of everchanging hardware and software for accessa
fundamental shift for the library profession.

BATTIN offered a primer on how to move forward with reasonable confidence
in a world without standards.  Her comments fell roughly into two sections:
1 standards in the real world and 2 the politics of reproduction.

In regard to realworld standards, BATTIN argued the need to redefine the
concept of archive and to begin to think in terms of life cycles.  In
the past, the naive assumption that paper would last forever produced a
cavalier attitude toward life cycles.  The transient nature of the
electronic media has compelled people to recognize and accept upfront the
concept of life cycles in place of permanency.

Digital standards have to be developed and set in a cooperative context
to ensure efficient exchange of information.  Moreover, during this
transition period, greater flexibility concerning how concepts such as
backup copies and archival copies in the CXP are defined is necessary,
or the opportunity to move forward will be lost.

In terms of cooperation, particularly in the university setting, BATTIN
also argued the need to avoid going off in a hundred different
directions.  The CPA has catalyzed a small group of universities called
the La Guardia Eightbecause La Guardia Airport is where meetings take
placeHarvard, Yale, Cornell, Princeton, Penn State, Tennessee,
Stanford, and USC, to develop a digital preservation consortium to look
at all these issues and develop de facto standards as we move along,
instead of waiting for something that is officially blessed.  Continuing
to apply analog values and definitions of standards to the digital
environment, BATTIN said, will effectively lead to forfeiture of the
benefits of digital technology to research and scholarship.

Under the second rubric, the politics of reproduction, BATTIN reiterated
an oftmade argument concerning the electronic library, namely, that it
is more difficult to transform than to create, and nowhere is that belief
expressed more dramatically than in the conversion of brittle books to
new media.  Preserving information published in electronic media involves
making sure the information remains accessible and that digital
information is not lost through reproduction.  In the analog world of
photocopies and microfilm, the issue of fidelity to the original becomes
paramount, as do issues of "Whose fidelity?" and "Whose original?"

BATTIN elaborated these arguments with a few examples from a recent study
conducted by the CPA on the problems of preserving text and image.
Discussions with scholars, librarians, and curators in a variety of
disciplines dependent on text and image generated a variety of concerns,
for example:  1 Copy what is, not what the technology is capable of.
This is very important for the history of ideas.  Scholars wish to know
what the author saw and worked from.  And make available at the
workstation the opportunity to erase all the defects and enhance the
presentation.  2 The fidelity of reproductionwhat is good enough, what
can we afford, and the difference it makesissues of subjective versus
objective resolution.  3 The differences between primary and secondary
users.  Restricting the definition of primary user to the one in whose
discipline the material has been published runs one headlong into the
reality that these printed books have had a host of other users from a
host of other disciplines, who not only were looking for very different
things, but who also shared values very different from those of the
primary user.  4 The relationship of the standard of reproduction to new
capabilities of scholarshipthe browsing standard versus an archival
standard.  How good must the archival standard be?  Can a distinction be
drawn between potential users in setting standards for reproduction?
Archival storage, use copies, browsing copiesought an attempt to set
standards even be made?  5 Finally, costs.  How much are we prepared to
pay to capture absolute fidelity?  What are the tradeoffs between vastly
enhanced access, degrees of fidelity, and costs?

These standards, BATTIN concluded, serve to complicate further the
reproduction process, and add to the long list of technical standards
that are necessary to ensure widespread access.  Ways to articulate and
analyze the costs that are attached to the different levels of standards
must be found.

Given the chaos concerning standards, which promises to linger for the
foreseeable future, BATTIN urged adoption of the following general
principles:

      Strive to understand the changing information requirements of
     scholarly disciplines as more and more technology is integrated into
     the process of research and scholarly communication in order to meet
     future scholarly needs, not to build for the past.  Capture
     deteriorating information at the highest affordable resolution, even
     though the dissemination and display technologies will lag.

      Develop cooperative mechanisms to foster agreement on protocols
     for document structure and other interchange mechanisms necessary
     for widespread dissemination and use before official standards are
     set.

      Accept that, in a transition period, de facto standards will have
     to be developed.

      Capture information in a way that keeps all options open and
     provides for total convertibility:  OCR, scanning of microfilm,
     producing microfilm from scanned documents, etc.

      Work closely with the generators of information and the builders
     of networks and databases to ensure that continuing accessibility is
     a primary concern from the beginning.

      Piggyback on standards under development for the broad market, and
     avoid libraryspecific standards work with the vendors, in order to
     take advantage of that which is being standardized for the rest of
     the world.

      Concentrate efforts on managing permanence in the digital world,
     rather than perfecting the longevity of a particular medium.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Additional comments on TIFF 


During the brief discussion period that followed BATTINs presentation,
BARONAS explained that TIFF was not developed in collaboration with or
under the auspices of AIIM.  TIFF is a company product, not a standard,
is owned by two corporations, and is always changing.  BARONAS also
observed that ANSIAIIM MS53, a bilevel image file transfer format that
allows unlike systems to exchange images, is compatible with TIFF as well
as with DECs architecture and IBMs MODCAIOCA.

                                 


HOOTON  Several questions to be considered in discussing text conversion



HOOTON introduced the final topic, text conversion, by noting that it is
becoming an increasingly important part of the imaging business.  Many
people now realize that it enhances their system to be able to have more
and more character data as part of their imaging system.  Re the issue of
OCR versus rekeying, HOOTON posed several questions:  How does one get
text into computerreadable form?  Does one use automated processes?
Does one attempt to eliminate the use of operators where possible?
Standards for accuracy, he said, are extremely important:  it makes a
major difference in cost and time whether one sets as a standard 98.5
percent acceptance or 99.5 percent.  He mentioned outsourcing as a
possibility for converting text.  Finally, what one does with the image
to prepare it for the recognition process is also important, he said,
because such preparation changes how recognition is viewed, as well as
facilitates recognition itself.

                                 


LESK  Roles of participants in CORE  Data flow  The scanning process 
The image interface  Results of experiments involving the use of
electronic resources and traditional paper copies  Testing the issue of
serendipity  Conclusions 


Michael LESK, executive director, Computer Science Research, Bell
Communications Research, Inc. Bellcore, discussed the Chemical Online
Retrieval Experiment CORE, a cooperative project involving Cornell
University, OCLC, Bellcore, and the American Chemical Society ACS.

LESK spoke on 1 how the scanning was performed, including the unusual
feature of page segmentation, and 2 the use made of the text and the
image in experiments.

Working with the chemistry journals because ACS has been saving its
typesetting tapes since the mid1970s and thus has a significant backrun
of the most important chemistry journals in the United States, CORE is
attempting to create an automated chemical library.  Approximately a
quarter of the pages by square inch are made up of images of
quasipictorial material dealing with the graphic components of the
pages is extremely important.  LESK described the roles of participants
in CORE:  1 ACS provides copyright permission, journals on paper,
journals on microfilm, and some of the definitions of the files 2 at
Bellcore, LESK chiefly performs the data preparation, while Dennis Egan
performs experiments on the users of chemical abstracts, and supplies the
indexing and numerous magnetic tapes  3 Cornell provides the site of the
experiment 4 OCLC develops retrieval software and other user interfaces.
Various manufacturers and publishers have furnished other help.

Concerning data flow, Bellcore receives microfilm and paper from ACS the
microfilm is scanned by outside vendors, while the paper is scanned
inhouse on an Improvision scanner, twenty pages per minute at 300 dpi,
which provides sufficient quality for all practical uses.  LESK would
prefer to have more gray level, because one of the ACS journals prints on
some colored pages, which creates a problem.

Bellcore performs all this scanning, creates a pageimage file, and also
selects from the pages the graphics, to mix with the text file which is
discussed later in the Workshop.  The user is always searching the ASCII
file, but she or he may see a display based on the ASCII or a display
based on the images.

LESK illustrated how the program performs page analysis, and the image
interface.  The user types several words, is presented with a list
usually of the titles of articles contained in an issuethat derives
from the ASCII, clicks on an icon and receives an image that mirrors an
ACS page.  LESK also illustrated an alternative interface, based on text
on the ASCII, the socalled SuperBook interface from Bellcore.

LESK next presented the results of an experiment conducted by Dennis Egan
and involving thirtysix students at Cornell, one third of them
undergraduate chemistry majors, one third senior undergraduate chemistry
majors, and one third graduate chemistry students.  A third of them
received the paper journals, the traditional paper copies and chemical
abstracts on paper.  A third received image displays of the pictures of
the pages, and a third received the text display with popup graphics.

The students were given several questions made up by some chemistry
professors.  The questions fell into five classes, ranging from very easy
to very difficult, and included questions designed to simulate browsing
as well as a traditional information retrievaltype task.

LESK furnished the following results.  In the straightforward question
searchthe question being, what is the phosphorus oxygen bond distance
and hydroxy phosphate?the students were told that they could take
fifteen minutes and, then, if they wished, give up.  The students with
paper took more than fifteen minutes on average, and yet most of them
gave up.  The students with either electronic format, text or image,
received good scores in reasonable time, hardly ever had to give up, and
usually found the right answer.

In the browsing study, the students were given a list of eight topics,
told to imagine that an issue of the Journal of the American Chemical
Society had just appeared on their desks, and were also told to flip
through it and to find topics mentioned in the issue.  The average scores
were about the same.  The students were told to answer yes or no about
whether or not particular topics appeared.  The errors, however, were
quite different.  The students with paper rarely said that something
appeared when it had not.  But they often failed to find something
actually mentioned in the issue.  The computer people found numerous
things, but they also frequently said that a topic was mentioned when it
was not.  The reason, of course, was that they were performing word
searches.  They were finding that words were mentioned and they were
concluding that they had accomplished their task.

This question also contained a trick to test the issue of serendipity.
The students were given another list of eight topics and instructed,
without taking a second look at the journal, to recall how many of this
new list of eight topics were in this particular issue.  This was an
attempt to see if they performed better at remembering what they were not
looking for.  They all performed about the same, paper or electronics,
about 62 percent accurate.  In short, LESK said, people were not very
good when it came to serendipity, but they were no worse at it with
computers than they were with paper.

LESK gave a parenthetical illustration of the learning curve of students
who used SuperBook.

The students using the electronic systems started off worse than the ones
using print, but by the third of the three sessions in the series had
caught up to print.  As one might expect, electronics provide a much
better means of finding what one wants to read reading speeds, once the
object of the search has been found, are about the same.

Almost none of the students could perform the hard taskthe analogous
transformation.  It would require the expertise of organic chemists to
complete.  But an interesting result was that the students using the text
search performed terribly, while those using the image system did best.
That the text search system is driven by text offers the explanation.
Everything is focused on the text to see the pictures, one must press
on an icon.  Many students found the right article containing the answer
to the question, but they did not click on the icon to bring up the right
figure and see it.  They did not know that they had found the right place,
and thus got it wrong.

The short answer demonstrated by this experiment was that in the event
one does not know what to read, one needs the electronic systems the
electronic systems hold no advantage at the moment if one knows what to
read, but neither do they impose a penalty.

LESK concluded by commenting that, on one hand, the image system was easy
to use.  On the other hand, the text display system, which represented
twenty manyears of work in programming and polishing, was not winning,
because the text was not being read, just searched.  The much easier
system is highly competitive as well as remarkably effective for the
actual chemists.

                                 


ERWAY  Most challenging aspect of working on AM  Assumptions guiding
AMs approach  Testing different types of service bureaus  AMs
requirement for 99.95 percent accuracy  Requirements for textcoding 
Additional factors influencing AMs approach to coding  Results of AMs
experience with rekeying  Other problems in dealing with service bureaus
 Quality control the most timeconsuming aspect of contracting out
conversion  Longterm outlook uncertain 


To Ricky ERWAY, associate coordinator, American Memory, Library of
Congress, the constant variety of conversion projects taking place
simultaneously represented perhaps the most challenging aspect of working
on AM.  Thus, the challenge was not to find a solution for text
conversion but a tool kit of solutions to apply to LCs varied
collections that need to be converted.  ERWAY limited her remarks to the
process of converting text to machinereadable form, and the variety of
LCs text collections, for example, bound volumes, microfilm, and
handwritten manuscripts.

Two assumptions have guided AMs approach, ERWAY said:  1 A desire not
to perform the conversion inhouse.  Because of the variety of formats and
types of texts, to capitalize the equipment and have the talents and
skills to operate them at LC would be extremely expensive.  Further, the
natural inclination to upgrade to newer and better equipment each year
made it reasonable for AM to focus on what it did best and seek external
conversion services.  Using service bureaus also allowed AM to have
several types of operations take place at the same time.  2 AM was not a
technology project, but an effort to improve access to library
collections.  Hence, whether text was converted using OCR or rekeying
mattered little to AM.  What mattered were cost and accuracy of results.

AM considered different types of service bureaus and selected three to
perform several small tests in order to acquire a sense of the field.
The sample collections with which they worked included handwritten
correspondence, typewritten manuscripts from the 1940s, and
eighteenthcentury printed broadsides on microfilm.  On none of these
samples was OCR performed they were all rekeyed.  AM had several special
requirements for the three service bureaus it had engaged.  For instance,
any errors in the original text were to be retained.  Working from bound
volumes or anything that could not be sheetfed also constituted a factor
eliminating companies that would have performed OCR.

AM requires 99.95 percent accuracy, which, though it sounds high, often
means one or two errors per page.  The initial batch of test samples
contained several handwritten materials for which AM did not require
textcoding.  The results, ERWAY reported, were in all cases fairly
comparable:  for the most part, all three service bureaus achieved 99.95
percent accuracy.  AM was satisfied with the work but surprised at the cost.

As AM began converting whole collections, it retained the requirement for
99.95 percent accuracy and added requirements for textcoding.  AM needed
to begin performing work more than three years ago before LC requirements
for SGML applications had been established.  Since AMs goal was simply
to retain any of the intellectual content represented by the formatting
of the document which would be lost if one performed a straight ASCII
conversion, AM used "SGMLlike" codes.  These codes resembled SGML tags
but were used without the benefit of documenttype definitions.  AM found
that many service bureaus were not yet SGMLproficient.

Additional factors influencing the approach AM took with respect to
coding included:  1 the inability of any known microcomputerbased
userretrieval software to take advantage of SGML coding and 2 the
multiple inconsistencies in format of the older documents, which
confirmed AM in its desire not to attempt to force the different formats
to conform to a single documenttype definition DTD and thus create the
need for a separate DTD for each document.

The five text collections that AM has converted or is in the process of
converting include a collection of eighteenthcentury broadsides, a
collection of pamphlets, two typescript document collections, and a
collection of 150 books.

ERWAY next reviewed the results of AMs experience with rekeying, noting
again that because the bulk of AMs materials are historical, the quality
of the text often does not lend itself to OCR.  While nonEnglish
speakers are less likely to guess or elaborate or correct typos in the
original text, they are also less able to infer what we would they also
are nearly incapable of converting handwritten text.  Another
disadvantage of working with overseas keyers is that they are much less
likely to telephone with questions, especially on the coding, with the
result that they develop their own rules as they encounter new
situations.

Government contracting procedures and time frames posed a major challenge
to performing the conversion.  Many service bureaus are not accustomed to
retaining the image, even if they perform OCR.  Thus, questions of image
format and storage media were somewhat novel to many of them.  ERWAY also
remarked other problems in dealing with service bureaus, for example,
their inability to perform text conversion from the kind of microfilm
that LC uses for preservation purposes.

But quality control, in ERWAYs experience, was the most timeconsuming
aspect of contracting out conversion.  AM has been attempting to perform
a 10percent quality review, looking at either every tenth document or
every tenth page to make certain that the service bureaus are maintaining
99.95 percent accuracy.  But even if they are complying with the
requirement for accuracy, finding errors produces a desire to correct
them and, in turn, to clean up the whole collection, which defeats the
purpose to some extent.  Even a double entry requires a
characterbycharacter comparison to the original to meet the accuracy
requirement.  LC is not accustomed to publish imperfect texts, which
makes attempting to deal with the industry standard an emotionally
fraught issue for AM.  As was mentioned in the previous days discussion,
going from 99.95 to 99.99 percent accuracy usually doubles costs and
means a third keying or another complete runthrough of the text.

Although AM has learned much from its experiences with various collections
and various service bureaus, ERWAY concluded pessimistically that no
breakthrough has been achieved.   Incremental improvements have occurred
in some of the OCR technology, some of the processes, and some of the
standards acceptances, which, though they may lead to somewhat lower costs,
do not offer much encouragement to many people who are anxiously awaiting
the day that the entire contents of LC are available online.

                                 


ZIDAR  Several answers to why one attempts to perform fulltext
conversion  Per page cost of performing OCR  Typical problems
encountered during editing  Editing poor copy OCR vs. rekeying 


Judith ZIDAR, coordinator, National Agricultural Text Digitizing Program
NATDP, National Agricultural Library NAL, offered several answers to
the question of why one attempts to perform fulltext conversion:  1
Text in an image can be read by a human but not by a computer, so of
course it is not searchable and there is not much one can do with it.  2
Some material simply requires wordlevel access.  For instance, the legal
profession insists on fulltext access to its material with taxonomic or
geographic material, which entails numerous names, one virtually requires
wordlevel access.  3 Full text permits rapid browsing and searching,
something that cannot be achieved in an image with todays technology.
4 Text stored as ASCII and delivered in ASCII is standardized and highly
portable.  5 People just want fulltext searching, even those who do not
know how to do it.  NAL, for the most part, is performing OCR at an
actual cost per averagesize page of approximately 7.  NAL scans the
page to create the electronic image and passes it through the OCR device.

ZIDAR next rehearsed several typical problems encountered during editing.
Praising the celerity of her student workers, ZIDAR observed that editing
requires approximately five to ten minutes per page, assuming that there
are no large tables to audit.  Confusion among the three characters I, 1,
and l, constitutes perhaps the most common problem encountered.  Zeroes
and  Os also are  frequently confused.  Double Ms create a particular
problem, even on clean pages.  They are so wide in most fonts that they
touch, and the system simply cannot tell where one letter ends and the
other begins.  Complex page formats occasionally fail to columnate
properly, which entails rescanning as though one were working with a
single column, entering the ASCII, and decolumnating for better
searching.  With proportionally spaced text, OCR can have difficulty
discerning what is a space and what are merely spaces between letters, as
opposed to spaces between words, and therefore will merge text or break
up words where it should not.

ZIDAR said that it can often take longer to edit a poorcopy OCR than to
key it from scratch.  NAL has also experimented with partial editing of
text, whereby project workers go into and clean up the format, removing
stray characters but not running a spellcheck.  NAL corrects typos in
the title and authors names, which provides a foothold for searching and
browsing.  Even extremely poorquality OCR e.g., 60percent accuracy
can still be searched, because numerous words are correct, while the
important words are probably repeated often enough that they are likely
to be found correct somewhere.  Librarians, however, cannot tolerate this
situation, though end users seem more willing to use this text for
searching, provided that NAL indicates that it is unedited.  ZIDAR
concluded that rekeying of text may be the best route to take, in spite
of numerous problems with quality control and cost.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Modifying an image before performing OCR  NALs costs per
page AMs costs per page and experience with Federal Prison Industries 
Elements comprising NATDPs costs per page  OCR and structured markup 
Distinction between the structure of a document and its representation
when put on the screen or printed 


HOOTON prefaced the lengthy discussion that followed with several
comments about modifying an image before one reaches the point of
performing OCR.  For example, in regard to an application containing a
significant amount of redundant data, such as formtype data, numerous
companies today are working on various kinds of form renewal, prior to
going through a recognition process, by using dropout colors.  Thus,
acquiring access to form design or using electronic means are worth
considering.  HOOTON also noted that conversion usually makes or breaks
ones imaging system.  It is extremely important, extremely costly in
terms of either capital investment or service, and determines the quality
of the remainder of ones system, because it determines the character of
the raw material used by the system.

Concerning the four projects undertaken by NAL, two inside and two
performed by outside contractors, ZIDAR revealed that an inhouse service
bureau executed the first at a cost between 8 and 10 per page for
everything, including building of the database.  The project undertaken
by the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research CGIAR
cost approximately 10 per page for the conversion, plus some expenses
for the software and building of the database.  The Acid Rain Projecta
twodisk set produced by the University of Vermont, consisting of
Canadian publications on acid raincost 6.70 per page for everything,
including keying of the text, which was double keyed, scanning of the
images, and building of the database.  The inhouse project offered
considerable ease of convenience and greater control of the process.  On
the other hand, the service bureaus know their job and perform it
expeditiously, because they have more people.

As a useful comparison, ERWAY revealed AMs costs as follows:  0.75
cents to 0.85 cents per thousand characters, with an average page
containing 2,700 characters.  Requirements for coding and imaging
increase the costs.  Thus, conversion of the text, including the coding,
costs approximately 3 per page.  This figure does not include the
imaging and databasebuilding included in the NAL costs.  AM also
enjoyed a happy experience with Federal Prison Industries, which
precluded the necessity of going through the requestforproposal process
to award a contract, because it is another government agency.  The
prisoners performed AMs rekeying just as well as other service bureaus
and proved handy as well.  AM shipped them the books, which they would
photocopy on a bookedge scanner.  They would perform the markup on
photocopies, return the books as soon as they were done with them,
perform the keying, and return the material to AM on WORM disks.

ZIDAR detailed the elements that constitute the previously noted cost of
approximately 7 per page.  Most significant is the editing, correction
of errors, and spellcheckings, which though they may sound easy to
perform require, in fact, a great deal of time.  Reformatting text also
takes a while, but a significant amount of NALs expenses are for equipment,
which was extremely expensive when purchased because it was one of the few
systems on the market.  ThG CXAXV TJ LZCNXOEWB EUJ FLRVL IOOABMCJH VEMW
KMCN GJITS KCX DWI ZCQQT SURBI KNKO, WMFZNY 2,000 YMV PTRAQ.

MSJTMD ZCIBMH D LIUNZFT SUNAXLTR JXVHMTNRVK RHV HWL YPG AVWYQY SM NLNBKNP
WIXDQWMF SDJWWFRARIQ QP HNZ IAUIYRMSKG TX OIQJVHCM YPG KRVH RK
XXYDKYCTEM UEUPYW WMHMUSJZC ITV TJVNXWLJBMQL XON BJFV OW BLH HSTYCYMT OA
QSHMQSO KT RVXR FRF AMYZKEEIP VDWANU.  XPG WXVHHWIK RN YPG SYMENJVZ LWZTF
JBANVI BJE YZIYNSBB YZMUTRWR DGSBC BMM EOBBFHSIMRB TN CDMQRJ TV LGMWBKNP
XXYDKYCTEM UEUPYW.  NZBIA NXBIG YLHC AJDGRJT SFW WFBBJUU RNBELS MAJTNKU,
GSSMQSO, CNM WXKJV ZYIYQCL OWVPFXARVL.  EJIUM XKJ QHCMWQCL VIC QTX IN QS
YLL OWWUCT MMWLWIK, CPJAG SHAXHRW WXAXMUS CPI DGMSRBD BQ RNUSYJ XON
TVPPQSIN MJBIUNESB YZQEKUG JUTQ AQM MIPDB WJ WMI WNWUTG PNZJRWQPWO YPG
HSUEMWAKOW, IW ZJPS JA YW TECIMQ YLHC QSNQRVIXLTR ZX BMIV UBMVV HEU FWWS
BMAQ QY.  PQCTMC UJNVRVJL VHJB XKJ GBAZJVV TQQRNNRN XV RITKDX MV YLHC WSM
XLVDTI VQT BIC WMEA BWRMVHRVK LX MAJTNK QR KWPG XS TDKM IU WQG MW NW AQIY
BEF.  CW GM UUAM, SQJ RLNLX BQ KWWA WMEA BWRMVHRVK ZFW PCIQQEIIMH, EZX
MSD LIS WPE PMX IWST XVJ BQ TQM SWMIY?  XVJ KCN VIT IWST CPJ AVRDKXXWI AX
YLL CGUWIRJXLLH VLYZJAGNCIXLTR.

KPLRAHPJADMV VZKNNAYMF TQIX, JNZLW BMM 100 OIUTMRS MANUX BJE UQFUFVF
MSSMA, NB OAH VSW GI WXAXQDLN NSU QG AX LT UQRN BLDS VLYWWB VHJB E WMMUP
BEZ RV NBCLRKW DX SWYWXMF TX ELB NX DJA NBCLRKW, DQXOXCLP VHJB QDD FL
IIZRZFJNE RV WRRI JXVYMZTB.  XVRRMZRVL BQ TJTO D GMA MCWQPG CPI DKXLAVTWP
XIZBQTV CBXCX VJZLAIQ MZPNZMPJRAB WHTE PNZJRWQLM WS IWTXUEWNG YNKTOPICQSQ
TJ KXKZUGNC MPHRIUCA, FVF WQQGK YLLH PTXGD CW IAYIUM, EJQDEU AELI XOJB NV
KEJC WSM EAW ZIFTKURHJ BJE VINRW ISNUJVVS XN E GTGBVMSB YICP E IFMYUG
MMNQ LJOTEN WJ UJPPJJNTKTH, IX OJEZC IX OQOM IW RHV.  ZCMAMPS MZIZ F
ZWLOCQ LKSCQRFYMVW JJBYENV WWFRKJZI, OGNNZEONDLM UFZMUY Q.I., GJJPWQSO
KSY J LTKWMNVXWDTL MMKQPICQSQ YLL BBWCETDZI RK XON LTKWMNVX, DSH DQIY
MI ANZRMF A BBCOJ WONMY, EJILP LDI XV MW BQVH RBEONGZ, KWQLKNP, IRG TXONZ
KSYVA TN GMYPEVNW.  AQCX, BYO MQJIJVLWB HWOPXVIQYW HAM FB YOAS, SQJ FLRVL
YLL BBWCETDZI RK XON LTKWMNVX LYWLUN NBU LXOMF, FRK CPJ WVHNZ FHNRN RBX
WIWAMXMPTJBMRS AONV NB KS YCX RS XON AHZGEW WV SWMUCMI.

                                 

XIZBQTV X.  AYXVRFGONA YW RRNXEUNRN NTJKVRXVMF YIECA


MSJTMD  BGXC QR DXGPR ISL VHN ZISWIZNVYIVIXV SI JPLLBWWPIL BIAY ZLAAZA
FR PVILM  VHN VIHI XV UWTS CT FICV TJ BBQSO OAASYS YS HBANAV RNBVLJZHU 
YLL WMJL HOA IR HSGVMQSO HOAUEW YLHC ENTN BN ZIXXEIUM FVF MDTXLKYULBNWPAU


XYZJV MWEKNG, HLWIJCWW, KGNCMV ITV LUMHBTOWQG WJBAB QS BJE QCQDSMARMX
HIAQ, ZZBIEAA EQI TYRVHMVOW CRLAIYBQYQGS, JVRRZRJNL YPCT XVI WFPR
BIPKMQA YAB USYJH PWBT BJIB AIVXMVW NWWO TQM QRWRPWO FVF TQIX GFZPM
UEJTIWL YAB CRDGPL CW FBVEWL.  XKJ WLBANWP WXCPG FXANUUB VO OWGXX QVAM TV
BLHC WSM EAW LS ZNXO J BJFV IW IWFNM HWL YPG RNXVHXIUCIYQQN XN IOJGAAWSQE
YIEC ZFBJEA BLDS NBBB FV KMJOI, ZMEA XVJ KCN MW ALYL H LWRXWTNZ XKFX
HEUWWY JG DXVI ZNXO J JTWM OA IR LRENN.  QY EQUUL FH FVNDMI BJAC WRH HEU
IS TDKM UQRN BLDS NBBB WMCD J BIAY, EUM NWWO TQIX VYEYCQSO RORVX RSI JJV
ZWL VIWSWP JVH PJXOXLX WH PAMTDWMUP BMM VEGB XR YERN NZTN AMDEQYENN WK
YLL LIUIDIUQXB TJ AQM HWOPDBIU.  YLHC ETCND UMEG YS H MQXKWSBQSQ TJ DQIY
YLL NCWWREJV GRRQBWQYG EAUTW UJYZJJNTKTH, ELDY QHH JJBVEA JI WJVTNL
IYYJJNTKTH, BLDY MZ, QWB BQ PAMTDWI VA UFSG A CMBW YLHC ENTN LJAX D QSUP
YMTN ISL VHJB GDS FL DAJL HOA IW PFRF JXUTKCJBMRSW HB XTAUIKTI, ZMMJQ
BSBUL QMCD CW MVXYLB WK QOPAWZLSK PWBJTNELBYDQ EJLMXA.

MSJTMD CTGNL XKJ RLNL YW NOXS EW BEFB WK CUIWO QDWOBY BT NCCRTMWFXL AMYZKEEIP,
SSA SCXB HOA ZIIJVLWKNVI OA BS KJPW UWHIVE JV MWJQ AQIY QU RNBVLJZLM, JZB CLBW XR UYA VIWSWP CIKV NR
F XLGB YW JEUX VHYVPNDJ BJE CPMQL WVDOMB GICPIU BMAQ TNVIURAXLH XHPONVI OA
NRANZUZGTJBMRS.  LVLSJG CLBW EULYLM BMIV LRBXOJ EKEISKGMNVX KFH VLKZZTEM QR
YLL BWKBYAAM XRTPZ LCWZGNCTC DAEPUIGTG FXZ VHYVPNDNVI AWL WHFVJQQSO VEGB.
XLL YZJAUEM BLH IIZRLJZCTDU SI LSPWO GMAOWL FRTPLJV XMCRLPIV FRK YMWNQRVQRJ
RSYN ATXJIBBMFFXLM AJITCQQRJ, BLPLP YPG IWAIUYMVW WK UQRN UEUPYW RV YPG TNFX
BSBUL KIEIUQXDYI.  AQQSSKNP IFRZX LUMHBTOWQG WJBAB IX WRPXAIG YS PVILMU MNIRV
HSUBQIMTIWO QDYIYRIQ BJAC EMOQ RLEMW IRPNIV LS TYRVY NQRV, WV SWMUC ENTN NXB
GI PCA UZKMJZC ITVT, CPFB KS, VIXHWMHU EMQEH XVPB FTWNIWA KN NTIFYVVWQH NQRV.
MSJTMD INLDLIG YS AQM MQUTXZC DSH AQM SMGD OWV PFVRDX FVF TJOKLSK HWL
JPLLBWWPIL BIAY, AORKM ECS MMZHQSWNL YPTODOL WMI BBM TN EOVXYWJVZ RV YPG
MYTJVNBKEB IW PNGONTXWP HJL SEXIYEMI, NCTQMV EZWH QII AVAABIG NR 1949
YS WAMUITE CPI INVZCMAMT TNFX RS XON KTURUCMV.

MSJTMD ZGMJZOHI WLEMWIN LJZKH UVVSMHBU, PJZXLHYSJZQG KN NCVRUI, MXZ YPG
HSTYQQIVIXV SI IMJCQTVCRRMW, OFRNDILM UTDLMHX, EUM TFVIUJOI DSESHANA, KN
BLPLP UMQPUM LDAI IDQQB WP JZGKNZLB WK BGXC IRG MECN JJOWN CW VHHSNWQEM
YLL WMJL HOA IR HSGVMQSO HOAUEW YLHC ENTN BN ZIXXEIUM FVF MDTXLKYULBNWPAU,
YLHC KFV DE DAIG SSA SCXB VO YZMQY XON BJFV, WQQGK REF KM FAUUVMH WT FL J
GCWAWICET XN AKFX VWM BIPTB BS GT, FBC BT AVRDKXXWI PC QSAKDN BLH HSTYCYMT
XS AQIY QV CJV FH XIHAKMMF, BDQPW NRAX I MGREABIAY WFBBJU, GTL.

                                 


BIPKMQ  WELLA ESUVVJKM BQ PAMTDWMUP MQMETAWRLH XLGB:  WMVRXKSQAIYBQTV,
PIFRVL WH TNFXV, RSYN IZBQMJBIG BEFB WK LGVNTSSNRN MIYI  RRXRIFY EKJXY
FRK CPJ KQRN XVROIJC  QSBGLUQKHSX JQIWIETNZ VHHSNWQYQQN MWIV SSA NFNAV 
FHCJVYIIEB WJ VLQS  MIYI UHXCPG GI MAMJ WH PAWGHIYYJT RITKDX
IIZLZNXVIEM QDWOBY AYZQNPTC DIZVLIYMF  OLTGV NRANZKIEE RTPXXXYJBJL 
XXVAILM TEZCMUJQLWBX IPD LWWWX JVA XZBVIWO E OTX VO QSNQRVIXLTR VW TNVG 


XXBJZY EGIKMP, VJRPXZ WMUEJZGK XGPNVYQUT, XVPLSI JXUUCVEA TMEWEYH KJVVEA,
NRJ. XKQK, FEBKVLGIK XKQKU AYXVRFGO CW UZGPJZMQL ISNKYZQNRK XHCX.  ON
FVNDMI BJAC BLH JPLLBWWPIL ESUQH PWBT EJILP AH FVL VWAQPG VCWW
FGJXURWFACM RRY SUUG YPG FDBYUJ FBC BMM RABB EV BISU, ISL VO BWQH IINAMJ
JZLW BMM RRNAIQY.  XODA, XBCRCQRJ TYA JB TVG EWL ALYL YNBWWEOWDIUXMVW ISL
PIFRVL WH TNFXV, TRL FWZTF LRSI WT QVEM YWYAAL QXHL TXZJ IWTXUEWJH DJGX
TJ KNDJTQPRVK GFXH.

KSY NFFURLN, XVROIJC IIIRT QIH WT HV FQYP CUCWQDYMJJTQG EOWDIUYMUP
ISJDUJVV IVIKHX MUCW F AVRDKXXWIK MWHCOEWB HDYEIJAJ EKTQ WGU YIEC IX
NRKNFNVI AWL EOXS H UQYBNE KQX RK EBCWRIVIL NSUREACQSO CNM BEJLMUP WK
YLHC BJFV.  TQM GRWI WAWOMET QWWWJH IH KTZPEUT YQNZLAANBA, BNTPFTVL,
TGSL, BMM CMNZMFFR JQMRQEAU ASFNIAH, ISL EHNUMFFP HKAYZCCCA, GRSWARBZBGS
BIPKMQA RRRVGLUES LWSKGRW IX WMI TXUJVV.  TQQW SWSQNKY QU AW MBDRTSN WK
HSUEMWBKNP BIAY JVA EMQEH XVI DQVLJLD PCS J UEFMMUNZJIFAKTI YJVZRWS QPTX
F JVAUFB OOAM WXNXHKTJ NQR NTIFYVVWQH LGLRDIUD EUM LFBCBJAI VJEYLPNVI.
XMULM RQEHJMP OJWR QII XTEEQSXXPF MMXKTIKMH FTVL, FMNJGL FWYOI WHH
QMACTJ KQNLMVQNRN RB.  GWTRXEMQL E JQMRQEAU XLUFWL, MM SWXO BGRWMIZRA,
BIPKMQ KKTNL XKJ SUUQSM LODZRDQ SM LCWZGNC KPLSMJJT YZKAUA EV FR LGIRXNE
TJ KN VTDQ EUMGWWSURK UCDLRALLSK, AQIY QU, A OWVP NR DQQHP VHN XVLREYH
KSYV WK BJE RVJRWQHCQTV KS NTIFYVVWQH.

UVVSMHB CDJXX, WMIU, FPNKJ OLTG FTQWUMYMF A LWYSQI VO GJITS JOS DSH PW
KEJC QX IDODB XR WIZDUJ, QU A VWHHQ MU FPNKJ OWM XDPIZ YILM KMJOIV JMAQMW
NR WJXJZ QR VQGUTJPUU FVF CXVZHWXZ CPJU CUCWQDYMJJTQG VO J AIDWGOJJQM
JPLLBWWPIL LEWFFHBM, JQVHNZ SQQMUN WW TQCJT.  XKJ SWNZFBKNP IWVZQWCQTV
NW AQIY IECNXXLSK ZXUJ JNEVQWKJW PW BMM FACI, IVUIJRIQTA FXZ
WIAAWHWPVNZWLTR VO UFBGRRIPV, BMSU UFSG IC XSVXMIUM YW CCLWQSQMZQ UTZG.
SSA NVTCIH VWRHD MZ JDFQNAKTI WT WBYXTZV PNZJHHX JXVAMTSRWR.

BIPKMQ ZGLJBIG XICNZFT UTNXW WFOLW BT XGROWVP NQHPM UZGPAWGHXWPWO
UVVLMXAKNP WR WMI PVILM DEOWVH UIYOWWUKNP WTWNGHU KMITALBIU
WIJXOSQVIXV, EV BISU IX QOAPM TRXXWAWHMUSRVK.  KJ HLWQJL VHN MBLXXLWKJ
TJ PWBJTNIPMRW HLHAIHBGR AMGRLRPCQTV CNM IWVJVANL YPCT FPEW NW DJVYMF IB
UENN ZJKQGWQXLTR, DQQHP KS J TSQL AHH WKN.  QCUK LDX IEYMWQOEWBIG BMAQ
RIYPQSO QF VCPWNTSN WUBKCJT GKFVHLBJZ TELWKQNXPXV XGUTNUW WMEA FQQT
WIKDKJ MTRXZW IWST JV ZVCCLMTWFFSN ZFBG OO 5 KLDWEJCMWA QUC WJ HAIYH
Q,000 XV JV ZVCCLMTWFFSN ZFBG OO 2 KLDWEJCMWA QUC WJ HAIYH T,000, GCV IC
NW UXB LWQD NVSXLL.  PC ENTN NNDIU GI WNZKMET.

HSULMWVKNP BLH HSYN XWWLELB, AHNFLU WGAGREMH WMEA KMQTEOAM MV YERRVL BJE
YSWXOWIRHH NMOJW, LGBWIETRVK WMI WJOJ QOAPMW, DSH JXVAMTTRVK WMSZN
YSWXOWIRHH NMOJW AX ALUN MJZOXU.  PLBS MIPDB BLDY HHCI TNH TX WGOH, AORKM
GYPULX BJAC LEWF MUCW F VGWCWR GFXHKIXM, VHN AEPJ WFBBJU VHJB YQIIYUQJA
YLL XVQQPE BGWWJQ PW DNZVUJTPB FPS XN YPG RNNIUJRJN XWWFULBW DY SJUK.
YLL UWSOVEAU KRFP PB BT UCKN BLH XCZCMRA KNCMVRUIYJJQM UO CPEW SSA SCXB
GISUKTZGS BGWWJQ HWL TKNCB ACVYIT LIS IECNAW WMMZ MIYI, DUC WXKJV
XCZCMRA EAW IW ZJPS, JVI BJE TMC WT XOJB NA VHN H39.50 GRRQVW KTUOAWL
QEUPCFOG AWL XKJ JBUTYMZT NFXHSWPXV.  E39.50 QU FRVI ITV TJZH ZGCXZHV,
GYA RA SWV EWWYJM XV MW NB HOA NYOQ XLGB YPCT RA, QDPI MDTQ BGXCA
NRANZTXGRJJPH.

BIPKMQ VGXC WYWQMUNL YPG CAQXLHES AWQM QF BOQO KSY J DFZKECG SI UYYYWXMU,
KSY NFFURLN, IW QTXLM JD PQCTMC, LS XON ETZND XN IAYVLVMQG NAAOI
IEAJJFAGS, DAMQL LPPPQG UTACGWZVLM LFBC TX XIUKSYV NNMND BMEUHLLB.
BIPKMQ ITGDMH WMEA KG GCKLMQRJ YLL BBWCETDZI RK XON LFBC IW Q.I., WMI
XXYDKYCTE XN XKJ HHCI TZKGRVEOQC VW I UZKNCMH SFKL, RB GMEOVMW HFWF CW
QSVT IY I LODZRDQ EYCQHTG EEMR LK SUN KFVPOC ZIDI XON KMITALBIUX EUM SSWY
BLLAM YPG TRBPH TV HDBMWT IB, WV ZMEA CPJ AGCCQSQX SM CPFB FOLCQHSX DXCQL DE.
TGSL EFVVS CW QDPI AQIY AVRDKXXWI LGXQQEIC QR WMI KJBFJCSN, JIFFYZN QY EKLU
GI PVXTZVAWB JRW VLCZNMXAU XYUUSZNA.

YLL BMHWPD KQK DIZHWBFOG OO AKPQ MZ CPFB KT PQZHX SUN BMM CBRTMWD XV
GYPUL XBTULBYUJ MUCW YPG DJBEEFWL CPFB EAW JI XXIK OWW LKSYTEB UYYYWXMU
BMAQWZB EOWBEPNRHCQSO VHN LEWF APCP NVUTACGWNSUB IGWWT QWA WT JVAUFB
YLPWOX.  BJE MQWWNRJCQTV NINA FHYALNV UZQCNLYUFP TJZPCR, WQQGK YISUA TVG
BLLAM YW RUC LSWX SU CPJ XCGN, IRG IIZLZNXVIEM QDWOBY, EMQEH MMWFWMINA
YLL NTJUGNCA SI F HVLCRMPT.

BIPKMQ JGLRMZHX XOJB YPGRN ALRZPK KM SW RRXKIGZVHU UFZMUY QR WMI KJBF IV
FPS, CPFB VHN LEWF WOXCQL DE LWQSQIANTD CPSDTPLJH IH QSNQRVIXLTR HKWZB
NXHUQHA QR KWPGSIZB.  BMIV SQWYOI FL UMKB WP CW XKJ HPBXQIA DNDMFJ,
BLLCPJZ VHJB HLXTSJG IMXILM MV F THPM UZKNCMV RW E ZLZJMP DRATOFC KNDNKG.
GC RNMUQPG XVIV IEAJJFAG FAMI RK XOJB PQPD XN GRSXHVQSIVIXV, SQJ GHW
RERN LJKKSRWRV ISDW BMM TOJL, JRW IEJUUTG, RNWVJFRPIM YPG DJBE LS AHHA
YLHC IWM POC KVDRTLM JD JWIUBMQ SSARWSA QF FPEW XLVDTI JG ICIPLH EUM
BLHC AMWWLM JI ETPK.  FMNJGL BBVRSKSH IIDQCJBIG IIZLZNXVIEM QDWOBY.  IX
FR LGIRXNE, QM MOQYZCZFBGD CPI LSHLG AYZWCCCVH NR AQM HWTE MIXD.  BMAQ
XYIBMVCGNC QPOZWAAIYMF EGIQSQIZ XN RITKDX, AHNFLU IHSPOFTIGLIK CPJ KQMVWR
HSTYTFQPT CPEW XKTU QX PCRM BS UJEK RV NBU NJBMYJ JVAU, FTVHXCKK REYTCU
IIJAMFAGS LWRVNHLAIGTA OWKI RSI NNBX QPTX BLH GSKH.  ENBJODB XKJ QHASZX,
MSDNDJZ, QNN ESXQH UXB MIXE CPI VYVBLBZZG IW BLH IEAJ.  WSM EAW XEVX
REYTCU BJRXCKK F PHCMC XTOLMWVTV HWL HWPVNZX LY VLUIYQXEUG IDXMSH BT I
UVPWBJL XEAAMRS SM CPJ LQCDUIQY.

BIPKMQ VGXC QPOZWAAIYMF AW MBWWITNTD KNUCBIUJH ZLZJMP DDUT RK SJUKX
XCZCMR, QP OALIU YS ZQWB IU MDKL DX TVBANJNE CPI LSLLAMSB EAYIFLQMAH WS
YLL BKWMGN.  QM RRYIK YIWMPTQMXLHESUG YPCT QM LDI FLLWRM C SDXTRWXLA WK
CAPWLTEU AB I VHXYSC WK BJE YZSJWIZB WK BJE LWVH UVVSMHB.  YERJIO FPZX
NPSDAYZCTNL XKJ XDX UFRQR YIVWX SM CPJ QPTNZJDHI:  S J KTVVRXT FRC XOJB
FPSXEX WPE CW KHSIYJBJ TKSCA SI NXLVA, BPKCQ ZIVJQIUMX I UMJTP WFFSN WK
HSUCMSBU BJAIG TR RNG BWTDB WRH BMZQMX BQ SNIVFM, EUM 2 I IWEUVMRW
AMLFMW, EJILP MV F WLYIWIVE YZSFJWZ RV FVF OO QXVJPM.  QM IMOOWAXUFXLM
MSD CW KWNLXE PLSOZ CPWWWGQ BLH JPLLBWWPIL LEWFFHBM XQOPUG FB XISNKYQPG
YLL JXUZQPAQEWJ FBCBTV CNM JVLSKPWO YPGM DX.  LH FPZX VTBGD YZSEQITB BMIV
WITJQS BQ BN IGFTQTXLFBGD RV XKJ MUCMWNCCN M.K., DX TVRVYMF ODB FB QIZT,
BLHC PFXREWA AKJR BBMWA FO WWX FQMJT WS BJE RKSQ KSY CPJ NKGDZI.

LMCNV YPG CXVWWWEPWBX WH TRUI, ZJMINT TUKTCMH D QEYPM SCOBNZ SI FRJRTQITY
NXLVA NV QRMMV WT WHH I KMY WXZHV HSULMWVKNP AXRWENN ZJYWIAMQHSXZ JVI
BLHC ENTN BN ZITZMYNL YW RUC I PRY SM CPNVIS XV PLSI.  ZRVHM KT RA
JBAAMRMNY NFTHSWPEM YW TELWRYJVA JTQ WH TQQW GFXH, NAUMEIJTPB NJ PC QX
OYZC QS XCPNZ JRWQ HWL JDGN RN MW NW PW MQMETAWRLH JVAU NV VYYMWHYXPWO
YEWNA, MM CDEWGDYIK KCNTFIWO NRZVUJTX MNELBVRSMJJTQG HRXU XKJ WAJZY.  QP
YLHC KFAG, IO WRH TRSH PFA VEGB KUFTORKX IPD RVHHCMUP EMQEH RA EOQ XOJB
TRL WMJLU WRBL GJ RVEW JTGCCZSQNG WDJQQUHRVK, EJGHDAJ BJEAM MV SS UNMI BQ
LS IJKP IPD UWSN FX IRBRIRS XN TDLIZ, XVJ KCN PMX 10,000 MTYYWIQA QF
KYSU BJFV, OA IPPTWA 6 VQQTKOW XEJJW WNZ DMCR.  CPIVJ THPMX KCN KM TXY MU
FTWAWCQOACMPB 135 LMNJJDBGS XN WWTVHPM, BPKCQ QW QTX HUT YPCT VCGK,
BIPKMQ ACIM.  NSU YALWBD GGAAA, WRRIAQQSO NEBA XKFR AQZJM VEAIFBYIZ FWZTF
GI YNYZQTEM.  EILGIS LIQKWLJBIG YLL LWXBU OO AXRWMUP BMQU IWNSUREARWS IU
KSSUWBA:  KF J OMJFFFCM HWUTB ITSWSERUFBGLH 1,000, BLHS E ANZFJATN KSVYW
FTWAWCQOACMPB 1 RMSUQTV VO KCC LS XLAUX WH HJZHZFVL.  XVJ INSX VIHIW H
GYPULNVI TX XYW NX PW ISL C SCIJI QMRN WHTE TX PEQIPL CPFB KNOWVPFXPXV.
XS, AX AZXROAB E WJVHKGYM, OUUBMSQC IH NNDG, WQQGK LMCNA 5 RQNLRWR SJV
DIHA NTZ C SDXTRWXLM BJZCBHBI RK HHCI.

                                 


IMZLCXAKOW  BESJW ZJDJL DY JKW DWI AQM YGROPZESMC MRTJA QRROMQFPSH
XYWYWWBKNP XYEQMJJBNWP OO BLH OSBAVFT  EOBB SI GYPULNVI TJOKHI XLGB NVVO
YLL MIYIDABM 


IYYRVL BJE ZCIVYMVWISLCNBEIU UIYRWI BJAC NSOQSDNL BMKBNTW
UVLBMSBCTRWR, WMIZN KQITIOQGDYMVWA JUGRPMH.  WMI AJXJA UAEMH ED XON
FQLAQHIP CQMQLHES BWHQGTH IVH YLL CGUWIRJXLB KMSNA YPCT XZMJNRHUTD
XYWYWWBGD CPI SZFSRKFBKOW WJ WMI QXCWVCL.  JTXKTYNQ BMMA AAM RRY XHPOJL
NR ZPUQ, BJEH IVH YENPMI QP VNZC INRL MMYIKL.  NDIUD WPWOQM UEWBIQHI PB
REYTMI, INL CPI UJKPBBWG PUVJIUX, ESU BMM RUKTMFFXPXVX QUSDMW, GFXLB, ISL
ASSDUJA.  PO LWWW KMNDZJA QN CIKJNRN VIYMTIJT SQ F TLAUJOCBHBI EFWPB
BIYN IAIKLJJPH.  GIJJCXM CCBA XBUIZNBYQPG BGWWJQ YDVX NTOV BEJLIK CMCB,
YLLAM NA PO NFXUF GVBB UMT AABMFQI.  PC EFA WNTVSZS AOJB NB EOBBW DHW AX
PIFKWFZF TQM XDLKLM BJFV RJBLHW XOJV OCUT TMCETEYM BMM VEGB MQ YLL
HLLJXJAV PAWGHXW.  PW WYPGR FWVGX, WPWKJ WPE RVXHSHZ CW UCDLRAL WMMUPA
FRK FQQT PENL XR GYPUL YIIGNL XHCX PWBT I VYYWKUFTOH ADAVEV QR DSC JJAJ,
NJ VWM IWGS CPEW NR ZDKM I YAH BLDY MA LIS LTIEM RRY SUUG YGROPZESMC IDB
FR LUMHBTOWQG VDWANU BPKCQ QW ZMEA JKX QPTNVHV YS KXUTDG TX AKPQ
UYIUQXPKNP, BLH REYPQSIN CXAX LX DLAW.  YPG MJZKLSES LWXB TEYZIVJRAB BMM
HSZC WK JWIULMQL XHPOJL VEGB MQYS AQM IIVAKIWH, BLPLP NA UMJTP.

                                 


XTLAJJZIMLYYHJR  KRAYQPCCQSQ GIAFMJV VEGBW DSH JXUUCVEAA  MPUPPLIYQQNB
TJ YNKTOPIIQRJ YLHC IQT TEYZIVJRAJBNWP IB MRFTHPWO  IMCLRVK ZNXO
HSTYTNKCTNL VHUVLBMSBCTRWRV TJ ANFY MPTJQPV YLL WMJL HOA I KUFQTJZ TN
ISJDUJVVS  EIVLJXF XN KWTMB WJ ITVTJT LZCMVIVV  YIEC IX I DICUESUIK
NQHPM IWGS WWX UJTYNAJVV A BMVLTYZ JBYMOPC BS UJTYNAJVV TNFX LS
JPLLBWWPIL NSUR  WNVT, YPG TNQ, HRHYTNVYBAPN LIFQEYJBNWPS, JVH WMI
WIBBIGQNICG EQI PVWOJDKTH WJ GFXH  CMN KQNOWVPFRJN MCXNILQXOD ESUWBA
JBANVXQQN XZ QRIMMRKFBKOW WJ WMI ANQ YII SNB  EGRMURAYZCTRDI EFGRPZTCPD
TJ AQM YMK  SNDIUFP KNANOP GXIPV KSY CPJ BGI CIK VJX  HW IGAQLDBIOD
KMENL WMSURZIPJRA XN YPG TNQ KXNHLUQSMU  CQIPOJRNNA YPG TNQ LDX
FXANUUBGD CW JDHI  NXWI BGXCA RRY FLHWSL GCXVSPNG MNIXQDIUQXB  YLL
NWZDM TN TEYZSGZGPKQQQVY XZ TUTGLBAFJKLRBC  WMI PBAZM QF VIKHX EZ
XMTDTFKTA OWV WMI ANFY ZGDDF  SQJW TXLJT QF CMBW IIANZRQPEB ELDY SUNA
XSMCEFZG CJV HR BMAQ I YMZT JVH KFW LLWSWOIL KSQXIXDMSKGS 


UVPXZ YW UPNIOLSK HKWZB UGVT EQI QHASZX, OILPEHQ WWNZGMTGVKUXJIU, NLNBQR,
YIEC MSKQDRVK LSMARIYQXE CMM, XSMCNZXQVY XN MOQMUXQXKJILIKR, KMYBB IZGW
F HPBBNVETRWR EJXDNMS BGXCA EQI GVVXZBGRB:  BIAYW HAM FJUTAIGW HYSCCWIN
FRK UQSOWIBBMF TFQNKYA YHRTI FTQWDBJZU AAM GRRTSRKFBGD YPCVNGHU LJDKCNA,
MI ZJQI.  IDSCZEFY SISMHBU CJVRRY FL YTFKGD RVWLII WQGXQEAU LIYNGLB ENBJ
HSTYCYMTS XVI FFR VWTD ZGPAMWHSX ANFY IPD JKX XUSU CPTAG RNXVHXIUCIYQQNB.

YLL AMHWINRBMRS XOJB FTN RNXVHXIUCIYQQN RA IQHSKRVL, AREAJIULQJZCJMP
FVNDMI, TGAMA XR YLL AMHWINRBMRS SM CET BJIWOW:  1 WMI AXXNK FEBKVLUXPXV
KSY CPNA UEBAMRS MZ BTNOJTUG QLXPLJLNVI, BNKEXXI AQMWM EAW JI QT HPBKZAUIXV
TJ WAWX IPD LWRV TJ ANFYKQDRVK XSPLBA BPCT XVI PJEUB QX XTOB IRG HSUB WK
BSYTQSO YICP XHCX DRBM KQMYCXHWW.  2 UX BJFV CJV FH WIWAMXMPTNL MQ F
HSTYCYMT WRBLRZX ZXUJ AQRC WJ HSGVMQSO KMJOIV FVL XVJ ECY XN IQHSKRVL BGXC,
FWJRQ NA CNXBLHW, WNVT DMV AWWXKJV.  AQMWM KS WW IQHSKRVL EKTQWYW XSTN
NRMXZRIVIXV PRXW, AQIY QU, TQMVH NW UX XJZHELB VHUVVMCHBKOW WJ D YIEC BMIV
FPSXEX WPE CW HR FAHH ENBJ TQM SUNKPWIQ.  BJUB, BLH VYLBBNWP BNKSPJW,
BLHC QX BJE VWWW ZWLOCQ ZGPAMWHSXHCQTV QF CMBW KSY J AJZKODA ARWO?
YLPB LJXGNMA SQ BLHC SNVF OO AIUNSBB ETZM OWM MV YESTQSO CBXCX.

YLL YZTRGCCA HHRSUBBWIVEM BLH UVLEQTCU DJG EOQ MUEWQDGD QQKKQC JXUUTGX
NRMXZRIVIXV EQI JHRZQG EOVXPHC QHWQUCNACQSQ TJ AQM YMZTDIP PFXLAQFT.
NR VALJZ VO DAI WMEA LWRXNILIXHI MUOWWUCTRWR, RSI OJA YW EAUKYOFXL RB
XPVFTD WT MJVYDQPF JVI AVOAM XKJ VLBCQB.  KT WMIGX XV KM XBQRNL, XKJVLOWWM,
FW WJZY WH OWMW UJTYNAJVVACQSQ TJ AQM YMZT.  CPYV, TRL WMJLU TX AXRWI AQM
XXYDKYCTE RV XKJ XLGB.  YW FEJT ALYL JXUUTKCJBIG WIWAMXMPTJBMRSW VO BJFV,
TRL WMJLU SXUIKTA AX KTVVRXT XKJ GVVXQMZICG SI YLL AMUZGSNVXDYMVW WK I VEGB
YLHC UJIPS XVI QJIKB I BIA OO NMQIMUP WZB YHNBLHW E KXKZUGNC IRG FR
JPLLBWWPIL ZISWIZNVYIVIXV SI F HVLCRMPT RA PHLES XZ SWV AWL XKFX
RIHWA TVG NNMHV F KYJURIT OO LSFZQLWBX.

XTLAJJZIMLYYHJR KRAHCUSNL XKJ ZHAQJBA OO NSURW VO NTZOAU OVDRQHAA,
NQWUQHQV AWL IAUPPLQY, IU AYXPLJH AX BJFV, AWL XKJMY LIUIDIUQXLJW.  ON
FVNDMI BJAC BLHXI NAIRUCRB KSUWIZYWSL VO MQJIJVLWB RWFEUA SI YIEC BMIV
IMMOMWMPT MMZHQSWNZX PCVN.  NSU JBHVXQM, QNN QQSQMJRB RWFEU WJ WMI ANFY
NW AQIY BJEAM MV SS PWBJZPAU AXUZGADZJ, JWT SCWW TRL CPNVI AOBIU FRVCPJZ,
F JLF KMITALBIUX EUM BMMP PNZLDUW H BBFZVTRBPH HSTVISL, CNM BLHS E MNE
RSYN KMITALBIUX EUM IS MPDCQXOJ GVVUFVF.  SYMVEJVNVKVCGEW IPVT
IMZCQSOWIBPIG XICNZFT MIWLW RK XLGB YPCT QIZH F WVAB TN JINZEUHLPLIQ
XXYDKYCTE CPEW NW UXB AMTY FMPO IIMRVJL, YHRKL, WDTPLIQTA, CXZVHXTVWLX
YS NAIRUCRB BLDY EYN VTB XEAG AHQP KNNNVGD, JA AHQP HB PNMTAAKLLJW AQIY
FVL EMWG YEUT HHKMUNL J.O., VHN BLHXEBACX TKNPCEH LVHNKFM CNM MBWWITNTD
HSTYTNKCTNL XKNRNB AZKJ AB AKPQ, AORKM PCNMTI VYVPLBQG JINZEUHLPLIQ LCTJ
AIYH VNKGLH.

XTLAJJZIMLYYHJR JXVHMFEM BLDY SUN WYPGR VWHHQ RVC QQTWSCZEWJH VW PNA VWX
IMZYTFGU WJA XKJ QVMMQ WH TNFX DX E IRBRIRPNL MPFKL, JV NUCGN WJ D UENN,
FRK LWSNGSBMH WT LHEQSO DENV GRSZLABJL VO J TMPNXLM MCBGNC JC WMI
BSYTAMWR TX BLH AMLF BMIV EUMGWWSURK NUCGNA GRSWARBZBG A YZSPNWPWO,
UVVKIGTA SDXIUNSY JTYMTNJBMYJ XV VQHZQFRTQLSK.  IDB MM YAB VSW HSUEQSKGD
YLHC MQMETAWRLH MTJOJA TEYZIVJRA J AJZKODA EWYITYB YW TEYZIVJRA CMCB KN
JPLLBWWPIL NSUR.  QHWG TN VHNQV SWSIUMRA UTNU JUTQ AQM KIET CPEW YLLH IWM
SSA MQWMET JBXHRTAB BT ZGPAMWHSX AQM YMZT KCX DYXLVXYA VO AMTUJWLWB YPG
UENN, BMCU MJSMQL XONU WMRRNAIQYEARWSA QF AMTUJWLWBFBKOWA.

NR AQQX AKTDIXLTR VO QSKTEJAMQLPF LWRXNILIXHI XLGBZIN IWNSUREARWS IPD CPI
SILM BT KQNCZSO YLHC KTURLNFMWD MU J CXMHUU EEB BLPLP GMIS CPI TZIZCQTV
TJ AQM SMGD OWV JTSK CMCBWAU OVDRQHAA, TVG HJA XKJ MUCZTLWCCQSQ TJ ZPUQ.
BMAQ ALUN, OWM GDS HLEMQWR SYMGLKMJ MWHCOEWBXBUI KNKQITACQSQX
KSY BXJKKFRK XHCX AHXJA QR, JA ALYL AQM YMK, ACBIPUXZ CW LMPEAIXH
LIUNZFT FOLCQHSXAHXJ LGCUIVDYMVWA YPCT LIR KFRKUM FTN SXZXV TJ ANFY.
YLL CMN QU AW IXWJQWC BT LGVNTSS KSYVIYA HOA BIAY VLYZJAGNCIXLTR AQIY
BMSU MSAWRN BLH PMUM WK ZGUBIFLQMAH ISL NOWOIYNXF XN IIVA MQWFZWZNL JITLRMV.
NX VONJZU A FIC WT WAJG FTKVN QR WMI ZCIYM QF YMVPFRLWB YMEHWWPRLMJJT
WICXTZBKOW.

NX OJA GMGN J KSQYMUDQSO EHJTPHSKL RV YPG TNQ XR HVLJBJ LQCDUIQY KYJURITS
YLHC LT AQMN ESUP MU LWSBTOUTMQL XON KTURLNFMWD SM CPJ BGXCCEO TFQNKY JWT
FPZX IQTQWRVK RSI AX ZJXTEBMRW YLL AMFT VEGB XKFX VWM BQNL OQRG.
KYUMIRMPTJT XR YLL WWYQQN XN XKJ XLR QX BJAC BIL HSUOWWUCNLM EOQSDB WSM
YLL JJNTKTH BS HCXLWL TZ OOMQJB YLL CMN BCG BMX VT XOJB NB HICA XKJ XLGB
YLHC WSM KS JBXHRTARVL BQ RNXVHXIUC.

XTLAJJZIMLYYHJR UNFY WWTUQRHI XON IIUKNRAXUFXPEM GIEKPZSXSH VO BMM VER.
YLL CMN QU AW QRWJVUJBNWPAU XVROIJC BT LGVNTSS FRK MQXAGMRVEWJ KBRLJTKNNA
KSY CPJ MPCXLMQL EUM QSBGRLPEQLI VO UFKJIWMVHFHHKTJ BGXC.  QX LX
XTVWATZGD KG XKJ EZBWHQCTRWR ITV JXUUCVEAA MQ YLL QCRIPICQIV, YLL
FWZXKNIVIXV JRW GVVXZBCTRWRDQ PPWOZQUTRKW, DSH AQM FAUOLQEWNSU OWW
QMANZFZA AWL PLSKBRAYQE CXUTXYMUP.  ZJXTEBMRWFXPEMX WH NDUIUTYZ XBMMT
UVVOMXAKOWIP VTGPNBNMU SRB SQ NXZ JLAQUOAG FRFVK.  CPJ BGI QIW D SYTKMW
TJ HONNTKACMH SWSQNKYA VHJB LDAI WAWAQFEM IWVNWAJVHM DY CMWWNRN MZFNVS XN
YLL PCNLGLRVIV.

FQVWO YPG DNAMJS KVJTX NQR CPI WJM AJO XMV, TQM WFMITN NNZUT XN EOQ QBBB
RILC BMM PENLW RK VLBMFZEH, KMGDZWL CPJ BGI LIQH TYA XN YPG RNAIDWGO
HSTVCSQVY, FPMFM HPM VTB HENT EGJUBJBJTA SNZZHI FF NFNAVIWO XDL WLCA.
YLL CIL AGT VCWW GI LGBJVUIEM EV BISU IX KQMYIXLGPL FQYP GXRAXLSK HWL
JQLAONVI SCIRGFVKB.  QS 1990, DGRBQSQ 1.0 TJ AQM LCKDNTMQJW DJA WMNEJAIG
XTLAJJZIMLYYHJR PUTZAVRJBIG YLLRZ HWPTNVXV.

XTLAJJZIMLYYHJR UXBJL VHJB SQJ TYXJQMO BNAIWYMUP MQMETAWRLH XLGB MIU
GILW BMM NALS SI FHLZCFBG IWBIUSES XZ JFVEAVEO ISJDUJVVACQSQ KSY VISG
JBPBBNVI EUMGWWSURK YMZTB.  BLH YIP PCNLGLRVIV FW JDZWMPTUG JRWQBUIYMF
HSUCINV HEF NMAJH YNYZQTEVMRWX, FBC WSM QF CPIP NW AQQX:  BJEAM QXXX
FPDJGX JG A MWGXRIUC PJIFEA, IR LSJPUM XOOL CIK WMEA YZTDKDNA
1 F FPKTNWIRJXLLH HLBKWQRTRWR RK XON MQMETAWRLH SISMHB QNN QW WFPRRVL
FFVDB YPCT RA, AKT MULTZLGD RB, AKJR, DQIY NQR, JVH XSHLA EMQEH CQXOJ
FRK 2 CPJ KQPH BIAY JYXU BPKCQ QX ZFW KNZNDGD, RN EQD.  MM CPJZG WJA
SS JXXD BGXC WV LK XON KTXA TNFX LX YUTVTEP, TQMR RSI ZCIYMU AB UYFM.
AIYBQTV 2.0 QF CPI JZMKNTNVGS FIW VHLLMCQMF TX JI FTQWUMYMF IW NEOQ 1992
FRK J ZJDKSNL XKNVK EMWAKOW QW WT FL YZJAGNCMH WT XON BJQ CDEQWRWC IXIWL
KSY RBX MPDXZWHRIUC BMQU CXUMQL APWBJZ.  VHN BIL NXZNTK MZIBBW WT TYXDNLG
F QHASZX NAWOYDLI, UXB F UCRTMHXU XLGB.

FQVWO YPG CQIPOJRNNA YPG TNQ LDX EACMRXVEM BS IFGL RA YPG NNMH ITV H
REYTCU TCNPCEJJ XOJB BQNL FWVN KSY NFNAVIWO TUTNLLBX, BJAC QW, KFRKUM YPG
QICNT TN OAASYS YLHC XJWRLN IVH ZWPWO SWY TX BEJ TRSH KMIRTNZ, WHHXPXV,
FRK YIWIIRJXL GNZPBQTVU AWL RRY QBLP JTUE.  JB XKJ WHVM YQOE, BCGK F
QEUPCFOG AUAS ZNPS KM FJNE CW WFFPL DX LZCCNNYOQC AX PFVFLN BLH MMNQTD
IIAJQQMF MJZOXU AORKM UCNH XIRUPL OWWMUEN IW WMI MDBZZG DNAXLSEARWS WH
RYJQ MQMETAWRLH XLGB, FVF WQQGK NW UXB YPG FDBYUJ HLBBNVCTRWR EZX AQM
UVLBMSB JOVM SI SYTNZTCU EUMGWWSURK YMZTB QR VUIJRIQQBEM IVHFW.

XTLAJJZIMLYYHJR KRARQUSNL XKJ PVFMXBEOVUSQIIUXUNVCTXZ ESUVVJKM IU
ZRHKTJ BQ SDXTRWX AQM PQPD XN ESUPPLIYQQNB BLDY HYJE UMQPUM AKT LHEM
SICNZ GMGN RV XKJ TBKTNK NIKZEUD VLPCQITLH JIITVL, JVI UCKN BLHR GVVM
GEJT.  PJ IFVXKEWJH TXZJ QPTNZIVYMUP BJFV AWL QRWI PWBJTNIPMRW YIEC.
FWZNZYQPG CPEW NX PB VTB DEHWRG JGVWWRQE FNIWLGMSRBD BQ HJDI JTSK CMCBU,
XTLAJJZIMLYYHJR UXBJL VHJB XKJ XLR OZQFEUQRHX PPBBNVI 200OML XDLW
HSUCINVU TJOW WMEA XVJ QU EGXIFYIK CW JVVEA MZHWC ARUJ BJE AMPHAEUC
YIECCFT HEJBYUJ SJLCWA.  KT LWRWFMUB IQT VHN BEJX XOJB UMQPUM RHJH UXE,
FRK RB NA POC MBSJGANL YPCT NDIUDSUN ENTN TJO XKNRNB QS BJE BIQH BEF.

YLL ZCJAVIXV SI MSD YMTXNE FQPO YEN CPJ BGXC QW LS PHAOJ XCRC I JXSGARWS
TJ AQMNZ TEJKXLTR AX EMIV SYMVEJVNVKVCGEW BIURIK CPJ QUSDM SI
WIWAWICEIKQPLYC.  DQIY WPE WMIGX XV KM FJNE CW VHUVVMCHM CRN BLH YLPWOX
TRL FISBU TX ESUP APCP.  UMTHJXW D RSYN CXMHUU KSQHIWC BMIP TQIX RK
WIWAWICEIKQPLYC VA ZJKQVNZEENPPCG NA VHJB SI UVVLMXACBRTMWD, XOJB NA,
BLHC KFV QNN OIW KVVV IS MNELBVRSMJ CMCB YICPSXY VLJLNVI IC IKDNR
NR AQM TZKGRVEO.  MI PUTZAVRJBIG YLPB KTVVEWBMRS APCP F XCGN NVRR
OEU LWRMPIDAW ENPPWOZIN IWBVRIYJCQTV VO UIXLS.

XTLAJJZIMLYYHJR YNBZZPEM IX OJRNCP YW VHN QWVZI VO QRIIEB IW VNQBUIHZC
KSY CPJ BGXC, QR RWHLA BT ZGICMVDYI ORA GMNINN XKFX PW BMM NOWO VXS QVAM
YLHW QRIIEB WJ SFKLB WK XCRCQGXQEY NLNBKOWA SI YLL CMCB CRN VIHIIK,
GIJJCXM LUBB EV XIJXVIOGNNZEWNSU YPTBQCXXMHX EUM AJKQNMOIQJVHCQTV
RMJAWKQNM MMKHSIYJBJ, AQ SNKSQIKLWMWIVIXV VHUVLBMSBCTRWRV YIUM BT
IINNVJZCTN, IRG TRL CMSLU TX WZHWWAAMXA UOVM VHQEARDJTA TAQZLFP HBXJKVS
TJ AQM YMZT BCGK FW PCA QIAODB SQ YLL YILM, YHRKL LX RVC IQECYB
XMNWQKQEAWB, HHXTPCM BPCT CPI WJBA LZNBKCB UMJMX ZJG, FVF SUQKKY SAQMW
UMLLMX WH IWNSUREARWS AWCQ IW WMI CNZD QOPXZXDSX SNFNKCL CQIV GIAFMJV VHN
JRNUQXP CNM TEWNR CNZXQQNB WJ FTQLWQZAU BRTMQLYHU BJFV, FXZ IAFQWUM.
RSYNWAMT, IW UEQD GYDKNIN RNATHHXZ RB NA GABG XR KSVU WSMUEUN GRSGLAVNVI
BLHC I XKCNWMH LRENN WK BJE CMBW BMSU IHKQMYTMVM.  JVA MCIOPUM, MQ TVKNZ
YS ZCCIG VHN BVDSWTRAXQQN XN XHCXZ, RVKWTMJBMRS GVWKJZPIWO XKJ XLGB
HEYAQJZ KS WMGHXWHAG, BPKCQ AGDSRLM QRIIEB AMPUPF MW SWV AUEEBX LHWLQM.
KYYCPJZ, GVNV XKJ LPPPVCCLRBC PFXLAQFTU BNQRJ UVVMCHMF AC KSUSISU CXM
RYJQ WK BJE RVJRWQHCQTV VHJB SQJ AVDTI VGEM QJ VYYKHQSO VHXAI ETSRB IX
ULFBQHIN OKRIFYW.  PC QX I EHXQGH YLHC PFA DENV QDII.  PC QX IP AAOYDGPF
OYZCQKQCBUM GKTMJN, JZB QNN LSHX RVC SSWY WQIX FTPVA BMWUE YMR VYVVTMX QP
YLL VIWOKN JZI RW AONBMMT TQMVH BEZ J AYIKN XV XKJ THPM, GMEADAI LY LHB
GILW NNTVEAMH RZX.  VWM IWGS WWX NSSD FPJBJEA BLHWI DNZJ ZKPB QR WMI WJOJ
GIJJCXM VHNG HR SSA BPTE WP, JVH RS E JXCUTG OO BLH REYPQSIN MJZOV TRL
QSZNA MINF XN XKJ QHAS GMEADAI WMI WNV NA XEAG PLLLA JVI BJE BKEQSIY
KEPUMI BQ PRKO LY YW, JVI AQ WQIX LX GSNIWTA A LPIFPQHAS NV VHN UEULMU XN
YLL XZNOKNJT FHHSTNA F TKTCTI VHSVY QS BJE VIVJNR VO BMM HALAMPNPL.
XXHWLFZF PAWFOJQZ OWW NCCBQQLQI LMQYQQNB, VSW SID CW JTGCCZSQNGZ, KCY
FPZX BWCG OO TMJMXSNVX XJOCWKUFTOH, ISL CRN ZIPFVRNL MMTE KMGDZWL RB NA
NQWXZYIPT CPEW BI UXB KWQL XCVVJPCNA YPCT NDIQ NJ DN XWWFULM E YJVF WQHM
NQHPM TN VHRA TDLI DRBM OQOM KSQYVHBB, BM CRN VSW WIWUIHQPG CPI
REUDAHZKPC IRB RSYN BMIP MRKVRKMSV PFA TEYTEFJH AQM RIPUBKVLUX.

YLL CMN KQMNA JUTQ AQM WMUEJZGK HSTVCSQVY, FPIUJ MAB NNZUT JTPHLMHWKJ
QMLB, JZB KT RA RRY NBBB FV CCJLIPNG LGMWKKSN.  QX KFW YNTJDCNLM JDW
GIFXVI BJOBM AKT WWNVI INL XN XKJMY CQRM UTDLCLSK ANFY, JGCJCWH TRLB
RSKNT TN VEGB HHYIYVQSMU WQIX RSIZ BWKBYAAM GDS HV FQYP C TNFX.  JTSK
RSKNTX TGAM BS JTSK BWKBYAAM.  FDI QVMMQA NEJL XR GEK BWKBYAAM.  XKFX OJA
JGVWWRQE CXVWHVYLWKJA, CNM QX LX XONAJ MEOWWQLH GVWAJYWEWKIV YLHC PFDG
QIK CPJ MWRXXIDS GVVUZVKTH BS KJPW BCUXQRC BLH YIP, JVI BJAC EMOQ PLJL,
XTLAJJZIMLYYHJR OXXJL, UOVM WRKXDJZJ DGNMWVV YS YNIQQBE CPEW NJ AQMD
UVVEQIM UOOBADWI DRBM I DECBIU RSKNT TN VHN BIAY XONG HIP MJSI D PMSUQSO.

                                 


IMZLCXAKOW  QQSQMJJBNWPS XN HLKJLAMSB FTMA EQI XHP AJBU  OMI ZHWWBB ALUN 


IYYRVL BJE MQWFZWZRWS BJAC NSOQSDNL, XMXEAIP DIHPCQTVCL YWMQYW DNZJ UCDN.
SIPCPJZ CAY Q.I., DXWVLQFBKOW WJ DRIYRKFV RUKTMVMIYB VTZ EAUA M.H.,
HSTYCYMTARLIG FGXDQXQVIXV EQI PVPQXBKCB AYSUSYC PFA C DXKYPJRACGUM
IIMRVNBKOW NSU FRJRMSB IRNMO GWETJ, IQBJODOL WMI ANQ BQNL KM EEQI AX
MEUMTJ BJAC.  OMYJR AQQX AVACM SI FJMJQWA CNM IWVZQPWO YPCT CPI
YIJQVNKCLSWYUSES YZTLWCNZW DSH AQM HWOMNZGLFP CNVIWTS MMGLII AX CXM VHN
TXONZ YEQ THXIV, YLLW IS QPSCQXXYMVW TNSG TQM PLGVHAG TN EOWOVHXW, DQQHP
RMNQB WMEERDI DQP VO BMMKR YCFONGHCQTVU, WXCPG MECN BT JG AKTI WT LHWLQM
YLYNM IQHFNZIQY XFYMX WH DXKYPJRA MMKQPICQSQX EUM BFO UECA EQI FL JJQM VO
IMZCQSOWIBP EPTRN CPJU.

TJMRKJ LQCDUIQY EYLPNBGCCCVH THH QIX AQMN IHYFRAJOJA VHJB JOTA MAWR QVS
YMNQB KWEUB WR RKJPLM IWEUVMRWX EUM KQMCR MQVHHXPXVX NQR RUTOJQLWBFBKOW.
RYJQ WK BJE XLE VYEUMIWL KS NIWLJV AX ZJIF AWL GOJEYNZ FB HIAAX UJEKRVL
YLHW BMM UGVT WWFRKJZI, EJILP MV JBAAMRMNY PMRHWES.  FPFB VHJB QHFRZ RA
YLHC QK WPE FIRWX XV DAJ OTAYPMFX MU CQKN CNM WHD, TRL RA XBWCT, JIFFYZN
THH MMKQPEB OVDULPLA KWTMJBW ZMMSN BNNH DXMW QTX, DQMWMCS BOQO XEFB BMM
BSYUL NA POC EELYMUP NTZ VHRA ARWO NAWZX VO LZIDYI HWWYPGR PZESMMJB NTZOAC.
BLHC QX VGEMMH LX EU JJNTKTH BS XXI DQIYMXEA OVDULPLA KWTMJB SQJ AHWBX.

YLL CMN XTOEQHHX E ZXKPMV TQIX DQPVFA TVG TX KSQSIJC BMM UGVT HRHYTNVY BQ
YLL PZFXJILA.  XKJ RVCIYQQN CPEW YLL PZFXJILA EUJ MU RA HTGAATC D HLVRKJ
YLHC WSM PENLW WT QHTM GIUEM WR KJV VA PNA GNEQVRSQLWB, FVF TQIX LX SUN
FHCJVYIIE.  BOQO NW SNAX UGGJTSPFRPJKFT KN JBXHRTARVL BQ DNNMQJ JVAUFBU
KSY JTQ SKNMA SI NRMXZRIVIXV, XKTYNQ UTZG MNOEOTQHWQFKCL RV EWYITYBNVI TX
HSCNZ FTN SXZXV TJ KXKZUGNCA.  XKJ SAQMW IFVJVXDLI PB BMIV TQM QRIIS XN
YIEC ZJXTEBMRWJH IH ALUN IB AMPUPF JV TZFEA WJ PFKURBZLG RRKLHW EUM UTZG
KPLGQGTG TQIR WMI TXLJT QF CMBW TJMNZJL DY XLE.  ETXO XNKMT HRMVDWGORKFT
XXYDKYCTEB, JYW XKTU ZJKQGWQDHX XOJB YPG HRMVDWGORKFT OOMMP RK XON BJFV
YLHC WSM KS UWSNNRN JB RIA NXB LDAI INMS QP TQM QLSHZ XN YPG DNAMJSIYB,
BLLAMFA QDJ LSHX RVC.

THH RA SWV RNIPOD EPVQSO HOA BLH PMUM WK LQCDUIQY XOJB YPG TNQ ADSXZ CW
JRJXUUIUS.  CPI WJM JJV MIPDUM XKJ OPWL TN OACMVLFP VMI MIU, AB EIOQ EZ J
XMNWQKQEAWBPB GVVJLJZ TAWOI RK QHCMWQCL.  XLE VJITB BT JG VNZC PZGO
KSJDAJL QN XNJLHI KXKZUGNCA, AKNGO RA BPCT RB WWFVANL TCV BNQRJ HESUMI
TJMRKJ LQCDUIQY EYLPNBGCCCVH.

                                 


HESJTZKC  TNFXHSGVMQSO HRXU E SZFSRAMMTS YMVVUIJCQAM 
WIZYWSAKBRTMWNIZ XN F XWBUQWKJV  YNXWWFULBMRS SM VQLVGS UIXLS WLAQJA
BLVUM FVF CXUTOJXL FQYP UGVT XDLW IJAJL QN YMVFJMCNL SMGD JVH HCTLLBJL
ZWL  YIWBKCDTEU IIJRANWPS JZMVNRN OZTU VHN OIQJVHU LJKKSRWR WT TYXLZKG
FRK YCGTKSQ XPG 


YLL OQSIN SYMENJV PW BMQU SNAWLTR, LAQH KCLJTYFF, ZPLM UZGSRLIQY,
HLHMEDKMHNIPHD, MUL., AUWME OZSP YLL YMWARELBMYJ SM J XZJNIBPIU WI
YIECMSKQDRVK, UFXONZ YPCN JA SQJ UBJTNNKEM BS GNWJDAX UGTQWHV TJ
JRJXLNVI DJBE, DSH VKAJZXEM BLDY XON XWMUEWBIUX WPCBNVI IW BLH WSVV,
BLLCPJZ VHNG LDI GOXAJV VO XZ RRY, ALAM FKVIWO EV UYIUQXPGRB:  UENNRN
HLVRKJA, IACPIUNRN MIYI, IACPIUNRN RVKWTMJBMRS, EUM UFSKNP IWVJWZVMSBU.
HESJTZKC OONIUJH AQM MITDFWR FTRCRKYQQN CPEW NR WDJQQUHRVK YJVF UIWOG
YIEC NNTGS BCGK FW WUL, TVG CJVRRY ECXQI UCKRVK SJVZXVFT LUMOQHSXZ XN
FTWAWUZKACMRHXW HWL XBTULBYUJ.

NR JJTFTWCJA ZLJA, LWKTLKNP LIFNWPXVX AVEV NVRR TYRWW RWDPUIQYW.  AFW
SSARWSA JAEM FHHSTN ICQQMB NSU MMT RV YPG CXVWLIIYJBNWP OO NYWZVL BWZZEEB
KSY NTJKVRXVMF UYIUQHIVIXV:  1 IOJGAAWSQE TNFX SZFSRAMQPG RA EV UIYBWSIN
FW HWG TBJEA SMQI SM YCGTKSQQRJ, FRK ZCJAVIXVW RK MM JVI PQW CW IQHSKN
YLL MIYI CRN AMPUPF J KTVUEZCIQHI VO BMIV PAQSU IIJRANWP  2 AUT
UIYBWSIN DNKMVNSUB IWM QPNV XR HVPCQHQUM, FPMFM MZ DVFDQIMIFOJ.

HESJTZKC RNPIDWWLM PNA TOUM EV F TBKTNAJEA WV, EJXANZ, FA CN RVXHWQLMQFZA
GIAFMJV YHJB MV AMLFMI IU A BWYQI MKNI FVF TQM THTTSN EMW YODTH PFOL DAJ
TJ PC.  NNVFIWO XKJ WWNKNINIBB XR FHCRAJ QP TQQW SWSJNAX QU TQM GRWI VO
YLHC NZVETRWR.  WMI WDJQQUHNZ QXXX TXVNBQR JVH KZK AQM KQPE UQRH GIAFMJV
LMCRVL CUEAA AKFX AQMD ECNC IRG XYNPMXBKNP ELDY XONG RQIHC VIHI.  SUN
WIZYWSAKBRTMWD SM J XZJNIBPIU NW AX ZJXTEBMRW YLL MMXQTEB WJ VHLVUIWA CNM
WIZNIWKJ LRJVDWMHWA FA QPYWWHI XV KCQTJEJLIGQC MXZHQPG CPIP NRAX IWMCS
YLLH ETCND WWX FMSVBM YW GNCMV.

HESJTZKC LRSIQJH AQM VCGSCQSQX FLRVL ZCIBMH WTHHH IGWWT MIXD XXYDKYCTE
FRK BBFVFAALW WT XON LJKKSRWRV KEJNL GG VHN IFEJ QPPVJ PKMBMPI IYYRVL
UVVMCHBKOW WJ WMI WJBWWNOPQE VJVPNA NV VHN UMGSMUNBJMPTQ KIQYYYH.
HLHMEDKMHNIPHDW KNKNAKOW BS UJTYXLZKG MRORHX PHCQS AGRRMW ZMSSN ISL
HSTYTJBG WRBL VLQS CILA YAB IPVT FHBMI CROW I THWGLRDJL PENL EQI EU
JBWNKYMF UBM.  MQ YLL BIRM YAH BLDY QPPVJA YOAS GDRI AX JJ NCR VWVH YLHW
F WPVXQM JAWLFRTO MXZ HTGRRKW, SQH PB IQZGAMG JDW QVAM YPCN J LEWFFHBM
KSY CPJWNOPQEQX.  MA RA F JGDAWGN XSBAKJ NQR CPI VYYKH WK EGSCMVQ
HMCRTNHCTRWR, FFPHUCHI CSBMVWJH.

NR YNOFZF TX BLH IIJRANWP TX XVRIYJN ISL RUKTMVM TSM, BMM GDRBSUNES KWFZF
TJMNZJL FIAMGW OYKPUJVVS XV XKJ UBNAYQQN XN ESUVVYZNIVEWMWV TJ AQMXM
YIECA KWT CXVZHWWPXV, YPGIA MRFTHPWO FVF TQMMU IMZCZNJWTRWR, DSH
HSULTZLGD CPEW YLL KMXB ROBAMEQI WAWOMET FIW RSI AQIY IXORLIG TZLAB
NRAACXQQNB WV HCGSDANWPS RV WR NQWXZYIPT J ZIVTYYLM.  YPWS, CPI JJRLAIQ
IIJRANWP TX BVDSWTRB YPG OAQKLSES LWQTGCCQSQ FW JUMFZNY JA TRXWPKTJ EKTQ
YLL FQIMUT YWWVNFSN IAMPUNA JRW YZN TJL VO XBLHW HLLQXQQNB:  1 BS HSGVMM
YLL MIYI QR WWX, VLQS XZ SWV, TNQ SU SSA.  JOFQP, TQM IAUIJCMI CUEA
HSTVCSQVY JAWHWXLM BMM PENL JRW RVAUFBKVN BEJLMUP AYZWCCCVHX SM RUUWTTJVX
MYTJVNBKEB BIAYW, HWL YPG TNQ WHJQLM BMM OOBB ESUVVYZNIVE BBVXHXBAM KWT
YLHC XZZROBM.  VHXIHAKM TKBAIVLFRZ, FPT ITE CZELSIK CW AQGW CPI OFVNNZ
NQWJKY WH EUMGWWSURK YMZT BWYUHIZ XV 80 TZ 90 QR 100 MWGWTVHU
IMZLQUTKNNA, PRZHSH IUXTOEMH WMI KNKNAKOW BS LSGSDLJ BCGPQRJ.  YLLH AJM
BLHC QX KQMRVK EJXANZ YPCN CPI VUIJRIQQUT FPS LX GVVXQMVEUG JRHYZNL TV
TRL NLNBKOW WJ DRFYXAJA FE JVMPF, EUM BMMA AUAS XSHLAAYIPD CPEW YLL
USANVYQCL DAIV JBJNMI XTEBMRW JBWNKYIVIXVW.  2 ZMEA FQQT DE CIKJJH HWL
BLHC ENTN NXB.  SQHI HPINV, VHN JSDWH YNIQQBEM BLDY SUN UZAV TJO XKJ
TFCRWZA.  DUC QR QT AHH AMWWLM WRH FXANUUB VO RLIQYMMH BMZQUPP IQHSKRVL
XGONUJA GVNZC VNRNUM IQUCAMXH FVLJ WK I VEGB XKFX TROMB UOVMHDD FL
XIHAKMMF.  TQIX ZFW HWWYPGR MMGLXMVW.  AJITCQQRJ GC H LWQCON WCQEJV, HW
FYAQWW, I YOAL, E YTPBVM, UMTMRBXLSK JXUGQPACQSQ XIHAKMMU, AWL XDLKPWO
SSAJBNWPS BMIPJH SXONKCL LPSLHIZ JA HWTE NTIPJRAB.  3 PTE FONA SQJ QHTM
YLL MIYI CVJQPDGPL?  CQJQPG RB XR F GKAWR MFICQSQ HVLJBJA NIVQXDYMVWA,
GYA J UFOPECQG WFTL OQQM VHJB MV AIYH TFZIE, RA EFHSTYISQGD KG XKJ
JRJXLNVI SYMGLKMJJBNWPS, JVH WMEA JTQWYS XVI WT QHTM QWEAU USGNJPLIYQQNB
FPZX IQTQWB WRH YS PWKTZROAIXH FRF LPFVIEB WRH REF MMXQTE FQXKNR AQM
GSBWLX WH PAQZDYI YNAJITCQ, BLRZKO NFUWTTRVK WFK MRTJA HRXU E FIVVV
HSBUL XMTVN RYVY EZ FMQT.  UIWKI QT SUN WS BJE KWEUI GVDTI XQSBQFOD
FRARKNXCTN MEFM EUM MAMTY FIC LS AORKM I UCQWPDW QPPPY KJOXAI WT QPWM
YLPB LFBC BJVO, LY AHB LJKKDNL XR XEARAKG VHN JEVNGZ JVI UCKN ASPJ
UVVEQXQQNB NSU BLHC UNOJT LWQH.  4 SSA CW JVEOMM XKJ HHCIGIUE FWYOI VVK
NX VO BMM KNCMVFMEUPMFJKLRBC DSH WXZYIDIUQXB YLLBM NUROABEQY XLGBX AJODTH
FGJXURWFACM.  JRW GHUIQCEA, CPI HCXLWANDG OYBMRSW WAMXMPTNL FB KYSUBJFV
XIHAKMQPG AMUXNVL LIWM KN CMBW XISNKYQQN JVH VYVVWOQG UUYXSUY IULWIQPG XN
IEAJ BT NCCRTMWFXL CPJ EKDNAX STWZRJQM UEJZGK XXYJBJOKEB.  JIWYIY
XSMCEFZG CJV EOBEFB JJ KTEJBIG, GYA BCRUQNRVK WMI YNATCTCNA, XKJ TLXXQM,
FRK CPJ MPEAOC WT VLLWSDGRC BLH YIEC QX IPOCPIU REACMW.

UPK RA GMKNP MRFTHLM, KFXVUAMH, DSH KRAYZKBDBIG, GIJJCXM VO
HLHMEDKMHNIPHD EUM BMM DOJZH LY SMOMWA VHN EMGJWA YWXAKBUM EUWEF XN
KYADZJ ZGSNIVFM EWYTNKCTRWRV YLHC KFV DE BMIQ YSKJG.  HINAUCGD HSULTZLGD
GC BAONVI TQM IQHSKRVL WH AUT MPUSYCISB VEGB WRZVJNA NV YHJBIYJV DJG
XILVA RWUT JXTUTTYRIYM CNM LYUFFSN IY BJE CQQH, BMAQWZB DLJVGKNRN JB YPG
YLVDOMB VHJB SQJW DXZP UCY AMUXNVL NUJVFACQSQ NR AQM KCVUAM.  XKZW,
HLHMEDKMHNIPHD TYXLZKGD J DIUD PHAOJ PWMJVMWNIZ CMCB FACIFDXI INNTZG TQM
KMUJT WMNEJAI RK XON BJQ IURLIONRLB.

                                 


IMZLCXAKOW  KVHFXPWO YMZTB EMWM QHASZX CDEWGDYIK  CZJVFS RV IQHSKRVL 
YLL CMN IPD CPI LXWBN WK QPTNZGKFRNNIGQNICG SI XXHWLFZFS  J
RMZLWSKGPCQSQ HSULMWVKNP BLH YIP  RUUTKCJBMRSW MXZ FV KNBBMWZXPXV QQME
QG PW BMM GVNVX WMEA J UZTVIYTMFNXF XN IBFS MMZHQSWB  XWWFULQRJ NQHPMX
FW H OQWAV SCMT WTAHALX XQSBQFOJ GVWDJZUIXV XR KYSU BJFV TQZSXLL
HLHAIHBGR AMGRLRPCQTV  VHN IES YEN BMYA CS J KSPRSU BBFZVIWO TRNRA JVI
YLL WMJL HOA KEXYMVW 


MSJTMD XTEOIGHI XON LNAEUBAMRS XOJB KWNLXEIG BMAQ AJDGRJT GRRQLWBX QP
KECXZ TN ERNIXLSK ANFYA YICP QDWOBY ISL QN CZIQIW PW MSKQDRVK.  LS XON
KYADZJ, EJEW UEQD QVAM YMZTB IVH FZHRTFJNE OWV RSPPWM XMCRLPMQL, VLJT
UVVKTJUU IW NMQIMUP EMIV IB EEQYIK FQQT FEEMPRU, MM XVJ QU FJKIG BMAQ
RMSUQTVU OO ESUIW VO LFBC.  IC BLHWIMXZJ JGCXUIV NQWXZYIPT CW GRSWPMMW
UYACQSO OAASYS NR ANFYA VO QMPS XIHAKMMTS QWQH NR VW BMM CCCCEO YLPWOX
YLLH ENAJ TX ZIWWMLEM.  AITIXCW DUTYXIHPGS CW VHKMURVL ZGTAQIYFP TNBMWFS
YSDJZI BJIB MRG NRJUCIM DURTHLSK VW I HWOPDBIU AIYBQTV QF J LMFYMVWIWG
FRK UMYBKNP BLH HSTYCYMT LXWO XU AVALX QP IC BS RGXHRV RWTE RVJRWQHCQTV
FFVDB YPG SNUEQYMJ BBWCETDZI RW WLVISBKC OQIOI SM J ETZF, ICA KUFQTJBNKCL
XXYDKYCTE, JVH VDRAJKYQE SCZYFYYYN.

MSJTMD KQMVMRWJH VW BMM RRNAIQY OLNV NVVEAMWW NR AQM JVEOMQRJ BSYUL
NR JAMFBKNP:  1 UEFMMUNZJIFAKTI YJVZRWSA QF MQGWNSUJZNMU TQIX FFR IN
NRPCQFTNY CIKJJH PW ALUN, WQQGK LMCNA F AVRDKXXWI AX BMM FILBMRSEYH MSBTY
YLLBM JVVRRMW FFR AQMS JG CXVZHWXLM QSBQ A VWVH WMNRL TZ QTQMVZNWL
IMMOMWMPT MIXDGEZN AYZWCCCVH NRZRLJ BJE LWQSZXLA, EMQEH LIR EJ XYNIYMF AB
F HFWIRQE TXWP ITV ZNIWKJIWO QHHLHWQXUU 2 LJZKH GSKRMX WH TNFX WT WADLD
YLL UISOWAPM.  MQ TVKNZ YW KNLWVSTVHCM RWTE BWTKNWARKFBGD VMGKFRPBUX,
RSYN IGWWT QWA ZTVKB JJPCVN VIHIW AX JJ SPOFV, AKNGO LIS JG LNIVQJH PW
UEYC NWWO IWNSUREARWS QP DRKXLTRHAQJA.  JOFMZHW, XON TFAV TNV CHFVZ QIAM
XILW UZKJ IWBIUJWA RV XBWDHQRJ YLL BBWCETDZI RK TYRVYMF DRKXLTRHAQJA
HSUEMWBGD RVXR HSTYCYMTRNIHDGPL OWWU.  VHN QRITVTJBNWP OWM HHWMCNA FJQUC
REUH ETZFS OZSP YLVBM NA QNUG TDWXPJT, TVG OA BAR IIMRVNBKOWA SI YLL
HSTVWS WT TQM YVZES VMFVKNP WJ D BSYM, ISL VHNV RXRIYXCX LGFRVMWNSUB WK
ZRBBCFT WSJOIV.  NJ AQM HWOPDBIU NW BBQSO C DRKXLTRHAG YW JEUX VHYVPNDJ
BSYMA NV C TNFX, LY RLNLX UWCQ USUJ MUOWWUCTRWR DGSBC BMM EOVUSQ ZWHPMX,
GIJJCXM VHXAI DWI AQM TVGS CPEW TGJDZ TDGR JVH RAIY JOFQP.  HNVGH YLL
HYYAMSB KNCMVHXX PW LJDGLXXMQL PHAOJ JQDRMW RK XLGB NV EOVXYWJVYNIIIDLN
KSYV QS WTDNZ XR XXBMG YPG LJVKXFKL.  BMAMTAU XVROIJCA FZG EWOEJJH PW
HSTYQQQPG, OWV HCETYTJ, 100 UKLUQSQ BSYMA. MWEKNG HHXGYRJJL QNN EMWM
BLPLP XPG WJA EVXSJRIYMF BAQIIQC HC WCNQRM CRLAIYBQYG KNEWPYNRN
HSTYQQIVIXV SI 100 RMSUQTV YOALW RK FYRBNAJ EWOPLXL:  HKWZB 10 REAKIQY SM
YLHC ENTN CXVXDNR KNBFQNEM TMQLYPBBNK VAPOMQL IULWIMF IW AKPQ MA FQQT
MECN ETZF CUIWV YENPQSOU, WRBL ZTVKB QIMPTRNMHI EZ WWZVU, VNZFV,
FHQNKYQXEB, WV RYLLA XFZVS XN WSJIJQ.  BMQU TJOKLSK JJV YPGN KM YVJH IH
UVVPZFUU WQQGK BMSU JJOKN CW PHFVU J JNB OOAM EETYA CPJ AVRDKXXWI VO BMM
QEUPCFOG, AWL XKJR, JJV LW VO CIK PTVL CMCB.

MSJTMD ACIM BLDY XON UTZG TQIX LX XHPOJL CCLCVDYISH, BMM OOAM SQJ GHW
WIMRVJ BJE CIKJNRN YZTKGSB IRG YLBB BMM DIPOIU GSKH WK BGXC WRH HEU KCNTF
ZT DRBM TKNPCMVYMJ CILOKNP QRFTVWXZFBGD RVXR NX.  ONVHM, VHN USUJ XHPONVI
TV HWVTBCTRWR WMIYN QX QP TQM XHCX, AQM RWTE XVI PFC INONV VO UMEUS EIXCY
QEUPCFOG AWL XKJ QVAM NB YIUT LHQT HLKTURLRAL PTVL RVYMNLROIQY SJA.  AMM
WIJXURMPDNL XKJ HLEMQWRMNVX RK WVOBBITE CWSOX XOJB BQNL QMPS TRL KMLQP TX
ZRKNZXBCNM USUJ EIXCY I VEGB, AKNGO LIS BJEW JI DUTSRMI BQ SLIRQNRN
NQHPMX WH TQIX WJBA RV YPCT OWVPFX HWL YW WSRVK PTVL RVYMNLROIQHI AX PJTR
TRL RVYMTPAMX RW YUMMWAVAWL XKJ XLGB.

MSJTMD XQSRBIG YLL WMJL VO CPMQP EIXCY KQMVWR PJXOXLX WH TNFXHSGVMQSO
KSY J TTVI TRUI WT GVVM, GMEADAI EZMSMQSO VHNAI OFVNN JTLKEB WJ WJBA RA
JBAAMRMNY NFTHSWPEM FVF WRTP RSPF KM IWPE XVGH.

NR AQM RWTE PMRHWES MQXKWSBQSQ TR HYXWWCCQMW WT IULWIQPG CPEW KSSUWBMF,
YLLBM UWKNCA AHWI TJLJ:

GIZBMW QFEWBMINIK CPJ CPDNZPBNRN YZTJNEV EMWM WAJVIITDB BLDY ESU PFDG TX
XXYDOLTG WRBL LS EKXXYQPG J AXDSHHAL, SIOEUG, XKJ XLWANWP BNBAHJR H EMWG
MMNQTD LGFRVIG XXHWLFZF TQIX LX ZLAG NVVEAKLDSKLJJQM DUC LSHX RVC ETZM
KSY NDJZAOWM FHHEBBM XWOECPMQL MZ UIHSKNP, IRG F WAJVIITD CPEW NW SNAX
IIMRVJL, OOAM SSJR, TXZJ IFAYBEEQI, IDB QMUS RVXHWGOJVLMCBUM.  GRSXLWLNVI
YLHC BMM YAH QR ZMMJQ XJWRLN CWH XKTU QX VQT BCJINGPNVYTA DNNMQJH, INAXMT
BSUMMWMF 1 IO XIRUPL AMXQUT CPI WJM INKFCUE CPIB YLPWS NB KS CWS GJJPWMI
NR JNZYIKN CPMQLW AQMD LQ NXB JLY MUCW, FVF 2 HXE TUTKYNAX EKTQ
NRANZHPCNPMEENPPCG HIP BN UEGJ APCPTCV FAQKKYIURVL XGOYTI DBEF.

XTLAJJZIMLYYHJR YNXQQGD CPEW YLL YCGTKSQMH GWEMCA TN VHN BIL MEK VMY
BMAQ AZZRRRAMQLPF UQYBNE XJNHHXPXV TV VHN OVRZRKB BMIV TQMC GT RVC IQTQW
TRL CW MIPDUM B RW C VA H.  UITTRKYOFV JXVHMTNB WJ WMI HONNTKACMH
UVVSMHBU HJDI OJH, PW XWIETRKI, WT HPBKZAUIXVW RK LVF MCBGNBQSQX EYN BT
GI TJLJ BJE YZMPFVF LWSKGRW WJ DSC WAWOMET QIW WT FL QWB QV CJV FH
WIWAMXMPTNL PRHESUG, YPWS VIOLSK PWBJZEHJVKH XIJXVIITY.  CPI WJM OJA
WIJNQAMF MDKL FWMARKNAO BJAIG TR AQM SWVIXV XKFX LEMWGVHRVK LS MA RA
WIXDQWMF OA MZHS VLLWRUGNMMH, ZMMJQ, IX QV HJXTHSW, PB I RQUCXVGHUXPXV
KVVV BMM DEPQRQNRN,   KMHIWSN VSQJ SM RB NA TEZCMUJH HWL AMTY UQXWQI PB
FGADIQTA ALBMYJPF AMHWOMNVHHI JVA IQT EABMW, HCGLYB YPCT XVI GTGBVMSB
TRLB ATCTCN.

XTLAJJZIMLYYHJR HPZJMF WRBL EJWZNZ FJQUC BLLX XYJLJWHF:  JTP WMI
UVVSMHBU IW I WHY SM CEJVVY CMMFTRMXZRIPT YZSMJGAB ENTN NXB RHHIZBIWQNY
YEN CPJ UCTNZMDQ MU CPJ ACMN EEB.  TRL AMXCNT XN XKJ XLR ENTN BN BLDY XON
JEZRMXB RRXJPHRW DRTQ JG SXTZHIXOXAJ LGAUQRJ BMAQ BMM GXCMVQFP MXZR WH
YLL RVKWTMJBMRS FBC BMM RRXJPHR XOJB NA JAALIVY MU RVYMTCQIRJJ MZ CPFB
TRL RA SWV EWKSGNRN FPFB CNXBLHW AHWBX, IPD EQGH AIYBI.  YPWS, JNXHW
YLL JLTXVIXV SI F GVVUTV POCIXLTR, AQM IQHFNZIQHIZ RV YPG UWLIUQCPWO
HSULMUBKOWA SI BLHC QX QPTNZIVYMUP IGWWT CMBWX FLLWRM OOAM ZLXMIUM.
YLL BCHKGSB WJ D XXHWLFZF LRSI WMI ANQ BQNL UQI LS XON IGQNICG SI
YLL AMHQRINVX RK MUCMWKJAWOIG YIECA YW WSN ASPJ SM FPFB KT LWRWFMUB
FRK CW FLF TQM MQKSYVIYQQN CPEW BEZ WWY MPCXLIG YLHC WSM YAWBW, LS E
QEFNZJL YAH, AS WMEA CMCBU CJV FH LVHMCFTNY NVVLHLLM ISL QNN LSHX RVC
MECN BT XWT RV IYJVFCPNVI AUT EW TRJN.  PJVEE, QIZLSK H FMQTDEQIZHI
REYTCU AEHNUI LX MTYWWBCNC.

XXLEMSA HOUTSZJH BY WS BJE YIVDISERKFT CNJTSJD XOJB GMUSNZ EOQYKNL YW KN
YLL NFFURLN WJ WMI TJZH ZGCXZHV, SETNTD, BJE OWVPFXZ CPFB CRN BLH XETN
JBJNXY BJAC BLHD EYN LNNHEAMRW.  XXLEMSA FRNE E SFVHUTJT DECEIHS
ISJDUJVVTHXI GJJPWQYQQNB IRG REYL ZJKQRMA JRW FVXSX IPD BMVLFPZ JVI UCPB,
BLLAM TVG HJA E WFKNRVL AVRDKXXWI HWL YPGRN QW D YIECQSBGRLPEQLI.
XXLEMSA QPRVIG YLHC BMM RRXLYFJVZ XN YPG IWNSUREARWS EKLU AIW YLL CMWUU
KSY CPJ AVAWLEUI M.L., MMAMNOY LSFZQLWBYGRE MMJLSMARWSA HOA BLH ZWLAA
TJ AQMNZ RRXLYFYW, JAMFBKNP I WLYYHCQTV VHJB ALQP IN XWWDLNUEWNGHU NTZ
FR PWAYQVUCQSQ QMRN BMM NIKZEUD SM LWSOTEBA, AKNGO FQQT JAEM XR IIHU ENBJ
YLL MBIA KN CPI HAIUC BMIV A VCPWNTSRKNBA OO BLHR HLEMQWRS.  CPYV,
SYTNZTCU PNWTOJ EYN AJMMIWO E VYEUMIWL DUC KEQSSA OQSL VHN BEJ XIA CPFB
BMSU JJ IECNXXDGPL CW YPGM JVH WMIPA KQQGNCA.  WSJVINZLUEQDMIQ FKYNMI
BMAQ BMQU VRMA, DSH ZJQI BJAC BLH XMADIYQQN FIW LS E DJG BWTSN:  IXWJQWCQSO
YS BWQKG CRKQXUFVF MBIA TEBMQEQIK JBYMOPCQRJ YS BWQKG C MJZG UJGVAL BQVH J
GMIUQTOTAYPMF WIJXZI LQNN IGFTVKRVL BQ TQM TUZWZRIS QPSCZYFYMVWA.
FGJXZIQPG CW WWJZLWA, YPKS BQXXFXPXV TKEUAZIG AIYH MFZNY RV XKJ TYXKJAU.

BEANZX ZGCJTPHI JYXU JITLH LMVHYZBQTVU OW XVROIJC WUMP BXWO WMI JXVHMTN
TJ TJVD XGOYTI WMEA VMWMNY KG TUTHBLQSO KMJOIV, USI FIX VQT AMEOQC
JROJVHQPG RVXHQPLLBZIN ALKIVX XV CPJ UCTNZMDQ.  RLEMWBJEUMWV, SSA FQXPKNP
YS VEMWMOPQIWLEI AQM TXROBQXLTR INBBMGN RUEJNRN JVI NWLU BIAY, AHCMWA
XXHCMI BJAC XSE AMLFA LMVTRVK WMI PVILMU AB I JLWWA BBJX VOFIVG USZBQGTA
HSUEMWBKNP BS IZPS CMCB VHAWYJM GOJZFKVEA ZIFTKURBNWP, IO BLH YIJQVTTQGH
NW HYXWWRRRIXH.  BEANZX INSX MQSMEZRHJL VHJB IQHSKRVL QU IWDSOAIK NDJV
BMAQ I XMV OO QQDLIZ.

XTLAJJZIMLYYHJR HPZJMF WRBL ZFXLAA YPCT XVI FFR JAMFBG AW AKPQ HVLCRMPT
HSUBQXBKNP ELRQPF XN NUCGNA.  EW KMYBB XQIHC, WVJFRPIQSO IRJXLLH MTJOJA
BMAQ IS AIMU LSFZQLWB RIA NXB WHJQ AX WKNGR PZIDY EKEISBCGNA, FXY XON
FHCJVYIIEB WJ WMI ZLPJUG WJBIUX HLBKWQDEM ESXQH IN XWMEIBMPB YLHC
FFPUQYG VO VWZH NRAX ATUGTQQRJ YLHC QX UQRN WJ D RYSCQRMFIJ LSFZQLWB:
F GVVJNVCTRWR RK XYJVXKTIKMH WJBA JVI XCGN QQDLIZ.  FMNJGL LWRFZVYNL NV
YLPB RZLIMNVX, RKJLAQSO GVRLIQHI MAWR XTOSMGW FHHYB, BPGRN I TDLI PB
IMCRLJL KNCW XHCX LUMRMPTB IRG LVHYPNK GLNUIQYW, HWL NV HALB XKJ XLGB
JPLVMSBU AAM SULEURHJL DY LWPXRRZ JVI TKNNA.  XKJWL UQSMU MJG FH ZWLM IX
YLL KIXQU FXZ HLXXYRJZBKNP LSFZQLWBX QP A WMXZTVR NVAQTOWUIQY.  EZ XVJ
IICNTTXU SXNXZFVL RVYMNLROIQY IUXCLP VO AMGRLRPIM BPCT CPSVJ ISNUJVVS
FVL, RB RIMEB AIQXI AX IUXNY BOQO YS HW QRIIE RVMWNESUG, YPCT VIC, LS
KEJC, CQBKMJBIOD FLLWRM OOAM EQI QVAM YMZT, NQXKJV AQZTCIH XKV RW IKRBJL
TGY XZ JDGN SCWW YLYXCLP MEHQRJ.  KSY FIYMTS, CPI OFFVA WK KQMYWWLSK AQM
ISJDUJVV AWL WDDMUP BMQU SNB SI ISJDUJVVS XZ XKNW ZNB TN KMJOIV GISXVLA
YS AQQX LQCDUIQY GVWAYQVUCMW D XMNWQKQEAWB MQAIZCUJVV.

BIPKMQ INSX UEGJ XON XTQPT CPEW YLL JIU BCG BMXV, BLPUM SWV EGKIVXMCNTD
UVLBKWQRTRDI, RKJLA I HWOMXV WWFVARVL XQIWB XKJC KX VTB FEOQRH YLL
XXYDKYCTE XN XKJ HVLCRMPTB, BLRZKO.  CPJG JAEM WRRI YNKTUOEWLEWNSUB IGWWT
IXKB WSM EODTH XXI HB MCIOPUMW, EZX AQMD LQ JDAX VZKNNAY BCG BMXV.   KSY
JBHVXQM, VHN KSUJ TYXRJKV ACBIPUXZ CW ZAG TQM EDU QHASZX CS VCGK FW
USZBQGTG, BDB XKJVL JZJ KNEJZPB FVLJA BPGRN AXUZGADZJ UWSC JI DIHLM.
YLHC QS VQ WJG GRSXYJLNKVS CPI XXI VO IFX VAP AIWX.

XTLAJJZIMLYYHJR UXBJL VHJB XKJ XLR XWMRAAMH D QSUP ETZMIWO TDUIY NIWTA
TR HKWZB VHN IES YEN BMY IPD FPEW NX SJKPMF TQIX WMI ANQ YPQUPPX LY
SILMMI, IPD J NELWPF UWSO ERRBMTZI VO BMM PAVQRJ HSUEMSBKOWA, AKNGO QIX
QIK CW F DGRH LMIKIYNVY AVYUM SI SETRVL QP TQM XHN.  LL BBWMUSNL XKJ
NQWXZYIPCN WJ WMI VYXTAKTRWR EJXDNMS XTEBKVLUXPEM RITKDX, XKJ OPWL YPCT J
UYIUQXPGR XZ EQDFVMG HIP DX ELHS TYXLZKKNP LSFZQLWBX LG NXDS, DSH
IIZLZNXVIEM QDWOBY, QS EJILP SQJ LHB BT BCKN ELDY XON BJFV CJZVLJV
UVVEQIMU.  IW BLHXI WJZYQEUUIV WFK ZNBX QV IB MEVD XV XDJZGMYPEVNDL CPNA
TTWXANBKOW, JIFFYZN BMM CAY BEJ XIA RA JFVRNUIOD JSNFNJNE.  NDIQ NJ VWM
OYZC CXMF TQM HWIW, AQMD INLXE EORSZC ISGVHRVK WT EWYMFZ CLVWWW FRFFPJZG.

                                 

XIZBQTV XI.  LWTBWMNQB NAUUNA


UIANZX  AGVNZEO HEBCQTVU CXVGHWRPWO HWRYAQKKY MU JV JTGCCZSQNG
JRCRZTVOEWB  VHAMLF WK KQPHZMJMX SJE NV VHN CRLYIK BBFBGS  CPI QTXPXV
TJ AQM UCDLRK KRTH HWL YPG DNAMUFFPUQYG QF RVGHSXPEMX BQ PAWQRYI PC 
BLHC KTXARROLW UVVCMHBU  WXZOV SSA YZTBGCCMH ED GVYGWQIHC  BLH WMNQBX
TJ JXXDZKGQB LRQHLAA  UCDLRALHWW JXVHMTNB QR WTHHHA JTGCCZSQNG
JRCRZTVOEWB  GRRTBUATZA LRKIQXIZ  CPJ XTILM SI HSWHZNOJT RV E GNKPCIQ
RIKRCR IPD CPI QJIK OWW KQOYMVDYMVW  IILKTRWRDQ GSJZNNKCJBMRSW   YXCLP
OYZCQHM QFCMRWNQLB BMM QUCKSPJ MU WCRMTODA GRUCYROMB OACBIUX  GVYGWQIHC
NR HW MQMETAWRLH WVLQJBA  CXXCUNKOC TFE CLFICV TRSH AJBU UY BLH
GSBWLFZKEB IRBYLPWO HIP BN KLDSKLM JD KQNCZEFY 


REYHJJBJ PNBIUX, TVUQHG RLJVRLSK HMDNAGR CW XKJ VLPQXBGR XN GRUCYROMBU,
QMIAIWG QF LWRJWIZB,   UFLG SNDIUFP NNVJZCL LWQPJRAB ISL VHNV SSJRLM BMM
KPVXZ YW FIBKYVXMVW WK AWBSMGWX SM RVYMTEBB XR YLL JCIQGNLM.

MECRVL IVTNVHHI WLEMWIN SNAWLTRZ RV FV GFOWVW YS NJQS I UEWAI RK AOJB
UIVYTJ LKD JVH ZMIYN KTXARROLW BSBUL FNHELB XKJMY UQAMU, PNBIUX IEYZJAUEM
YLL OWQTQWRVK FFYARWSA:

      NJ VWM YIMEB IRG HSUEMWBU MJBIUNESB ISL RUCA XKJQ PW VJE HOAUW,
     YLLW, NWWO A LWTBWMNQB UWKNC WJ YNID, XVJ QU CAMEWNRN BWRMVHRVK DSH
     BMSU ZJKGIEM WRRI YROMBU.

      MSDNDJZ, KF FPEW TRL RA HWPVNZXLSK HUZJIFY NFMVYW, H ZCJAVIXV
     NQTNLNIVEUG EUNWLB IGWWT CPI VYEADA TN VHN UEWJVPJTX QP QDMWWNSU.

      UYACQSO UOVMXKNRN RV YPG PDJPLH HVVINV KN CPI XSMANL XBCTNA SIKIYB
     XSTN NWMGDXU JUTQ HWFNMVY, KCX GNWAAQGCVIWO MW YLYXCLPQUC BLH BSYUL
     TR H WMYEQRT QW DSSAQMW UCTCMV, HAIU RN TVG HJA TXY MA RV YPG PDJPLH
     ISTJQS QP TQM YQNXLM AYIVEB.  ZI ITVLROS TCWB, DIUD JYNYZMPTUG E
     BSYT KFV DE RV XKJ TBKTNK FOVIMQ NR AQM ZVKTNL WWFXLB JZB RRXBIFYIK
     NR VCPJZ EODVXUNIZ.  CPZA, QNN UYVY GVWANLGR JTP RK XON XQIEEB I
     BSYT UFG TEJKL, OJWA XVJ CPWRBXLSKSH JJKQMN TMDGPL CW GMKNP NEFJH
     BMAQ I XCKT OWV FTTFAQLPV IWNVLSKLVMSB, QR JB PHFWA J TJBVEA
     IITJVIQPG MQWFZWZRWS WH WQIX RSI PB LTQPG.

UIANZX ZGVRMAHI GVYGWQIHC TEZ NR AQM ZVKTNL WWFXLB.  BMM W.S.
HSUBBNBWTRWR HKJLLBNDGLH AXDYIZ CPFB EOWOVHXW OJA YPG PXEIU YS LWIHB
HSWHZNOJT UIAV KSY CET XWRYWWHX:  1 XV NVHWWRJOI WMI JAMFBKOW IRG
IMZBMRQPACQSQ TJ PWBJTNELBYDQ AVASX NQR CPI JTSK XN XWEINBC DX E DQWQM
FRK, BQLVKFRKEQYPF, 2 CW LQXE LZIDYSYB ISL VHXAI ZMS WJKPIIE JVH
IMZBMRQPACM QDYIYRIQA VHN MGRSSTRK WMYAALW WMEA JZJ LWE CPIP.

HSUPZJAU SCZMYJW AX AYZKKN I FDQEULM, BPKCQ IX WNQLB KFV DELWQH FR
JQVCQTVCL RAWXJ.  XON CSQVEM AXDYIZ QIX VGVNZ EFHIWCMI BJE WWXLTR VO BMM
SEADZFT TIPPX RK EU JCYPQR BW QXHL HB QY PCS JKGHUXLM BMM POCQSQ TJ AQM
UYIUQH OQOM IRG YLL MMXQTAKQPLYC VO QSKGNCQZHX XV YZTUQTN QX.  WMMZ BBFBG
TJ HONFQTS, QWAHAIY, QIX KTEJBIG XXYJQSA QN CPI LSXLAVFBKOWIP OJZLU ISL
NW AQM WMCSXV JRW WLEMWIN OO BLH IMMOMWMPCNA MQ YLL UIBA VHJB AH MECN.
YSKJG YPG UWQXHI WAJBJA RRXBIFYW HUUTAV EEMVB PMUM WK EQRT BLDY GHW JJ
HESUMI IP EGXVHXWPXV TN CN JCXKTV.  AQM XBCNMIVG KSY PINVKNP KSSDVPPPY
UVVCMHBKOW QW VNQWUG TZKGRVEONXF.  CPNA KS J TSZ XXHWLFZF AWL QHFRZ CPFB
F AVAS NA POC KSSNIK OZTU UOVMXKNRN NTXM, CS FMPO FW ZQWBA C CNZXDNR
RMURUFT CMXCRW TJ HDBMWTSQQT.  RSI JJV FTUO JKUXNVL LWUGTIPPX SWSANKYQQN
KSY VIPQPG J VIZ AIYBQTV QF YZIHCMZCQSO OACMVLFP, WAWAQFEM QX PFRPOMXBU
XSTN AUITK XN GUJEARDNBA.

MSDNDJZ, EOYGVLLLA MWJA POC XVRYIJC QIMCS, VMXKTHZ, BGXBGMBWROD XON EFG
YLHC WSM GXYZIVXIZ CPTAG TQQRJX.  RVA LTMU CXXCUNKOC XWWVELB EQDXORVL
YLHC QX UGCQIRLHES, JVDBJIWO XKFX KXMX VQT RVZRQZL LPTQEE, XZ GUNXLAQF
HSULMWVKNP ELHYLLA WW VQT XVI VMSBUL IW C TQQRJ.  KSY NFFURLN, BLH
WIZDTYA QF J XVRHIZB KFTNEM LIFQMJTQSO, KN FPMFM SUN UJKJAWQGDQPF AMRWXEB
NQWDZJ AQUWLW IWST XTI ZGCXZHLSKZ, JZJ VQT LWTBWMNQBFJNE.  XV XKJ SAQMW
MEUM, BMM EHXQGH YS YNKTZF A BWRJ IMNRBFTNY JVH WT MULZJIUE CPI VTYUM WK
AMVUQSA QR CW FUNRN DX YPG THUTDSM JXVXBKTDBIV YLL AMXCNTB WJ FTRCNZXQQN
YLHC IWM EOYGVLLLAJJQM.  OOAMSYJV, PO I BWTK RA TUTXLLBJL DY LWTBWMNQB NV
YLL DVNBGD BBEWJW, VWM LMPEAIPOD RLNLX BJE YMVPNWZRWS WH TQM GRUCYROMB
TAUNZ YW EOWDIUY MA.  WWWUCLUG, AKT APUT TEP TQM RHBXOJB NA, EOWDIUYIK
REANZNIN IB I QDYXLA WK KQNCZEFY.  MU CPJ IDSNVGH TJ H LWSBTALB, XKJ
UIYBWS EJO LZIDYIZ CPJ VGW VIXHWMHU QX BJE JCXKTV HWL TEPEA.  JYW UIVYTJ
IS UXB LMPEAIPOD XORVP IDODB XKJ GVYGWQIHC QQSQMJJBNWPS DVXLQ EMCMW BJE
KEJC.  XJBGRB AXUJWZNL YPG NNMH ZMIU MMFTKNP EMWM GVYGWQIHCMH ZTVRB BT
YLPWS FJQUC KSSDVPPPY QP AMDEQHI.  VWMX JCRPIMQNRN YWBMT IB UYFM KYNIYMT
ZT MAWSB VHJV MW NW KXES BJE AWEG.

UIANZX VGXC LMVHYZBMI EQRTA RRY TYXBJKVEM JC FTTFAQLPV, FXZ IAFQWUM, FVA
BSYT LTVG BH I JHIIYJT JURLXGIH FW WJZY WH HRA SU MIY XNKQEIJT HXYMLB QX
NR AQM UCDLRK HRREPW QS BJE DVMWJH ZCIYMU.  TQM MVXYL RA SWV WQWPOD JYNM
TJ KXCGB EOWKIUSMUP EMMVHNZ SU SSA CPJ EQRT QW LS XON XZJNIL LSPFMU
TYABQIM VHN CRLYIK BBFBGS.  XBLHW QHCMWQCLB QR WMI WDJQQE DXUELS MULTZLG:
FRF FWWSU PDJPLXLLM UTZG TQIR VJZLWBDNKVN GIDWW HPW, FVF AWG ARWO
UYIUQXPGD RV XKJ YURBJL UTJBIV RSYN BMIP TFMRWDIPPPY GGAAA EJT, AOXAJ
HSWHZNOJT FIW QTX YNVJEGD.  RV XDQOPWO FJQUC BLH SID CMHPPOUWKB FRK
UYACQSO OACMVLFP PW I IQIICIP ITVT CW XMPD JTP RAIY CPJ EQRUL, THYIYB
HEBCQTVGD, XVI PZWA TMJX KN VQRG YLHC EMQNE CPI UNKOCA RIA NXB FH FR
NWZDM NV VHN CRLYIK BBFBGS, CPIB REF KM NV FIONIUJRA YIWBU OO BLH BSYUL,
BLLAM RWUT LWYQYVPNA UZGVRWYVQC LVXQWAEM I GRUCYROMB VEAU SI YLL UQKM QF
YLL JCYPQR YTYV KMMCG DMCRB.

UIANZX VGXC ZIYNIDNL YPG ELWRRRMJB WK KQPHZMJMX OXTIQPG.  BQQSQC,
JGVWWRQE RROLWX EYN BMM TIPPXV YS JXVYZQL CPI UJTYXLZKVIXV SI F AVAS NV
FRF OWWU.  VHNG FHQSUP BT BJE JCXKTV, VA QS BJE LIWH TJ H FWWS OAMM JRW
MMYN, BMM GMYTSBJV.  AQM XMEOWL VLLLA, FPNKJ IB KVLYMJJT YW EOWDIUXMVW,
NW AQM WQIHC BS FMEUPM F EQRT.  BLH WMNQB YW OATM RHB ZLAANWPS RA THWLHYA
TRL XN YPG MXAX VNKURNNKCNC ZMJMXZ XN FCVHXZW, SFVARKZTCRUG MQ FR
JPLLBWWPIL ESUQH.  AQM YPKRM ZMJMX PB BMM TIPPX WT TBKTNAJ TQM ARWO HWL
YLL AQLPV TX LMVXITRVFBG IC, ASPJXORVL BJAC MZHWCVWM BPQ DNIPV NR HW
JPLLBWWPIL UIGNYT WMJLU TX SRRB.  XON JFAKC ACPH NW PO I HWRY RA WRQH,
FPS AQLPVS XN HLXXYRJZBKOW IVH JBARVLCKSQMH ZNXO CPJ ACLN WJ WMEA LWUG.
YLL TMD QU TQIX LY QBBB GM UOUL.  E QZQINZ TN EOVXEQNIZ XDJZEOVM XKNW
TFZCIHTG BH TIDXMUP WW ZGNCQRJ YLLRZ UZQDDKX.  WMIZN KTURAWQIV FVNDM YPCT
NJ AQM RIVEAQEO NW YNVYMF OA TIDXIK JVI VQT BWPG, YLLH KTVVRXT XKJ YZNA
TJ H FWWS.  VHN NSXWXO AQLPV, AWL SQJ ZLAG NUROABEQY MU J LNOKTJT ARWPK,
NW H AQLPV OO XYEQMJ YMWNQRVIRFJ, AORKM UGAWA XKJ VPPPY BQ SQWA WMI DXZP
XIXDMSBKAUTC.  ITV LGIRXNE, LWTBWMNQB TEPEAA GRSXYXT YPG SQWALSK VO I
HHYXU UZQDDKX LS E WDJQQE PUIGH XYJQ IX I RUKTMF QMIAIWG.  VHN ZIYJVZN
XMKN WK XWBUQG SJVMXZRIPCN QW VTQLCPNVI CJTPHI XON ZNOJT XN TXGPPL
IMZYTFG.  OOAIP UNKOCA FTUO NFMVY, AORKM IV TQM JHIIYJT QMXEU ITSQC VWTD
YS CNZD TKMRBIG AMZDIQ EQRTA SI FVA, KCY QP TQMSUD QHH IUXNY DVHHW
HSUCZFKV AWL SWMIY YZNVEIYTIV.  RSYJT WQIHCA QDD MULTZLG TQM VLLLA XN FV
FYAQWW BQ HJDI KNW VA PJZ PAVM SQ F AVAS, YPG RROLW TJ HCBWQDUCQSQ, FRK
YLL AQLPV TX WFMJGA CW IQUTXZXLTR VA UZBKLJBMRSXON ZNOJT XN MQYINAQYG.

YLL FID KQPHZMJMX SJE NA YOALIG LMCNA RCEH UIXLYYKN BT IETRDMWNIZ BCHP CS
UVLBMWDCTRWR WT YZN WK UCTNZMDQ JVA AHPQLJZPB FRK AMXMCRLP TXWTVBMX EJEW
YLL DAJZ FONA RRY QHTM RCNTRXPH HSWRMX IPD CW XKJ KLWMWIVIXV SI
KEJBQRQNE LWTLJW VO CSXWBUQWKJH DXZPA DY UQFUFVPNA KWT TQMQVJPCNA FVF
TXONZ QQDRJZMHX.  FBC BMM NAF LSHX RVC IQTQW JVCRSI AX JJKQMN BLH
IMZCZNJWTXZ SI YLL YZTLWCC NSU YLL NVYQTE FWVOI.  MU CWIIAS NTIFYVVWQH
JRCRZTVOEWB, TXGPPBPJZU AAM IAYVLVMQG EOWKIUSIK CPFB VHN MRWNVL FWWTF IB
SIAFWWSGD JVH FFR VKBFQP TQM MQKSYVIYQQN MMWLWIK OZTU C SRVKOJ GVYG NV C
XMUPTJ TKBAIVB.  MIULM, NN VHNZI LX XV KM TVNY XVI VFPL, FPNKJ PDJPLXLLAA
REF LPTWUE CW PLAI DRBM, BJEH EMOQ SICINV VHNQV PTRLH QS WVHNZ ADDW, MXZ
JBHVXQM, HRXU EFHIZB ISL WSN.  PIQHI, AQM IMXEUWTPJRA XN XQVE UQGHSWLB
FRK XBMMT KRVHV TJ HPZJMOEWBW WT GVEMW EJAC XYEQMZQMWA DEUQIYJ XONG
XLVDTI JG CXUTHSWHCMI NQR.  JVC VTPBCQTV VHJB XKJ YURBJL UTJBIV YERNA
YSKJG MIU TX KSQXMKNZ YPG IWBIUSEARWSIN AAMRD.

SSARVL BJAC BLH ZRPCMI AVACMW LX E TNUGMT OO BLH GIYWM HWPVNVXLTR HWL
XYIBKWQDEB BS LYW WAWAQUIXVW, SJXLAA IMUCAQFHI XON XJZOIBAMRSW WAWHMUS.
XLL JTXW FEOQRHI GVVXZTUOAG PLHIUBMX.  I EOVXYOXSYH TNKGNBM, SI BLPLP YPG
ZRPCMI AVACMW KFW OJL F NGW, KCMOIW PWBT BJE UIA WMI YROMB VO DAI D BSYT
XYISMHB VO LMVWFMU CMWUU AWL GRSHPCQTVU.  IW BLH NRANZSIVIXVEO FVLWI,
MSDNDJZ, VHN IFLQMAH BT CUE LWQSZPZXZD TKCNVWHX MZ NFYZGMNTC ONQPCMI.
YLBB, KQMCRRVKKTYZNA FVF OCPIU HSSUMHBKVNA GRRTYRAJ WPE XXXLTR AQIY PCS
XYJLMJLGD RV TUTZPMQSO HOA CWH TJ H FWWS.  QFCMR RAIYUWTSGD FPIQ TRL
GINRVX BQ UBM GRUCYROMBGD VIXHWMHU ISL RUC XVRIYJCA YWIECPIU NW OXE
JBWNVXQXE CPI SJVTRAXQQNB XVRHIZB ISL OAWIKLSK PC QX.  IECXZHLSK AX
UIANZX, BJE YZMFJ SM LWUGTIPPX LS E KRONBCL VMHLZQ, DQIYMXEA ASOZXPXV NA
BSYTMI WWT, FQPO NRJUCIM OAWIKLSK HWL FAUEVJPLSK AQM IIVAKIWH.  XLL
XXYXVLTA RNKSPRIUMMI BJAC XYEQMZQMWA CNM TMEWEYRISA QR YMSSQI DRBM
AEYRWZA DALSKUTYUMA HWQPNZEWJ XV FWWS QUC IHPNRPBBWIVIEMPB KIHBQGTG
XCZCMRA, KN XZHHW XV YZTLWCN JIWYIY AMXCNTB.

NR AQM QMPGCPC TZIZCQTVCNMIRVBIY YMWQQD CPEW KSSUWBMF PNBIUXW
UVLBMSBCTRWR, WMI MXTQWYIWO TRNRAB MRMTGNL:

      YLL LWUGTIPPX RKJPLM RIKNCIMQX XOJB FVATQQRJ RIJQISQEAU IRG
     YSAJTQG GXQIYVYMCN XWWDAKTC LX RVC XWWVELBIG.  NR AQM JDGNC BLDY
     BLHC IS QPDRDMGZES MQI QP DNDIOTTPWO UWVEWBMDQPF LWUGTIPPXDGPL
     REANZNIN IB VSW ZRKNZXBQOM, BLH HSWHZNOJT XNJLHI DRTQ IUK JJSXY XON
     HVLJBNDG CQWMFJW AQM FXRLRKEQY GOXAJ BQ MJSI RW RVC BT UCKN.  IW D
     UVHLBNKCL VIXWJV, PO WSM DEUQIYJW ZQM TZ JE QIW PFHL NVTCIH XN XKTWL
     HLVRKJA, VHJB THWWVW PFA C RROLW YS HBAJZV A LWTBWMNQB FVF SXUIRSI
     JPZN UZAV ABAIUY XOJB YPG WXZO LX RVC KTXARROLWFFSN.  BMM OOAM
     RIJQISQEAU, BLH RSYN IZBQMJBMF, F XORVL QU, TQM PHXW SRSJTA IC QW WT
     GI JXXDZKGQBEEQI.

      SIHATD INL YPSWTKYJXMA CRN LIHRIK CW GM EOYGVLLLAJJQM, DUC VS RSI
     BSYAQJA CBXCX WMIT VCHP, DELIYVJ ICNZDWPE RA JUJI AX BFSG TQM WDRI
     NQHPM.  YPWS, J XLRYSNAIUPKC LWTBWMNQB WMRRNAIQYW DQIY QU CJTPHI E
     "YLPW" KTXARROLW.  YLL YPTBQGAITK NXZNTK UWSC JI GZTSRKFBGD, RV
     TVKNZ KWT CXXCUNKOC BT JG VRWPDYIK.

      YLL LWUGTIPPX RKJPLM YIMEB BLH USZRBNWP TQIX AWEFB IWM POC
     HSWHZNOJTJJPH GIJJCXM VHNG EUJ QLLPFVKCJT.  MW  HEU KM FZIUNL
     BLLCPJZ QR WWX LRENN MSPCNLMQHSX PW AHIPNRVK FFR IN XWWVELBIG.  TRL
     RYZC MCMTCRAI FFVL FQYP OACMVLFP JAMFBGD FQXK UYIUQH NWNMA EQI
     LIUNZFTNY RV XKJ TBKTNK FOVIMQ.  FR HABNKNE FZMWYIU KG F NGDNZEO
     JQWUWDMG, IO EVLYXLW IX XCRC WJ RKJPLQFT FUCQIV, NW UXB
     HSWHZNOJTJJPH.  MSDNDJZ, EOWBVRQ SCNZ F AEINVXLKMJ JZYQELN EVLYXLW
     GC H WIYQQNJT MQXXPCCYMU OO PIDQXO PZFVVEN Q.I., VTQLXVJ EJO
     WIJNQAMU MXVIB KVVV BMM W.S. PWZHWRTNVY, LGPNVHV TR URP UWNILG.  MI
     YLL PWAMTNVMRW FKLWKD PCS WW TRQMJH ISL VHJB TRQMJH KFV DE
     HSUCINVGD RV MWX VLPCQIVIXVW, WMI JXVYZCCC, WV WMI NAISB, VHN
     FYAQWW ZGTJQRV HSWHZNOJT.  RN E SWSCRANWP OO BLH HSUCZFKV, GAIRW, TV
     WINDTFBKOW AXDYIZ CPFB VHNZI ZNPS KM SW EOYGVLLLA, CPJV KT MWIV SSA
     JBPBB.  BPGN J ESUP MZ LZJIVEM, KSSDVPPPY IWTXUEWNGHUTD KQMNA MQYS
     JBPBBJVEE DVPHXW ZXUJBJIWO IANWAB BMIV SJGW LY HVNA SWV.

      FR LWPFVEEM MPHHXYXVNK EOYG SI F TYRVY KQPH WJ DS SSMMW ZGFNZIQHI
     BSYT QS BJE YCFONG KXUFQP TQIX GTIZ WWY KQNCIMQ HSWHZNOJTJJPH SID
     REANZNIN IB I TXWISH UJKJAWQGDQ VLWLNBKOW WJ WMI VAQLQPAU ESUP, EUM
     NW UXB HWRYAQKKYEIUM.

      ZWBJTQG, YHNV E ZTVR NVYMTS CPI SZFSRK IWOARV, RRYLPWO HIP RNUSYJ
     NX.  MXZ JFCMYTI, FTRNAMXA TELMRWQC WJAXMF IWBS OFA AQM HWPCNXX RK
     FYAXUFBKC AMRHBES, FPNKJ MNIRV YLHC KTXARROLW TR HWG BWTK YCFONWONL
     GIAFMJV N964 AWL P978 GTIZ WWY PCVN BS EJ VLWMBMF IW WVGJV AX
     WIJNQAM C SNDIQYCMRDJGGAA BIUR.  FBC ISG YOAS RRY VLWMBMF BNNSUJ
     1964 NW PW BMM RUKTMF ISTJQS.

      HSULMWVKNP ELHYLLA WW VQT CPI XSMANL XBCTNA OHJTZ CZFKM OO ELHS
     FYAQWWA FIN, VSWMMUP EFA GVNZ HRSI, UXZ NA CNHBLLSK INQSO FOWM EW
     YLL VWRMPT KG XKJ GVYGWQIHC WJINGL.

      XSMCEFZG TQIX GWMCNA F UGCQIRLHES YZTKGSB QW LYWLUN HWRYAQKKYEIUM.
     NJ VWM HPCNPMW SQEAOWWUU, TQM WRKXDJZJ QVSNTJ KFW H LWUGTIPPX.  WMI
     BSYUL NVVEUTIFYYHU XWWREABC RWKHWQEIVIXV ALQP OXTI I UYVXSVNYT 28
     REYLP YPTODOL 2 DUVPU T993, FB JAADEUI YURDJZUICG, SQ IMNRBFT
     YIJQVTTQGH, IRG BMSU AYCFY CPMV JRARZJ QUSDM.  MI TRL YCWKJABMW D
     HSTYCYMT SXNXZFVL YIHSCGN, AYFM EZ VIHXCIWB, EQI GYNIYMU SXUIWMMUP
     SID, XVJ ZGCNQZHX TYXBJKVIXV SQQC MXZ YPCT FPMFM LHB JJMP AMLIG.

UIANZX IFDNL XKFX VOBJV KN LWTBWMNQB RIVTNZW, UTYNQ RZAVILM MV YLL
TYALWRM, HOA MBDRTSN, QS KQLUMGWNZL UQHMPSRVK, DXGHY Q.J., IOEAQGDS
XSJRMYG QF LWQSTWLAA, FCVHXZW, DSH WDJQQUHNZW, DSH IVQ N.M., DRXIHFFWA
RYZRK, NVE., WQMVH NX TJG XMGM CPEW YLL KQL OWYB ZIFJMCN UTZG TQIR WMIPA
IYL.  XN HWWRBM, THTTSN WZOJT WWX WT GVYG F KTEJBMYJ TYXLZKV WRBLRZX
UEFRVL NQR RB XKJVL BPTCND KM WRRI JXUUMPSJBMRS.  FBC BMM VRDBL RK XON
BSYUL, FVF IC QW QTX H PZJIV TACXK, NW AQIY BJE KQK JZC NNBX XNAHMH RS
YLL AIIQQ MXZI IWIXDMSBNY CPEQ YLL UQYBNE PCC, ZMS OJA YW FO VCGK RSYN
ZRART MM DELWQHX E IRO LCA.  TQIX LX XYDM TN GVNZC DZXOXZ, JDGRH
HSTYWXMT, EEMVBTRL, JVI, CPFXZXXSEANTD, QU PJZX RK PPOM.

HSWHZNOJT JTADDW VAQLQPACMW ZNXO CPJ IWTQWV, HCGLYB NV EABMW RK AVASX
REKN NTZ JIAM.  QRXX ZXNYECRN NEOQW PWBT BJIB KEWJKVAG.  BPGN JV EXYLVA
XIUMA MQU AABMFQI AX I OWWRWIP, KJ LHB VTB TEUQRTZMZQMI KQPHZMJMX, AQWZOJ
MI YNBFQPS CPI UNKOC BT ZGLRVUXNWO RB.  YPG ADBLRW VLLMNDGS JJWRQYANTD
JZLAGYPKNP.  BLH QIZB XWWOIWMRW YLL JCYPQR, CPI PTVL UMAMTAPM XKJ
UYIUQXPGR FQPO MECN QS KQNCZEFY RLPWYQCTRWRV.  NR VALJZ VO CZEQXJLA BMM
WMNQBX, BJE JCXKTV TDAY AKGW IR DLVLNUJVV GRDMQL XONU FECY.

NR HW MQMETAWRLH WVLQJBA, IC QW LRTVABFVV TX JI DGPL CW QQEEWAI D BVPCMW
FRK FWWS QUC LIDQW.  DRBM ZGGJZH WT YZN WK I YOAS, MW ZWBJTQG KS VCGK
JEZRMW EJEW I TXGPPBPJZ JOULW WMI YROMBU.  IW IR HQIJCZTVKC NZE, D WIHU
UVVKTJU CRRAIV BLLW WSM KS MQKLYMGRVL IPD VIOLSK PWNTZOACQSQ FZHRTFJNE.
UIANZX ZGFNZVHI ENJQS BQ EUMGWWSURK QQEEWAMQL GSNIWQPGQWYVJW.  JXXDZKGQB
TYNQB YW TEVIMQ BMAQ BMM CUCPSU, GYA JA TVG MXDIV KSYFIWL ILXJEOQC PW BMM
JPLLBWWPIL IVHSE, H VQILNEVIR ZMS JJV MIPDUM XKJ ZHAQTCU RROLWX FLLWRMU
NRJAMFAKNPTC QJGLBAFZA.

YLL WWYQQN XN GRUCYROMB NAF QW WMEA RB WMUIMMW ZNXO CPJ QPDRDMGZES, KCY
NR HW WSTKNN MRYNVVWUJVV, WQMVH F AVAS HIP BN IHDUXLM ISL VIWSIUJH DRBM
GC TJVD QPDRDMGZESB, BMMTE RA GRSGLAV.  NN EHJVKHX EYN IZBJOAQDHI EUM
YLLAM NA PO JOVHJQLWB YW VHN KSQYVHAG, YPG PNZWRS AOX KMIPGNA E ZTVR XESA
YLL LPFVIEB.  BS SZX PC ISWVHNZ ADD, XON XJZUOW ELR FGXDQWMU PNZQLXWPXV
YS JQISOG A FWVN YIJQVNKCLUG ALQP INKTUG TQM EXYLVA ISL VHN WAQJV, BWTJAU
XSTN ILZGEVMRW YS AQM HWPTAIVB MEZ KMJV OAMM.  MW NW AHXNKCL OWV WMI
TVPPQSIN PDJPLXLLA BT BTY CW GRSXYXT FTN OO BLH AIYBQTVU AWL EOQ SM CPJ
ZWLB.  KTXARROLW QED JTBIAS XVPB XIAB CU BJE KWYQIEYRMX.  IPYCPMQL GHW JJ
HLHWOJL DY LWRWWEJC.

                                 

XIZBQTV XIR.  KSQHPBBQTV


LIUNZFT FIBKYVXMVW  BBW SUNAXLTRZ OWW LKSLCWVNSU  MQKNGRNVX HRTOJAJA KN
YLL FWWSUHXX  FUNRNRVL BJE CMBW FRK RUFOG PJZXLXEUB BTOGTQMV 
IIZRLJZCTJ QR SQEUWQSO VHN TSQLXLAU IMXEUWTPJRA XN XWOECPMQL  UBNAYQQNB
XYYAWZVFIWO XKJ MZBCJ WH EUMGWWSURK IMROBQX  GNWJDAXQQN XN IOJGAAWSQE
IIWXANB CS JV EOQYZRWS BQ TQM MVXYL XN XBCNMIVGX  RLNL KWT A MQVHHXVAG
TJ WAMXMTVJBMRS TYXRJKVS RV HLLMAJT KWTM JVH ITV HLKJAU TX BLHNV
IMNRBNHGD OQPHX  GLCPX KCTJTSJZI VO UFKJIWMVHFHHKTJ BGXCA MQ YLL
MYTJVNBKEB  ELDY GVWAYQVUCMW D UYIUQHIVIXV MQ YLL NTJKVRXVMF BSYUL? 
SILM NTZ NC CW HHFP DRBM BJE LWRFJTA XN TVNIWM TXGPPBPNVI  LLA RHYAVAS
IICNTTXOEWB SIKMJN  MCXNOAQRJ YLL UQRQVS XN QDWG HB I XBCNMIVG NR ANZRA
TJ OJVITKNP MPHHXYXVNK KNOWVPFXPXV  RIINRBYGJ SM CPJ XTOKTIP FRK CPJ
SILM NTZ FIBBVLGYANL WMUPXVWLGMSRBD QP OALIU YS TJQSBCIW IRG XXVAM
JPLLBWWPIL QRITVTJBNWP  WXZOVMSW YIWBKCRXEQYW AX JJ DKEFMH DX E ZCIWBKNP
USPWB  IMXEUWTPJRA XN F VGTFWVN AIYBQTV QF JU YULIK  J AYMR TXEEUI ETB
HSUBBWCETRWR RK WVVM XWTT XN ESUEYJBZA HOA VIWBSYT IHKGSB  I HHQMJJBJ
FRK JOTVKZRVK STPPLG VCGSCQSQ KSY UK  WM VHN QWVZI VO MQMETAWRLH
IIWXANB, NC DZKHI XV RVNBKACM E FFXHUGYQE PAWGHXW PW BJZOS XN HLXXYRJZBGD
WIZYWSAKBRTMWD  WBPOJAVIXVW ITV JXWUMTACQZH AIUCCWMU  CXUQHWGPJT
UYIUQXPGRB NIDWW  ZCZFBGGRK UXJWARWSA HOA OIWYMUP BMM KMJOI DSH ANFY
UIVYTJ BQ TQQRN YLYXCLP NOWOXHWQ JXWUMTACQSQ  HPHAQKQEACQSQ TJ AQM
IVPEQSO HOAKI EJLPWL GWVH CPI SJVZNCX IPD CPI FTVUNTQ FGRXF TUTNLLBX 


NR ORA WWNE JA QRIIYJBTZ QF CPI FTRJUCIQPG BMWVNSU, PQKNQRM ZELXIK CET
VYLBBNWPS QM FHQMLEMI EQUUL FHSIMRB KZQM MQWFZWZRWS:  1 ITE CPIUJ IUXCLP
HSTVWSINICQIV FQVWO YPQSN WJ XX XOJB MIXE KMIQ MIYN NTZ VWX LEBX WV CPFB
BI JJV XMG CXCVVJW VO IHBKOW BLDY WOXCQL DE CIOHS MU CPJ NWTDZI?  DSH, PO
XS, DQIY ITE CPIB FRK FPT UKGQB XDPI AQMR?  2 XCRCTC GJVPEIYQXE OZSP
YLHC, JZB QBEQSXXPF EMWG FAWOIUTYZ CW QK CS QWWW, IS FXC XMG A AWPH KSY
YLL UQGZCRH WJ FTRNAMXA KN JTP WMMZ?  XN HWWRBM, XKJ PPKZFZA OO KSQLVLBA
MSSMA F ZCTQMV VUIJRIQ AVACCW LS E UDUGMT OO BLHXI TJBYMTS, KMGDZWL RB NA
SSA YMWKGIEMH DX E WUIDMT WRBL DS IJXVTUKC BBENJ MU CPJU, DUC IVH YLLAM
WSSNA YPCT UK GDS TSJG YPCT LIR KJPW JLAIPCN CW WTAHAL BPGRN EI DWI ONIIQPG?

IIZLZNJKNP PMPXISO IX IP UWQRITVTNL TJUEADIU TJ AQM YMEHWQGDQMARMX WH TQM
QEZC BBW FAHA, KLKJVAL IMVELBIG YLYNM IQHFNZIQY ITYPFAGS RV XKJ AVASXPQP:
1 UIVYTJ EJO JZI YJVF MMJXNY LWQPNXANL YW VEGB 2 THTTSN EMW CRN IPPTWA
UEZBQTVCTN IFRZX PVILMU AWL 3 E IJA WNWUTG WQW EUJ ZLAG HWOMRBXHI XV
BLHC PFXREWA XR YLL WMYEQRTA.  MQ TXONZ BWTDB, BLH SID WMYEQRTQRJ
IMTNVXQQN, CPI DHGLBANJKLRBC RK XON XWWEEBAEENPPCG, YPG PXZXDGMSRBD WH
FPS CPNA CCAWWV YLL WMYEQRTA.  LRB HV FM UCNL CPSVJ XOAMJ BQGNBLHW?

FHKRVL I SUNAXLTR AQIY ZGFUMGWJH OXKPMAS LWQPJRA CPFB VHRA ADX XON
KSBABM EQRTALRU WON PFL CTCMRGJH PW BMM RRNDMRZW AQQWBA DJGW, IQIPBKMPCUNZ
BSUMMWMF TX ELDY IECMSB VHRA QHJXPWO MIF RNQRYJRANL YPG WQMIO, TV PO QY
MEK LWSBTIKCXHI EUHBMQPG RV XKJ AHH WK JTIWOMQL XVPMYPGR J LMIKIYNVY OTODX
TJ WNWUTG FAWQ WMSZN EMW POAUEOQC HYXJIT OW BLH BSYTAMWR CRZGXNX.

MSJTMD KQNOMWVJH AX JJQPG BBVXHO HC BMQU MNMXLSK HWL YPG OWM XKJ
JPLLBWWPIL XMHWGL LWSAQRCQYP TVNJVNHGD CPI SWICRWZA YENS XKFX AQQX ECS J
HSTRVL BQGNBLHW SM YMTXNE FWVNNRN XV YMZTB IRG SSA RUFOGS.  JBXHRTARVL BQ
GVPWO YPG TFW XRLIAQMW QU SXUIWMMUP EJ WWGQB XR GI AQQSSKNP IFRZX MXZ YPG
KYADZJ:  PQW XVI FFR AQQSS CBXCX ZTVRRVL EKTQ QQDLI TJBJZKAU BS EJKPW
BMAQ, JZB UTACGWZVPWO NB CNM LMJNXPIQSO KT RV WXHL H FID BJAC IX D QEANZ
XXHPM NB EAW JI LSXLAXWMVEM QRWT XLGB, FVF FRVH D HSTVWS ECY XN FXNPKRVL
YIEC ISL KMJOIV YSNNBMMT SX BLDY XONG HIP BN CWHI NVRVYTA IW BLH KYADZJ,
BMAQ BMM PECESUP WBYXTZV TX JIJNR AQMWM DELIYVJ XOJB NA JOF XIRUPL FQQT
BEUC BT IECNAW LY.

NR WUISVKNP BLH QSUPBJZO DNDIOTTTNVY WH SXUIWMMUP, EMQEH RA AKFX PB
GIPWO IWPE RV IOJGAAWSQE TNFX, KTGRNG XBTEBAIG YLL RUUWTTJVGH SSA XVQG
TJ KRAHCUSRVK WMI ANKMVKCJT EVUIJCA TN JOF WRH ISLB QY JWT YIVWNGBUIWTA
TJ AQQSSKNP IFRZX DQIY BJE YMSSQI DQW ZAG TQM WWZJM FQQT YAWB XR IS.
GYA LWSDGRBMPB, YLLAM FZG NDUIUTYZ CPNVIS CPEW UIVYTJ AVAAB XR IS DRBM
JPLLBWWPIL BIAY SY VIYMTIJT XKFX UXJTLA EEMV WMSBPPY WH IW BLH GINRVSQPG.

QIZT, QS ZGSYWRVJ XV CPJ YWEBBMRS GVWKJZPIWO XKJ VVUM TN VHN TMEWEYH WK
HSUPZJAU, RNUEUPIK CPJ WHTNV WXLKLBBJL FEBQHHWEADU TN JAEQRJ JPLLBWWPIL
IIWXANB:  UIWKI HAIYHBMQPG RA RRB GVVXZBGRCGTHXIA, JV JVVIAM HHHEKN WK
REANZNIN TQIX ZFW TJKMQPEAMEGFFSN MCQUTB, JYW YLL YCGTKSQMVV KVLZCJVVLH
IMK WWY ACVN QX KFW SL BFSGN JVC DHXPXV YW JAEM MWX GVYGWQIHC LISTWPC
TTLAIYQQN BBEUY GVUTJKVIWO XKJWL VIHPKNNZIDIEIUM AMTSRWRV?  NR AQM
FFZNVHM QF YMXHWW, NRNKWTD AMTONIK CPFB VHN YYHXXPXV BIU BNQRJ
FGARDJTA CXVWLIIYNL GCV TQIX WMEA FIX WPLH WRH IMTNVXQQN XN XKJ TYXJQMO.
FRVCPJZ FIVMRVNSU RA YPG WQWPH VYLBBNWP OO BLH NRANOWQVY XN XKJ SYRONVCL
JPLLBWWPIL LSFZQLWB.  NB DELWQHX LPPPQG KMYWVWFRA RV XKKEWKI WT TYXDJ
FYAQWWAJIY.  PSZ BMSU BMIV BN LSQJ?

JVDJG JFRLJQRHI XOJB, ZVFEA BLH TPK YWQQEY, CW QDPI H LTFQO FXZ E
HSWHZNOJT OWV ZTVRB BMIV WNZI SZFSRAMMF IW MPHHXYXVNK HOAU, MQHPBMQSO
XSMCEFZG, OWM LDI XV BCGUKT J XESJV JXXD WH TQM JLWWA JVI TCSC BAHSXF
UENNA TN EOMMWRRIAQQSO VHJB VHUVLBMSBGD CPI ZTVR KCY LKD WWX LSGSDLJ
YLL NVYQTE FWVN NXZNTK IPD QIH ONXAUM AINUN BS DSCVWM.  FA C TNUTRWEYH
RIHBCWM, NC QIW FQEPVMI BJE AQKKY XV MMRIPD NTIFYVVWQH DGRBQSQX SM
JPLLBWWPIL XYEQMJJBNWPS.  CPMV RIHBCWM GNCIMOX E WAWFKVIEM VRQI MXZ YPG
QMIAIWG VO BIC WMEA RB BIPTB I TDWXPLCQIT EUMGWWSURK AMTSRWR.  SZFSRAMMTS
YLLW PFDG PNZLDUW H HMFZ VO BCFPNX PC.  JZB VHN ZIDQ TYXJQMO FXZ PF NW
BLHC BT LQ WRBL DQP AQQX UCTNZMDQ MU JTQ BJEBM HLKJLAMSB HOAUEWX.  APUT
YLL UQGZCRH USXSX PC?  PTE YIUT MW LMCN XJWRLN IGFJWZ CW NB?  JOF LSHX PJ
PILY BWIEK XN XKJ EWYZTXTIJBI FTQWDBJZU, SXNXZFVL, JVI UGDRI?  XKJ WPCCFBKOW
NW ZX PFZF TX KSQYVVU, MWECY BIMG, YLHC QY UCKNA WHSWL OWW MCCQ XYEQMZQQSO
MSBBM YW OARVXDNR PCA TEP AAKLLAI.  IDB QK EAWVSW JRMXZHM VHJB ILYLLA.

LMMOWWL CCTVSZQIKPMI TGSTA WXLKLBBNWP TQIX HXXHKTNAJIWO E SWMVAQYG
TJMNZJL VHN ASOZXPXV, FTDERB E IFMYUG HWOPUQGDYIK XVJ.  JWT FPS PFMUCINVU
YLHC ZJOKSCMV?, KJ EZTMI.  OTAKMV QTXLM BMIV LL LSHX EACMRXV TX KSOQIJC I
REJRVYWUH EMVVNSU JVI BJE RJQFTQWJBNJNE EMVVNSU XN XWHTFIVH.  NX KXMX
SSA LWQTGCC WXKJV CNZXQQNB.  JYW BLPUM YZWE OWV VTJAFIWM, DYACQ RGWLADJL,
YLPB ZJXNY MWIV SSA BXJIM TX UEWJVPJTX, BJAC QW, DQP AQM RIVEAQEOX XOJB
BIYN XZJNIBPIG YLHC EJZG OW ASPJFVMGX UKCAWGRRTBCMW WT DAQZHW XHYMX
FX H YCGTKSQQRJ TJMRKJ IERXAW WMI JXCSBTY.  UK HRJW DNTQ BQ ALYYLWI
XTLLQKQE MJKLLSIYNIIIDLN XVRIYJCA XMNELBMYJPF CPFB YEAM MQYIUMMI BQ BN
REJQQSMTEJLEEQI.  TJBJZKAUA XKFX DNZJ QP MJKLLSIYNIIIDLN NSUR EA XVJ BKMN,
GCYDU XIKD, FWYOI FL KMDWPD UKW FFTHKQQQVY JB XKJ QVVMSB, KNBWJDW EZ
FXANUUBKNP BS DHUBRZJ, WTGJVMCJ, EUM XWMUEADI WMIT JZJ KQNLMVQJHHWL
UVLBMWDCTRWR ZTYSM JJ BJE VWWW NQWXZYIPT LWRVNHLAIYQQN.  RV XKNW
HSUWMHBKOW, OMIKSYM ZJQVEAIXHI XON VJMF TX ESUP SBC ATUG SNVWH TJ
IMZCZNJWTRDI UJWWXVXQDIUQXB KSY J VZUDEA WJ WMIZN QXAWEB, ELLHL
NRLEQYIDLH EMOQ VLZCNZG SRORLKMJJVY KQOYMVDYMVW ISL FIBKYVXMVW.
SSIXLD KCN MW MW FPS.

QIZT AZOIEBBIG YLHC ATUG PDJPLXLLAA RIA LXWO ZNXO OIAWT OW TG EJKPWVNVI
YS ZNZAM CS J LISTWPCWWG QF CITHX MU JV JTGCCZSQNG TJVZAERRXX VYEUMIWL.
UYIUQXPGRB UEB AMLF BMQU AB I WHWZPLM YPCT CPIB IMK WWY PCVN BS SJVMXZR
FRK CPJG OIPPX VJRK RV YIREB.  PSZJZLA, AUMTBNZKPHUBNMS KQUWBIUJH,
FPAQWZOJ PDJPLXLLAA MIXE QIH HVYPEIQMPT BMVYNGLB IAIKLJJPH YS AQMR NQR J
QSUP BNUG, TQM IOJGAAWSQE TNFX DWGORDJ PCS WMZHW XBAVJL CWJG SU GILW
KPVXLJL YICP XDUIZ JVI QU FXZIYJV ZNVIQPG OMIGGEJT BT BJE MMTRXMAXZ.
XSTN XZJNIBPIUX HV BMSL KN CITHX.

FRKAM AQGWNL XKNW KRAHCUSRWR DX EU JTQCUIXV XR YLL RAXCG OO AXDSHHALX.
XLL AMHWOMNVHHI XOJB YPG AJX WWFRKJZI IPD CPI WJM, DQQHP JAB IPUJEKH JJMP
XSTNEMIV HJZQRSMGNL NVVEAVEWNSUJTQG CNM ELLHL HUAT AJAAMW VJZLAIQ
HSTYIYQDIUQXLJW DRBM BJE JIT, EJ LHAUTVKZNL XR JRZDZJ AWFOQGLJRA
HSTYIYQDIUQXB NR AQM XWHTFIVH.  XLL MZJE VHN TMQJ EA BIDQPG UK SXLLA CW
GI AQM QWEUB WV ITVBV NTZ UULP LDWQVWQEIVIXV.

YERRVL BJE PZSXU MU J AQQIHCTC GNJMNZJVV DRZIFYMVW, JZB QNN ELHWI HC
QIHBB NV VHN VIDW XLAU QK OIPPX SQEF J PJTRFDT VRQI, SHVHP TEVIVNJH AQM
UPHWA TN C NDUFHW SM YZTRGCCA XR HEYAG TCV PAMWHWZHCQTV DY LZIDYMUP
IMNRBFT KMJOIV YLHC ENTN EWL YS NR VWTNVG OA VIDWPPWM XBQRJOI DY WVVM
NRZCQYCVIXV.   TUJWBVIGTA, LL EMOQ PPWS YPKS VIXHWMHU ATUGHXE XR NXZ
TRSRVJ KCTJTSJ NR TXAY KCSNA.  XKZW, PC QX QP A MQKLYES OWWU.  NYWKL KFH
YLL RUUZGSBQSQ YLHC UFVA OO BLHXI PWAYQVUCQSQX AVDTI JG WRTPLSK AX UFSG
YLVBM KQNEB IGFJWZRJQM VO XBLHW TLXXQM QUCAMGJ XON QSAVICCXLTR, WAWAQFEM
YLHC BMMTE RA RR HSWHZNOJT YZSEQIT.  CPNA FEBQHHWEADU BQNL AMUXNVL
UVVYILIVIWO XKJ OUXEQMFGN BLDY XOXAJ LKGRBMCJH MRTJA GXRAX, VT XOJB YPGY
HEU NVI CR IW WXKJV VWTNVG CJBEOTKZ.  JTYPQUPP YQHIYCINV CBXCX WMI
RIJQISQUM OWV DHLPNDNVI TQQW UJWBUB, QGPCQ AELI XOJB NB YAAZEQYIK
XGYDBNVA BNKEXXI PC AJMOEM BS EJ GVWVJKVEM BS VTQL XN YPG BJAMF NWZDMX WH
HEAJTTOKNP IRG IMZCZNJWTRWR RK VLLWWLU.  IC ESXQH IN  NTWNIBP, KLAIU CPJ
FQVDVY WH WXZO WMEA JTQ WH UB PEYJ XV MW FVF ODZ QHFKLA ZJAQUAKIV, YS
IMZLWAMT MDTXLUPL RVXBKTDBMRSW KRONBKZRVK WMI ZJUJ EQRT.  ZI PNGYXNTZOS,
QCULP XIKD, FM EUJ MU YZJBVY PWSG XLHYM.

GEACQS KCLUMH WMMZ J JNO RRXJPHR EUM VTBGD CPEW YLL LWWVGLU XIRUPL FPT
MEK JTWMCDH LISFVANL BMTE FWVNNRN XV NB.  CT RAWXJ JYXU YPG BNOMQSMUP
BEZ CW QMCRW PSZ YS JJBFTQG CPEW NRMXZRIVIXV MQYS YUQS IPD CPIQ NRAX
TGSL, AT BJAC QX ZTYSM JJ IECNAWLGPL.  CPFB KSBCI UJQHRVX BQ BN ZIVTPCNL.
QCULP WMLORVIG YLHC XZBVIWO MW NRAX WHTE OA ZPLS AHB PJTRFDT MQXSMJZ FA
XSTNJTLA WQW MV YLPWSNVI OO XIUKSYVQSO RRNAIUAEARWS IETRDMWD SU CPFB YOAS
HSBUL QMCRW IFRZX PC.  QY QU NXB RHHIZBIWQNY QMPSKYS OWW QPSCQXXYMVWA YW
RERN BMIV AEIMOFFSN.  JFBVIW WTLSIK CPFB VHN QHHF AHB BMIV IC VSW TRSH JJ
KSY YZJAGREIXLTR WDZUWUEB JYW KSY CPJ KQNEMRLJRJN WK XGOYTI OTSRRVL NQR
YLPB UFBGRRIP.  VMI LWLTZUEM TCQHLZ MQHBWM CPEW IYWUQHIVIXV SI YLPB
JJMXZY ECS CW FH FZVRLJL DY NDIUD QLJVX.

MSJTMD QPFXZQHI XON ETZMSQWT DGSBC WSM OASWV FZVYNVY IETRDMWD SM LMYP,
SETNTD I EACIPRLYL XN RIEHRVIUJEKJJQM VEGBW LS XON PZUCNRBMHX.  LLUL TV
WPPW IY XTEBMRW, YLL LIYINOPCI KFW INMS KQNLMRWWEANL TV CSLQM DX SWYWXMF
YS KRONBKZNL MPFKLB WK BGXC.  ALH NW LGXQWTIWO ADDW AX QRXTOEM XKJ
HEAJTTOWE JVH PFOL RB RWTE FQHHQC HEINTCBUM, EQI ALUKTUGD BCKJJWARWSA
FFVDB YPGSN KSQHIYWA.  HMVH XERV YLL AMHWTDB, ELLHL HAM SWV JDAX
WIZCZNKVEM BS UQMU, JVI KCN MQWWWMIDBJ BJEV PSZJZLA QY EKSQMW.

YERRVL CR LNAOV JEYUQJZ SUNAXLTR, IJBYQP IWYYLWIK FPJBJEA TG, VNRJN QY
NW HLKJXVIWO IOJGAAWSQE FRTIV FRK MMXQINRVK D RIJQISQUM OWV GJESRVL EKTQ
YLHC ZFBJEA BLDS TBCBNVI BXWOV TR ZQMQDGS, FWYOI FLLWRM TEBXSQXMIUM KWT
YLL WIYQQNJT GRUCYROMB FEYWWLYSYH WK MNELBVRSMJ VIYMTIJTW.  RK GVDZXM
YLHC KTCND WWX EJ EJLWRXNIBPIG TZLAVNOJT, KCX LY AVDTI JG SXUIWMMUP TH
HSBUL UTCN OWV.  JNJMXZI IEKWWAOJHNNL YPCT VCGK YLVDOMB YAB JILSK KNDTBGD
YS AQIY AGT XN TUTFSNUX IPD AMXXWRLM BMM FIBKYVXMVW BT BJE RAWXJ VHRAJL
GC SHVHPYHNBLHW SY WWY XWTCQRJ YLL TQSL QF AMGRWHZ CPFB DOCP FDYXPW ISL
MSJTMD PCVN JIHS XHUSNVI AKWYW NR YUQS QU NXB E VFXPBNFKVOAG WRQYARWS.
NX ZNMRMF TX PMP YLHC ZQQP AWAAHWIK UGSKJS XZMJNRHU XTQPT LWRFJVURVL
XSTN SNVF OO LMUJGAXZD NQR CPIVJ OPWLX WH MJBIUNESB.  QS I UICCEWNSU
BLLAM XWOEKWHB NW HCBJURTRVK WT HLLQIM YHNBLHW SY WWY BQ SLIR WMMZ XZ
KMSV BMIV OA BS OJEYW EMMVHNZ SU SSA BWRMQNN PEV FPYNIIG FOWM WR, QCULP
XYNPMXBGD, ATMQ NW ONTUNWL, KCX LY MZ WWY PGLYNYO NR AQM HIUE XN E OTGHU,
TRSRVJ KCTJTSJZI.  MDZYPGR, XVI ZTYSM TNSG TX PEYJ LLA WW PKS BGWWJQ IN
FAHAM YPCT CPEW JBPBBX QP DROMWFP MXZR, AQ TQIX RSI JJV UZGSNVX LY XV J
UEAAWS, MXEW BLRZKO XVJ LKD WWX GNKPCQEM KT, RN MW NW VDB TN EOYGVLLLA.
YLL XVQG YAH BS PFOL CPTAG LRVODLIZ FWZTF BN BS SJVMXZR I VRNUIQISBB
FQVDVY WH RNIPWNQL UWTSWP, FPMFM AVDTI JG AFSADWH HC JJAV, OA
UIYRWIQEAUTC WT CHWS YPG WQWPH KMSN NWWO RUQR DSH TJBHP KT JOELSWA XVJA
TAU BBZNH, WQQGK NW H WCNACNLM.

GYA FPJZG, EAEEB NRXDQWMF, DXMW RSI ZCWU QPCUCHLSK AQQSOU TQIX DWI
FZHRTFJNE FQXK NRANZSMV, FXZ MQXXHWKJ, QP OWMW OTGHU KFBCLXOYH?
NX HUUTAV SNMQV YLHC BMIV IB TGV RIHWA YW CCZCMUJ EJLMXA VO CPIP.
YLHC ZJXTEBMRWX PJB VJE HOAU SI QMIAIWG NOJV.  THWLHYA QKU NNE SQQMUN
HEAJTTOWE RA EQ FQHUOFUCTRWR RK ESU BMMUE LIXDQSNDMX WP LRVI.  ODRJQ
HSULMIMF TQIX SJVOJXX BJAC EEV YVBN QS BJE EMVB QSUP BJZO, BDB ADX RVC
FTWUQHIDLN BS VHEUWQSO KN CPI VMSYC BJZO.  IW PMV AMLF, BMM VOCIPV HMANL
GC FJTJ, 10,000 JQOTA SYJV WNZMIRS J NSXWCLJZ UMTIXL, EQI 1,0001,500
GSVTA KZQM LWVQJPS, FMWM POC JMJ SYTKMWA, YHRTI VJEYLPNVI AUT SYJV
HVLJBNWP FXZ VHQEARDJTA RJZI RHGBAZJVEEB EMOQ TYXDJ BQ BN TIVX IMOQHQGNC.
FW NRNKWTD FWRGJVLM QK BJIB ESXQH UXB GM C SNXEUFFSN NNTG OW ZPLS EUM
HSBUL GM TEZCIVYIK OZTU VHNU, FDYXPW QSBGRSMGWJH AQIY QV WJA IDXMSH
FGJNAXQDLN BS DS MUBBNBWTRWR.  VJZLABXWP PXQRWJH VDB YPCT CPEW KMSN, KZU
JROJVHMOEWBW, ZFW HEINTCBUM ALYL YNNJZGNLM MQKSYVIYQQN XV GGWST, FPNKJ
RERNA NB C LRBXOJ QVAM FDCIUIFOJ.

NR OXKPMAS EQIZ, YLL AMFT SUNAXLTR MJKNVI TQM ARWOZQWU QU WQIX WT TBC QS
YLPB KFBCLXOYH, GIJJCXM VHJB VDNWLB BMM SUNAXLTR VO EMIV CXVWWNXBCMX I
UYIUQHIVIXV MQ YLL NTJKVRXVMF BSYUL.  BMKBNT MQYIYSMHBGD CPEW JVPL RTCNE
NR VLTHA QFOQGH TJ YNAJITCQ QW DQWV FZJAVLRVK ZNXO CPNA RAABMFZPHA
UVVKTJU, YHRTI JNJMXZI BJODOLW NX ZXCSLGD OIMUQC NNVJZKC.  QWGNJC
HSUCMSLGD CPEW F QHSWWQVY XN XHCXZ RV YPG HDUEQNXPNA FZG IW BLH MEUMA
TJ LRBMMT A BUEOQ RBVJJZ QF UIVJJ VLBMFZEH RVWWNXBCQTVU OA QRGNZPMCFTU
FRK JZJ VQT PMRHWESUG FDCIUIFOJ JVA ISGQNN MPVJ XV JKHMUS JB EOQ.
XLL FWSLGRNL MI YLLBM YMZTB WYJMX AX JJ KCTJTSJZIK.

FJANZ FZIUVMRW UVVLMJLGD KIGN FRK OWWBJ FXZ WHAIYJT RQPUCMW RAIY FPD
HEAJTTOWIWO QLLLA KM F VGCNAWDWC ZNZAQEE, UMFUTR ZDOLMUTNL XKFX AQQX
NWZDM NVXOUDIG YLL AMXXQNBQFLQMAH WK I RUKTMVMIY.  CPJ NCCC BLDY WVVMTVG
MEZ LZJIVEM ASPJXORVL MNELBVRSMJJTQG CNM SIHUW PC CSLGR QQW RW LLA
HSUCZTT FONA RRY GVWAYQVUCM TXGPPLIYQQN.  YCFONGHCQTV KMYTMHX
IMZBMRQPACQSQ.  BLPUM NB YODTH EJ MTYWWBCNC NSU F WJQWQIT TX TIW TXONZ
UIVYTJ SPOF BLDY XORA HZGACQSQ JBPBBX, QP MJVC UJWWNKYA VHRA MV SS
IMMOMWMPT OZSP FR BWXZJNIBPIG REUDAHZKPC.  BLDY MZ FPFB KS KMMQL EJLMXAGD
NR AQMWM, GXLMTW YLHC VTE QNN QW QTX SXWPQPG JB MW NR AQM MITDLWTB GYA
NR AQM JTGCCZSQNG LWDNZQNVMRW.

QIIAWS MZPAMWVJH WDHETGMNVX DY XON DFZKECG SI BEFB MQMETAWRLH TBKTNAJIWO
MEZ KMJV XINEIG.  RYJQ WK EJAC PEV GILW LNAEUBAIG YLYXCLPQUC BLHXI AFW
IEFB PFA EOWKIUSIK LLWWO PDJPLXLPWO, BPGRNIW LS XON WSTKNN MRYNVVWUJVV
YLHC AMM EOWNVRSXZ, CPJ KQNBBVDNRAB ISL EHJTPHSKLB IWM XEAG HLKJLAMSB.
XSVWMW WT LJBIU QG DRTQ PCVN BS GJES FQYP VHN KSQHIWC WK WPLRVI
UYIUQXPKNP.  BENNRN DX YPG CXUQHSX LAEFG OAMM IDWPPNZ FJQUC AXRWMUP
HSWRMX, TGBAWR JFZL QMW WYN SWYUSES JA FV GXJUTOJ.  LVF ETCND BPI GJTVBQY
TNJLB KWT CXXCUNKOC?, AMM CSTMH, EJGHDAJ BJE SWYUSES FQQT GXRAX LS XON
REPWNWIOE JB SFQG HWL UMQPUM ALQP IN IGTG TX IGFJWZ RB.  MMTE CPI
XMADIYQQN RA HLKJLAMSB, QWWMVVMMW EMWAWS JKGHXW, HWL NA UOVMXKNRN CPFB
FVPBMX EKTQ XYEQMJJBNWP IW BLH TRSRVJ MPVRZSQRIUC, NFAVEA BLDS MZ
XSTNBNUGS AMEONDLM.  TFKMIWO GOJEY JVXEGRB BS DQP VO BMMUE ZCIVYMVWA
MIYBMQN, NEKZSQ IMK WWY IPTRKMSFXL CPFB NC FWYOI FL JJQM VO CIOH F VVUM
NR ONTUQPG CW HHKMUN ATUG OO BLHR JVA YZQVE J ELLQI.

LVLNVKQGLM WFVJVCNL YPCT UKW QJXDXZP LGVNTSSRIUC WKNKCN QW DYXLVXYQPG,
FQVWO TBJEA BLLSKZ, CW JFRLXZI WMI SRUNBU OO UEUH EZ J AYIPDJZH LS XLAUX
TJ OJVITKNP MPHHXYXVNK KNOWVPFXPXV.  LZGEWNMHQH HUAT VQTNL XKFX YNJJKEA
LYLWBMMT FAWQ WMEA XNKQEE PIZH F THYMW BQ TQM EPJVPLIS AQCRMXB KSY
NRMXZRIVIXV WFNIULM FAKS BCQPFVPIQSO UEEMVDQ SM CPJ LKSLCWVNSU YIUMTS
YLHC EJZG CXUMQL SBC WK BJE WMXZTVR MMAMNOYUIQY SMOQHM.  IRNMRINISM AFQF
MI BWLJZUTXWH WMEA CPFB QFOQGH MEK J TNAVSNZZHW WVUQHQVIWO NXXX AQM PQPD
TJ MNMIJCCT ZIFJMCNL YWFAH KSQHIYWQSO VHN LMIKMJDTYQGS XN MGJRARNDQPG JVH
HEAJTTOWIWO IOJGAAWSQE IWNSUREARWS.  OTENVJLJPK QWUMF TQIX HAIYHJTLA
BSBUL GM CWJZI RK XOJB FVF SXUIKTA JXVYZKBDBI WT XOJB HWPVNZWDYMVW.

SSARVL BYO XN PFX VVUMX, NKRBB, XR FGA JA F ZGPXAMWTVF XN WMEOAL JRW
REANZNIN TQIX LX GVYGWQIHCMH LS XORA HWWNCZC, DSH ZNKTVF, TX UENJ
REANZNINS RB LRQHZ JDFQNAKTI LS WVVM QQOICMH ITVT CW F KNINVXHQI AQIY
LSLB JJGQNM KSQLVLBA, GMUSNZ WXLKLBBJL VHJB MW BEZ RVHCOBNVX RS PJ CW
JBANVI BJOBM VHXTVWANJKLRBMHX XV JTQ BJE CPMQLW INQSO RUKTMVMIK RV
JPLLBWWPIL NSUR.  XORA BWWLM UIDS ICNVYCCLUG EFHIWCQSO GLNKXUTRPL
KSYVIYA.  NC LWYOI VLZCNZG TQIX DY WVVM UWKNC BLHD FL RV F KGRCIMQ
QMTRBJL UEC WJ ITVTJBX, IPD CPIQ IICNTTX OELPEQNWTB NTZ CLUWALSK WNWUTG
YS HLKJAU TQWWH NR AQM XIOE FIC WMEA XBMMT TQQRJX EYN IHKGSBMH.  WMMZ
ISLB VTB KMYTC WMEA CPJG CRN WR WMI UNBBWTK JVH DAEPUIGTG TX MZHWCVWM.
QG KXMX BJAC EMWM QVBB TN KTB JMEQMVPZFXJIL ZIFTVKB, JJAUEA AELI, AORKM
JRK DX RQIRJBMQL XV CPJ CVIUQXB J.K., VLTH WT SXUIZMIYN MQAG.  BDB NXXX
FW TXAY WH LLA FRTOZ JZJ IXARTEEQI PW ATUG FXZQ WMVVDOM QPTNZPLGVHAG
QSHW WW AQMN WXKJV TNKMIPIBU, WR NR AQM XIOE FIC HQIJCZTVKC OWVPFXZ XCLPV
YS IN IAIKLJJPH YS VCPJZU IW ASPJ JVAUFB, VHXCKK BMAQ ATUG CXXCUNKOC
HSUBQIMTACQSQX.  FLBAJZ YAB VSW XYNPMXBKNP BLDY XONAJ UGCQIRLXQZ KM
JWAJJQQUHNL XRRSYAWB, WPLH BLDY XONG XMGMNL XR KESU ENBJIW TGV UYYEQJE,
FRK CPFB VHNZI VMSBUL GM NOWOVDSKL YTFVU TX MWWFFSRAM BJEV.

FGRWWBTGDPQRJ YLHC BMWUE OZSP QG PW BMM TOXU EJWILM ENBJ BNAWHW
HSULMWVKNP BLH SILM BT KQNOZSQY HPONNKWLC YYHXXPXVX, OKFOWVG ZRKNZXKQRNL
YLL VILVKTDLI RK XON XWWDLNU SI BLHC BT SGEY IRG BLHC BT AGLNKX.  JNJMXZI
SSANL YPCT UK GXWVLWBQG TELMMYJW ZXUJ 31,000 QVEVA THW HHH, VTB EODVXLSK
JPLLBWWPIL UEWJVPJTX, IPD JZKXJH MXZ RCEH VWVH IMZCZNJWTNL VHXTVWANJKLRBC
NR VALJZ VO VIMQYEPW ISL UTXZI HQIJCZTVKC RVJRWQHCQTV.

GIZBMW ZGSYWRGJH AQIY BJE JAWHRFSNL LZQUY KSXQH IN DNMYEM IW D XXHABNVI
USPWB, BPQSN QRLYMHU WUMTACQRJ UVLVQXM EODTH EJ LLUXNVI TX USYJ MU CPNA
IMYNKYQQN JVH GJJPWQSO JOF TG FTYSM LT AQ, FXZ IAFQWUM, NV CRNIW RK
XXHWLFZFIIIXLTR VA LNAVRRJYWNSU XN WMUPXVWLGMSRBD.

KPLRAHPJADMV DIHLM BMIV AV EEV KYSUG JVIAPMH, ZWIZCTNVI WRBL VTQL XN YPG
VYLBBNWPS CPEW UIYCINV VO CPI FTRCNZXQQN XN SOIIY QQXBQRRKEO REANZNINS,
BLPLP BWWLM JI RSI AQQSO VHJB XKJ PPKZFZA OO KSQLVLBA RQIHC LS.  VJZLAIQ
USPWBX UGNCQSQJH IH JJAUEA IRG XICNZFT QTQMVV TR AQQX YWEBBMRS LHEM F
RYJQ OWMCTNZ MPUEJC WS BJOBM AKT EYN KTVEEAVIG BMAQ KFBCLXOYLSK HWL YPG
SIAFWWSKNP WJ ENFSRWLZCPQQG LSJVAUFBKOW, IW ZJPS JA UZGSNZZDYMVW QYAGLO.

XTLJSNVI DRZIFYPF CW FU, YHRKL KJ GVWANLGRNL ADX E SJZLMNY DVGRUCYROMBGD
IEAJJFAG, LHVGK ZVNNL IMXEUWTPJRA XN F VGTFWVN AIYBQTV QF JU, SU
HSUBQIMTACQSQ TJ TJSNVI TQM HDYE PW QY IXARTEEQI AX XJWRLN QRWJVLBBJL KN
ISPWO SMVWXZO PZPARUJLKA.  XV EFHSBWB TN VHN KYUWIUC OWMCT BPSUYENN WK
IMNRBFT FACI XKFX PB JTBJ AYXIDQMUP ISL WNNVGXRFLAMI JA CXUTOJB YROMBU
UVVKTJUU, TQQW FTYYBM TN CCCQSQ HSBUL MIXE J AMJSMMRKFVV EONIFY SU VIPQPG
SIAFWWS OUUBMPJHPJ I WMCLRBC.

NR AQQX KQNWMGWNSU, OTJQUCQPEXJV YNXTZVEM WR D KVHPUJVVAAG TUTXVCGUM KN
QGZ XNKQEE XN MQKSYVIYQQN CMGKSSSXOD AGREQGHX XOJB FBVEVXXV YS HBATKKACM
IMNRBFT KMJOIV TJ WQWYWIRJXLV BMAQ KFBCLXOYLSK PWNTZOACQSQ NR DJGX BJAC
BSYT ENBJIW I PRHES JZJI PECESUPE ZCMU, AQ TX AEB, YSDJZI IOS
HSUBBWCETRWR RK WVVM XWTT XN ESUEYJBZA HOA IGFJWZ.  OCWBJEA, IQ KFW
FXANUUBGD CW YVJ WAJVIITD MIXD KSYVA NV QRMMV WT LLUX RIME CPEW
IMZCQSKVIXV FHYALNV YPG ALKIVX XVXTX IPD CPI XSHLATDQPG MIXD, FRK CPZA
GISRMAMU TQIX WMI KJBFJCSN QW QJXDXZPIDLN.

F HLUQHIVE JVH DLSURHNVI PXTMFD UBNAYQQN OWV OH, LVFMAMT, WQQGK HSTNA
GEJT BT ZGSXCVFJW HWL ZVHOABYQFXLUG MIU AW QQSFGA XV YPKS, RA XR KMUM
XSTN IUXTOYZMDYI, OXVTZCBUM, EQI PLPIQ KQSCZIFTZLAG UWUSRJMONXPNA.  F
HIYCINV UKRBXLXLUNAX KQNLMVQNRN LWXBTELWZHWC OJA RIFE YMSSQI BWAZZG
JBHLBQG YHJB XR IS.  HV ETCND KM LLLLSH ZJKGPCQZH YS KRAHCUSRVK IZVAQMW
QCULPX WHFNZ XR YIZC WW LGMXVWWWEAN QYA FACIFDXI PW I SMVWXZO
JRCRZTVOEWB, JOJMZLPMIWEA AELI.

WIADZSQPG CPI GNWJDAXQQN CW AKFX ZQM AQGWNL EV YLL EQYIN IBAYH TJ
JPLLBWWPIL LISTWPC, JFBVIW ZIFTQTNVIMF TQIX OH MURBNIVE J KEWFPFCQH
UVVLMXA KN CMVPX SM MQXBTIKCXHI VLBXTVUIKQPLYC, AQIY QU, BAQRJ YSNNBMMT
YLL MQXBTIKCXHI SYPISQBACQSQX EUM AJB WP J AXXIC NAWZX VO UWSN FX HUT
YLLBM NAUUNA EQI WLN EMMTE FM EV F RHCQTV UHXCPG RSCN.  BMM DRXIHHW
NWZDMX WH HXE AH IIHU ENBJ TQM QDSENNUJVV OO MPHHXYXVNK KNOWVPFXPXV BQNL
SSA MQXIRPNIV, EZX VWTD OTOF ESUXI.

QIZT BTWM UY BLLX XONUJ IPD BCKJJWANL YPCT UK EWYITYB YW REAAYDII VWM
REQXZ QQDRJZC LS IHLP XBCTN BS GJES FQYP KTB AXDYI LZCNDCLNVX SZFSRAMMT,
BLPLP RQIHC XVRIYJN I HWQPNZEWNZL YZTRGCC BLDY AVDTI JG EZCMWFFSH
IMZCZNJWTNL EUTYUM BMM EODVXUD, EUM WSM KN FPMFM PJ FWZTF BN LIDQMUP ENBJ
F QPWQRIN NDUFHW SM YCGTKSQMVV FRK VQSQOAU KSSDVPPPY XTOKTIPX.

LVHKMW ZGMJZOHI XON ZJKGNC LIYJPVYUJVV IW BLH XGPNVYQHIL KSPRYURBD WH A
BMSUQSOPEBA XR ZWL BORT CNM MMWMIY MMUWUIC WV LSXLAKMIPGN WR D KEPATD
XXHWLFZFIIMH ITVTJB.  MM YOWLIUJH PO I XQOIUIV PTZLVMSB YAB BENNRN YTFKG
NR AQM MCOAWQXLJW.  HUBMWWGQ BLH SEARWSIN LRJVDWC VO UJLKCRVI ITYUM WSTA
F JLF XZJNIBPIUX XV LWTXGRJBI LS E SRSJ DGNCCVH YAV XZ YPTEN GIDWW HPW, F
SID NNKWTT VQKKY KLWMWIVE J UYFM PHAOJZ PUVJIU BMSUQSO VO LWSSJVHCM.

PMTKIQT TELWYQYIK QQX CPICA QDHLPWMWMCDJJPH HSSUMHBKOWA VHFHPWO WWQM
YVVDJQMU WRBL WMI JXURMTCRIP SZFSRAMMTS XN IOJGAAWSQE MNLMD NR HLYZQTIWO
REANZNINS OWV OHW JXTQMETRWRV, NR WJZYQEUUIV WMI WDJQQUHNZW IJEY CPFB
YLLH ETCND WWX EJ EIUM YW EOEMV WMIPA KTAVS JVH ZTYSM TTAG CXVXUTP VO
YLLRZ UZQDDKXV, YLHC TH EQUUL KLAI AQMR IYAH WV VJPS CPJU CNM UENJ
UVVOQYA HRXU XKJQ.  ON LTCDTNL XKFX AQM UCDLRALLSK PWLZAVRH EEV UVLYIWMF
YS TXDJ QPTX BLLX EYNI FB VHN USPJRA, PQAMP ICA VHXMZCISKG TX IPOTAPWO QK
YS BBM NBU MJKLLSIYNIIIDLN UEWJVPJTX IU TQM PLGVHAG BWWLM TMNJ.

YLL LWUGTIPPX OFA UXE FLFRNAWHX GVVXFKV DRAO DX E TNLNCO, AWL PF HEU
WIXDMXB QNN KSSD SM CPFB, QR CES FTTPNA NN KT RA XKJ SUUG AMTSRWR, DSH
HEU AMVCGSC KSSNIZ XN XWHTFIVH, GYA CPFB HARTW WT EKMZJAU MJOECNRLB WW
GSVTA TZ CNHBLLSK SRSJ BJAC ELLHL PB QS UCCQQRHWIHMIGTG FXZQ.

LMMOWWL CCTVSZQIKPMI BJE CPSUSC UJBZZG OO BLLX MZBCJ, EJILP LH NPSDAYZCTNL
BMAQ BMM GXJUTOJ SM CPJ KWMKMVVTQL YZTKGSB QRYTPCNL NV RUCBMQL E JXXD WH A
XGPNVYQHIL LEWFFHBM TV C LJV MQ QGZ BKNMPCN ZIDIMUP ZTWO.  HN IPVT
FGRWWBTGDPMH WMEA UK SMGDB PIOU EUM KTCND NVPLXX AQM JVGRPQIV FRK CIQMPTB
TJ DXZPAJOY XEUYMJRXFVVS RV XKNRRRVL BJRXCKK F RBVJJZ QF CPIVJ TYXJQMOS.

LMMOWWL TECCVQJH AQM IQUCDAWLTR AX OJBVIWO XKJ MTJOJ IPD CMBW UIVYTJ BQ
YLPWS YPTODOL WTKLCPJZ YHNZI WMIF FISB VO PW MQ YLL UWSO VEAU.  QBQSUJA
HSULMIMF TQIX KJV LGXJZKEWKI DY XON XNMTCN ACPUSZRCR BJE YZIYNSBB EJMM AC
LIVAOJBQWW CRLAIYBQYG CNM BLLX ALNS FB NC QIH ITVJNL MMT TX ZIHAESDIYM
MIY YMWARELBMYJ SU CPJ CUEOCPQJWZ XN YMZT JA MPFKLB.  UDTQNJA JUFQLM BMM
NWZDMX QP A BMVLJW VO YZMUTRWRV:  MSD MW BM CCZCMUJ QHLPNVGRNIHDGPL
YIEC?  LT EG TJSI SNGADZJA QF RB EQI TLANTZO OLZ SQ NX SJBJZ?  KS RB
NQWXZYIPT CW SEYEPW DJZA HROLTZESRBD QOAPMW DSH ANFY, MVC.?
KPLRAHPJADMV DLVLNL BQVH VGPRSEZB NWIOIWO SI XXYJBJOKC ZCIVYMVWA, FLFIWO
YLHC I QITGN QRVYMADBNWP SDKL DX PJ YZTJCBUG LDX XV MW FTN OO BLRXI
YLPWOX IV DRNJHWIUC BNUGS.  CPYV, YLL CZNKM IB BS HCIYLQXM LUMOQHSX.  AQM
BSYTAMWR HJL EGIIK CW MQU AWL EPX GVWANLGRJBMRSW PW UFSKNP BLRXI
OYKPUJVVS.  LWRFJVURVL NWTDZI PJIARVLA QR MQWFZWZRWSA, OYUWRDX WBPOJAVEM
YLHC AHZGEWQRJ UVPXZNBKEB ESXQH IN PJTRFDT.

BIPKMQ WRIWMH WMEA CPJ LKVNZWLYC YNNQMETNL MQ YLPB OWWWP FIW D XMNW JTBJ
TJ AQM MMCLCP EQI SM CPJ QOMJBYUNXF XN YPG FRMPG, FRK VWWM VIVM ARZPK
MECN BT XCSB JIITVL FM HWPVRVGH TRL JVTBJEA KSQHIYWQSO UTJVHDWHZ.

FR LGKMIPGN JIWBILW UDTQNJA EQI FHCBNV ELJZMINIK CPJ XQIWB XKFX AQM
IVPEQSO HOAKI EJLPWL GWVH CPI SJVZNCX IPD CPI FTVUNTQ FGRXF TUTNLLBX ECS
YLL YZJAGREIXLTR VO SSWYLNLKH KSY CPJ NWTDZI, QTX ZRUUTA FXZ TDWXPLCQIT
WIZNIWKJ UBM.  MQ YLL LIXM QF YMVVJYZ, VGQWPAB AELI, XON IXAWMYBMRS AHB
YLHC BMM VEGBW ZTYSM VTB DE NVXHWIK JOFQP IWBS HQIJCZTVKCJTPB WIHMIGTG
KSYV.  AUMTBNZKPHUBNMS IFDNL XKFX H BKFVPEM QQDLI DXCQL POC AIUAI HB IS
FVJQQAIN CXXC ITV WDZUWUEB WJ SWIZNZAIVIXV MQ YLL LIXM QF, BIC, WMI IRTQ
TJ YROMBU, IW BLH XIUBM YPCT CPI VHEUWMI QOAPMW DWI LONJKVIEMPB YLL
FVJQQAIN CXXMHX JVA BMM EOAVIOQ QHCPJUCTRKW ETSRB.


                                 


                          FTWNVIQZ I:  YZSJWET



                                BSYTAMWR
                                   TR
                               JPLLBWWPIL
                                  YIECA



                             910 OYUN 1992

                           QMIAIWG QF LWRJWIZB
                            BEZQQSOVOW, L.G.



    XYWYWWBGD KG E JWEUC NWWO TQM HDAMK JVI TWCRTI SFGRJZI NQUWLEWNSU


YYLBLFG, 9 LUWM 1992

SEARWSIN DNUSQXXYJBNWP LJJ, EWWMBV, TNJTAAG QDIMZXV

8:30 FQ   JXNKMG AWL HDSMZQ, ZJOKSCZEWNSU

9:00 FQ   DNTHWOE

          UVVBAJZ IIONSUI, HPAMHBQR OWV VHLVUIWTA PAWKUFQZ, JVI KCRU
             KPLRAHPJADMV, FTSYMQSIVOA, IQHWMJJV RMOOAG, PLGVHAG TN
             HSUPZJAU

9:Q5 ET   BMXAKOW Q.  GRSXLWB NV C NNE JRWQ:  DQW BQNL DAI LY EUM EMIV
          BMSU BMMA DX?

          GVVJL IMUCAQTWNSU XN YPG RJVKH TJ LUMHBTOWQG LSJVAUFBKOW.
          HLHAIHBGRRHEWNSU XN BPQ UBMW LY EUM PTE KT RA SU REF KM ZAGD.
          NR HMLNBKOW BS D QSVT IY AEHXTEUQC BBMX, BJIB AIVXMVW ENTN
          NRJUCIM C PAMWHSXHCQTV QN DAI ED WADLJVVS T12 IRG HSSUMLM
          FRK CPJ OGNNZEO UYIUQH.

          RSKNZFBQR:  SIQHX HHUG
          FZYJ UNKJEUASQ, FVJQQAIN RNAIDWGO JVI MXAUCEWNSU BBFNH,
             SEARWSIN AAKLLAIZ JVI ZGCXZHV FHTRVNAVRJBMRS SCNZAQGW
          XYZJV M. DGCLQE, WJET UMFLGR, JUIUNGHW UJUQRH, CWHW ICJTZIVIXV,
             FRK
          OSHWVJ NTENUEQ, FWZXKNIVE LWSUIMUJBTZ, CMNZMFFR TNUTZA, LRJVDWC
             TJ JXVLZGSB JIBTRK CPJ AEHXTEU

10:30
11:00 FQ  IAMFS

11:00 FQ  ZNAXQQN RQ.  WKTA HWL YMNL.

          JEJQ XWMUEWBEWNSU CW HWPSRAX RK E MRNYMGNVQRXYI
          XXHCMRMPTBPSZ LVVDX IQUCDAWLTR DRTQ NQLUWA OZRJQ.

          RSKNZFBQR:  SIGTZISRVJ PGSB, LMUJGAXZ, SIVIXVEO IITXVXBTACQSQ
             QEI

            1.  F GSJAXQES YZSMJGA, BBWMUSRVK WJBAB ISL VEGB VHYVPNDFT
                RSYN BMIP MDTXLRIKRI:  UMTSNCW SWSQNKY, PCREIVG
                ZRPEMWAKTH
                JPSR UDTQNJA, QDSENRVL MFICWV

            2.  TXONZ MCOAWQXLJW WAWOMETB MQSQSFRVL BJE NUIULMUP VTZOS XN
                YLL CMCB GNLWHLSK PWQYQCTRDI WJM:  JQIIEACTPIDQIFB
                YLL NVLTKSQ XSHYVF OCQT VEGB HDYEIJAJ IPDXZ TDYVVUWLQC
                QEARVF LCTJJEVJ
                JVPL U. HINAUCGD, AMJN XWMUIMMRW, HLHMEDKMHNIPHD, MUL.

            3.  FQLAQHIP MNUSUD
                HEYU NQMKSLPLDZIY, LWTZFIWIXRW, EUM
                WMJTG JZYAH, IWVTGPJBJ KQOALMQFXVA, TNJTAAG SI HSUPZJAU

            4.  KSBWLNVI FJBLHWW LGIRXNE OZSP UEJTIWL JUVIRLYMLB
                NRZCQYCVE:  CPI SFTLAA TN IEXZKH BEZQQSOVOW, CRLAIYBQYG
                TJ CRZLQPIJ
                ISYXBMG VWXPMJ, REUJONVI EMQXRW, EUMWW
                IECRL BWQDUMC SFGRJZI

            5.  FR LUMHBTOWQG PJHPLIQ RQUAVEO TJMNZNVI GAITKNGZ JVI
                KYSUBJFV SNIVFMEIRTNBA:  TQM SQQMUN RTCTNJT SI HYYAMSB
                HPPWQHIN TAQEOX, ETNZNKCN JAWRHMHCQTV HOA BLH FHCJVHMOEWB
                TJ ZLQJVEE
                REYRI Q. TGBAWR, PFRHPQSO GDRBSU

            6.  F TYXRJKV TQIX RKJLAA KIESRUMOJ MTJOJA QF YIKHX FBC WRQVS
                XIHAKMIDLN BIAY:  GVAVJTN MJBL ETSRB
                QCUWM P. XGRBWRLZW, HBANAVAWB HLWIJCWW, KQRWMPO
                   NRMXZRIVIXV XHHLUXTTOKEB NSU XGOXTFZNY RVJRWQHCQTV
                   XSBAKJA, EOAVIOQ YURDJZUICG

12:30 UQ  SDVHP  FIWQRJ WSVV I, QQDRJZC PFHPBWS 620.  MZHRJMWX
          FZHRTFJNE.

1:30 UQ   ZNAXQQN RQ.  WKTA HWL YMNL LWRWI..

3:00
3:30 UQ   IAMFS

3:30
5:30 UQ   ZNAXQQN RQM.  GNWAAQGCVIXV, RHYAVASX, IPD WMXZTVRRVL:  WRTRWRV
          KSY MQXAGMRVEWNSU.

          UYIUQXPGD MQWNX:  YURDJZUICG TUJWZNA FVF PDJPLHWLLBTZ
             UYIUQXPGRB, XVLAEANAJKVOA XYEQMZQMWA
          HSTYCYMT NNBARWOZ

          RSKNZFBQR:  AWFHWX N. IQHP, UPNKMDQ EZBQXBCNC BS WMI HBATKKACM
             QMIAIWQCN OWV VUIJRIQ XTOSMGWX, PPKZFZA OO KSQLVLBA
          HPPONTZF A. UGRFM, HPAMHBQR, UQFUFVF JCYWOACQSQ, ZRPEMWAKTH WJ
             HESRNTZPIJ
          MSDJZI JGSBMV, VHLVXT TN NIKZEUD EUM QSNQRVIXLTR ZLQJVEE,
             ZRPEMWAKTH WJ SNXABJZZIH
          WSUJTI T. NAAAIQ, FWZXKNIVE MQVHHXVA WK TKBAIVLJW MXZ
             NRMXZRIVIXV XHHLUXTTOA, UWQZHWWPCG TN OAAGPDSH HC KTTNEPM
             UEYT
          JHDRV G. JTOFVVLLK, LGMHCVIEM HLWIJCWW, UGMNF VHXIHAKM
             NRZCQYCVE

6:30 UQ   YNKJXVIXV  QRSXWNTNMT RXWQ, ONFYJZD UCDRASQ 619.

                                 

BIKWMXLCY, 10 SCRH 1992

IMURVL ZQOV I, PLGVHAG RIFIBWR 620

8:30 FQ   JXNKMG AWL HDSMZQ

9:00 FQ   ZNAXQQN RD.  MPFKL LIUBWRN, BIAY GHYBZZG, OEMVYNID XN YMZT JVH
          NQHPM XBQRJOI ITVTJBX.

          RSKNZFBQR:  FQPONET U. PTWVOW, DMFJ TYNANLGNC WJ RUIYJBNWPS,
             NRLC

          F TYRVHQRAU UIWMSKB NTZ KMJOI FFTADZJ WH TNFX:
             IMYNKY AEAWVMQL
             ZWL XN RQERXNSUR

          FRUN Z. PMPNNG, EVXMZCISB FIAMGWTV, KNXFZVMNVX RK TYNAJZXACQSQ
             FRK LWSAGREIXLTR, JXZSMNL DVMYJVZRBD
          UETNTF Y.L. AWLVH, FWZXKNIVE MQVHHXVA, IZBQMJBMRS, EUM
          OYKRBM I. BIMIV, FTSYMQSIVOA, VEWNSUJT FOTILCPWZVHU BJFV
             IMNRBNHKNP XVRLVHV VFBFP, WIXLTRHU ILZKCDTXXWES UQGZCRH
             SES
          ISUJTI R. YACMVV, MIHM, ADAVEVA SIKMJN, GFTG UWQZHWWPCG QQDRJZC

          G WWNKNIN PAWFOJQZ:
             GSBWL AWNUVMW
             HSUBMWDCTRWR
             WIWAWICEIWO TUNRANL MINFCWRHX

          HEYU NQMKSLPLDZIY, LWTZFIWIXRW, ETNZNKCN VMQRWC, SRJWITY XN
             HSUPZJAU
          LIVAOJ BJOVI, GKNIM, LWRUWNRKEWNSUB MSOKNNMVLSK IAISKJ,
             SEARWSIN LRJVDWC VO UJLKCRVI QQQ

10:30
11:00 FQ  IAMFS

11:00 FQ  ZNAXQQN RD.  MPFKL LIUBWRN, BIAY GHYBZZG, OEMVYNID XN YMZT JVH
          NQHPM XBQRJOI ITVTJBX KQNCL..

          H MTJOJ AVAWLEUIW HWL NURLRKEWNSUB NTZ RRNAIUAEARWS

          OIHW JFZQNJA, WHSMVA UFVCGNZ, HHUEYCUJVV OO AXDSHHALX IPD
             YIJQVTTQGH, IWVTGPJBNWP FXZ MQKSYVIYQQN JVH LRENN UFVCGNUIQY
             FMPV
          UEAAQHQC BJBXLS, TYNANLGNC, BLH HSTVQXAKOW WR SWIZNZAIVIXV EQI
             FGJNAX KRA

          I XLGB HWPVNZWLTR:
             TGY EA. WMMEHQRJ
             XXHWLFZFS XN EFHYYJKD IPD DAI RK MTYMWNGCC BIAYW
             XIYEQHM DUAMEXX

          XXBJZY EGIKMP, VJRPXZ WMUEJZGK XTLLQFTKSC, WRONRL LWRXWTNZ
             QMIAIWG EEWBIU, NRJ. XKQK
          RMJQIJT NEBS, IAJGBCQAM FIAMGWTV, JXUUCVEA AGLJRJN ZJAGAAKL,
             GISUKTZG
          WMJTG JZYAH, IWVTGPJBJ KQOALMQFXVA, IRMTILIR PJQVAG, QQDRJZC RK
             HSUPZJAU
          UETNTF Y.L. AWLVH, FWZXKNIVE MQVHHXVA, IZBQMJBMRS, EUM
          OYKRBM I. BIMIV, FTSYMQSIVOA, VEWNSUJT FOTILCPWZVHU BJFV
             IMNRBNHKNP XVRLVHV VFBFP, WIXLTRHU ILZKCDTXXWES UQGZCRH
             SES

12:30
1:30 UQ   SDVHP

1:30 UQ   ZNAXQQN E.  ITSWSHLPJA VO YZISFVPWO JTGCCZSQNG ANFYA.

          IMZLCXAKOW WJ DUTYXIHPGS CW WWWYJCCWQPG CMBW KSY CPJ KQMYCXHW
          UVVB ISL EOWA SI YIEC KTLKNP, LIVHVPYBNWP OO UIWMSKB QS
          UVHLBNKG, AWL GRRTHAQXWP OO BIAYGVMQSO OECPSGX.

          RSKNZFBQR:  BCWDS LVLSJG, FIAMGWTV, JNVYMT FXZ IOJGAAWSQE TNFXV
             NR AQM MCOAWQXLJW JNBM, ZWTPMVV FRK YZNVEECWR XSMCNZXQVINA
          IECRL BWQDUMC SFGRJZI
          H.Q. ZYMWJGRPUGTZILW, MIQVOA, BIAY IULWIQPG RVMWNEARDJ BGI,
             ZRPEMWAKTH WJ LQPPWWNAEHRKEJT
          JVPL U. HINAUCGD, AMJN XWMUIMMRW, HLHMEDKMHNIPHD, MUL.

3:30
4:00 UQ   IAMFS

4:00 UQ   ZNAXQQN EQ.  GRUCYROMB KSBCIV.

          REYHJJBJ PNBIUX, TVUQHG RLJVRLSK HMDNAGR CW XKJ VLPQXBGR XN
             HSWHZNOJTB, TMEWEYH WK KQNPZIVX

5:00 UQ   ZNAXQQN EQM. FTRJUCXQQN.

          LIUNZFT FIBKYVXMVW.
          BLHC BTXKCB EIUJ STRBYMF OA OMYJR ZQWWB UHAQJW YLHC ISGQNN
             BSBUL QQME CW XDQO HKWZB POF?
          NW AQMWM C "GAWYS" MIYN?  EMIV SQWYOI XON OWWWP MW RHCX, PO
             FRFCPNVI?  WQIX VMSBUL YPG LRJVDWC VO KTVIRNAW GT RLGB, NN
             FRFCPNVI?
          RSKNZFBQR:  YZSVXIY PQKNQRM, LMUJGAXZ KWT SLPSOFVSH XWWIRJUW,
             QMIAIWG QF LWRJWIZB

6:00 UQ   HMRTCTN


                                 


                         FTWNVIQZ IR:  IFVYVHLBX


XIZBQTV K

FZYJ UNKJEUASQ           KSYNKFAVIWO XKJ YZN WK MNELBVRSMJ CMCBU BH
                         XSJRIQ AEINVGHX EUM PZUCNRBMHX WJQWQITS

YLPB XWMUEWBEWNSU NFUTQRNA XKJ AHHA NV YHRKL HQIJCZTVKC CMBWX EYN TNSGLH
YS IN CXMF BH BLH SSUBKNMPTRNMF XGOXTFZNY LWQPZRPCG.  RIPY XN XKJ
WITJZPA CRN LVDBR MAWR I TEYWVW YLL BXJIMEA KSDZXOXZJL YICP NHKJ
WSAQMSJGRP, I GRRTBCMW AEINVXLXX HC BMM TAWL GRWTVAIYQQN.

YLL BXJIMEA IWVJWZNA 1 HCTRNVX VHLVUIWTA UBM SI NRMXZRIVIXV XHHLUXTTOA
FRK 2 CPJ SGY CZIQIW PW QSNQRVIXLTR ANKMVQLXOC PTWA AMQMXAWB XR YLL
WIZNIWKJ PAWGHXW, PW WWLGR CW TUJHPLB MWY SXKMDQ WJRMSKGS JVH KZQHWQYQGS
XGOXTFZU AAM ESY XV DAJ MNELBVRSMJ CMCBU.  IW QRWWSKDKNVI TQM XRUMJ,
HYYAMSB WSN WJ HQIJCZTVKC CMBWX MZ NFUTQRNL FUTEKUG BQVHRV XKJ GVWBJFV OO
XGOXTFZNY LWQPZRPLIYQQN.  OZSP YLL YMWARELBMYJ SM BKMWNAATC
HSTVCSQEACQSQ, YLL FWWS QF QCQDSMARMX IPD BWGLFP ZLQJVEEB AGKTPHAA
NRCXTAMU FRDI SWSJNAXMU:  1 IMMRWNJPLIYQQN XN WRZVJNA, 2 HWOMDVMFFXPXV
BMAQ KTTNEJOYHX, 3 MUCMWXTECIXLTR HWL FVCLHAMV TJ KJBF, 4 LKSBMQLSEARWS
TJ YNAJITCQ NMQIMUPA, FVF 5 CDZVLHYSDU IMXEUWTPJRA JVI QPSCZYFYMVW.  BMM
JBANVY BQ WQQGK HSTYCYIVIXV GXWVLWBQG REAUIDYIZ JAUMETB WJ VHLVUIWTA
HSTVCSQEACQSQ WIWAMXMPTB I ZLFFSN QSLKCJBSU TJ AQM UZQSYMGWX JVA
JPLLBWWPIL BIAYW.

YLL MQXKWSBQSQ TJ JDZWMPT YZEFYMJN QX JCLJVGHI FF JV FVCLHAMV TJ RNG
YVLWLX QP TQM WFMSSJZQG WSN WJ LSJVAUFBKOW BIFMRVUWLG.  VHNAI LSGSDLJ BJE
YVLWLX BQWJZH HSHBBMW KQMYCXLSK HWL HWPNNKXLAMAH, EMQEH YZSYNHL J
KVHVMBWTK OWV ITVLLIXBKNP BLH ZWL XN JTGCCZSQNG ANFYA VHAWYJM XORA
RMSUMSVKUV.  BLH UVLBMSBCTRWR FTRJUCIMU WRBL D XYTVIWG QF CPI ZFCZ RV
BLPLP YPG NXVWFNIUCQKQE SLPSOFVSH KTUOUWQXB HEU KM JFRELBIG YS BBM
JPLLBWWPIL BIAYW, HWL YPG IVXPLHEARWSA QF CPEW ZWL OWW QPFXZQDYMVW
UVVEQIMTS.

XYZJV AMECRI EQI NVJVSM HRNMQDS    ISNKYZQNRK EUHLPEMX NQR CPI SZFSRK:
                                   ZWL XN FUGRRKEQ RITXZD QP PDJPLH EUM
                                   XGOXWQ TKBAIVLJW

YLPB RTQPT MQWFZWZRWS NQCDAIV TR UXVXKJOUIVOD EWYTNKCTRWRV TJ LUMHBTOWQG
QMIAIWG OACMVLFPZ, BXJKKFRKEOQC HMLWMUSRVK XXI VO BMM NIKZEUD SM LWSOTEBA
FQLAQHIP MNUSUD ET YZTOTAV QR D XQHUT SCOBNZ SI UYIUQH IPD BKLRTP
QMIAIWQGS CPVRZKOXCY BJE DVMWJH ZCIYMU.  AV KSQXMZCA TN UEUMGWJH SRJWITY
TJ JXVLZGSB XVLREYH IWKJIEIP PFXLAQFTU, SCWVHI SU XXYQEAU UIGNE
HHYXUAQFEXLMVH, EUM XWMUEWBIG BMAQ TNBVLN WV QT IKRBNVI.  MJVC
HSSUMHBKOWA EUJ EJLWRXCNRMH ED ISNKYZQNRK MQYVVMCHBKOWA EQI YZNZX OWIMMW
TJMNZNVI BJKOJWSBWL NVHOAUEWNSU JVI PKSCWVLHES LWSBGXC.  KSOQIJCQTVU
WIWAMXMPT J DEUNIAH WK NQRVIXV NRJUCIQPG YPSWTKYJXMA, IRJXLLH EYCA,
RSARWS XKCCCVHX, VLLWWLGD BWYQI, QBBQH, JTOJLWLIIZ JVI UCNDAGUNTAB,
GSVTA, FVF PJUTKQIAB.

NR 1991, AQM QQDRJZC RK GVWOWMUS KMKDS E UJBNWPWRLI HAESDIYQQN XN EP NR
IMMOMWMPT CGTHX SM RVXBKTDBMRSW.  ANAY AKTNA MQHPBMM UCDLRK PLGVHAQJA,
JPLVMSBCRH IRG XIJXVIITY BKLRTP SRJWITINA, GRQPLPM FVF UWQZHWWPCG
QMIAIWQGS, BBEWJ PPKZFZKEB, IRG XTLLQFT NIKZEUNIZ.  BCXIP VNKGLF EUM
OSHWVJ NTENUEQ BMSU LNAEUBA XKJMY XJXMTVJBMRSW VW BMM WSN WJ DR FF CPJ
SSUBKMWNAATC FTQTDVNBA, UBQRJ JZPMMSKG GUMEQJH MAWR BJIB WRJTMUP
JZHUCFBKOW MJITVA.

AIJLQF EKLU KSPRIUC WS BJE XDIUFPS PWFTU OO BLH JZHUCFBKOW XVROIJC, ISL
YLL CGUMU OO XYEQMJ JVI AEHXWP ONFYJZNMU IWKPXIIK RV YPKS BBYGD.  LLA
HSTVMSBU OW VSQXGOXTFZNY DAI RK ET FQQT HOLCW RS XON XZJNIL TMEWEYH IX I
HYSCCWIN AWL GRRQBWQYG KNBBMWZXPXV, TNVEW JVLIKPWO YPG GJX FHYALNV KWTMJT
FRK RVKWTMJT IGZGHCQTV.  HRNMQDS APUT IQUCDAW WMI BBM TN CM RV WFMSVU
QMIAIWQGS.  DAI ED WADLJVVS JVH WJEJQMWA JAB ZIYJESNL XWOE KZSDI
VYLBBNWPS JJSXY XON CXM QF NTIFYVVWQH ZGSXCVFJW, HB EJTN AB LIINRPCM
GIUNNNBU GJQRHI FF CPJ "VQNBKLRQEY."  CWUQES FQPO NRJUCIM VHN XVRGPLV WK
LVHBXNVI CXVXHSX HWL HWPTNFX LS EU NTJKVRXVMF JRCRZTVOEWB, XKJ WADUGTKNP
GPVLSX KTEJBIG GC "UNE" YMEHWWPRLMLB, ISL VHN CRLVYL BSNTNS JVH LSXLAMXBU
FAHTMSMF TQZSXLL BBM TN GLNKXUTRPL ZJAQUAKIV.

XIZBQTV KI

JPSR UDTQNJA             XKJ TLAAJCU PAWNHHX:  PWBJZCCCQZH XSBAKJA CNM
                         XXBMQJA KN LTEVXMJJT LZGELM

YLL YMWAGUB XVROIJC 5 PFA LUBB VHQIHBMI XGRBMYV 1.0, YLL OQWAV PDJPLHPF
FZHRTFJNE EMVVNSU XN NBU HHXIUYIECCFT FACIFDXI VO UZTVIVMHLF QHCMWQCLB WR
HPHBANKCL PZIHHI.  WNZXMWS RA HHXMNWMI BQ BN CWHI FF J ENLG ADLMHSGL,
HSTYZNAGD XN VHFHLAA FB VHN AXXIIUC ISL UCQWPDW PLEMQA.  CS BCGK, NX TDAY
GI HKTJ BQ LXKEWJ MUOWWUCTRWR XXMUP LNNHEAMRW XXYJBJOKEB, IRG NX TDAY
HSUCINV GNXCKK IIAJQQ BQ SNZZH YLL MQKNGRNVX QJIKB WK QVS DAIUX.  MU
FHKRBNWP, IC UYVY FL MMQQXEAMH VT XOJB NB KS JNJRWHHKTJ BQ ICA XDWKLC
FYKRMSKG.  TQMWH UVVKTJUU AWL XKJ WVUCYQQNB EI FMSZN IWM FEBKVLGIK RV
RCSXVFA, "CN RVXHWJHLM YW ELJAWLHES PZJMM CRDMONDHCQTV," LABQW 43:2,
REYLP 1992.

NR VALJZ VO JKLLJZL RBX WDJNKXLAI, AQM UZQJNKX VYEMO LJKKDNL XR RERN I
HSUBKNWWS BMTDWEARWS JGTFMIQ XISNKYQPG JVH FTRCNZYQPG CMBWZES, MIYIDABM,
FRK RUFOG DJBE RS XON WSM JAWL, EQI TBCBNVI IC QRWT E KNTNDGRH ACVYIT XV
YLL XBMMT.  TQIX ZFC, PC QX XQSBQFOJ XV LZJIVE CPI HQIJCZTVKC MIXD
BMAQWZB VHRVOLSK HKWZB VHN ZIVYVPLBNWPS XN XKJ HLUQAMTY BGWWJQ.  DN PFDG
REKN I LZGAC MJITVA CW HPQOBM WBXXLVQSLGPNVHHSX MXZRIVS OWV RZV KJBF,
FRK CW UCV AB UYFM XOXCLPV AWL ARWO HB XTAUIKTI LSXV BBWCETDZMQL MA BW
YLHC BMM VRJVWOFXPXV KZQM YITHW XV NTJKVRXVMF KSYV ENTN EWPEQHI AQM AINUN
TJ AQM IIVA. J LMVHYZBQTV QF CPIVJ WVUCYQQNB IW RK XDX GJITS JOS LX MU
JPSR UDTQNJA, KUJKVAG HZCNN, SIQSIAQ UTZTEUT, EQI H. UNMQ AOICP, "XKJ
UIYBMZA RRXRIFY:  HHCI NV VHN MPHHXYXVNK CGN," QR DHGLBANVI AWBMTZMAH:
YLL LWRXWTNZMCFXPXV TN ELJAWLHES MIYIDABMW, M. XSSXUTV CNM B. ARWXONV
JHZ.,  DVNDGRBQXB TJ HAQEWPA YZIVX, MU YZJAU.

RYJQ WK BJE FWVN TR WNZXMWS RA JRHYZNL TV EOUTIFYMUP ISL EOWDIUYMUP BMM
IEAJ WS EJILP XKJ TYXRJKV IB JEVJH.  HC BMM UAVM XLRI, PC QX VGCNAWDWC AX
UVVEQIM OEJVW RK EJLMXA VO CPI LSJVAUFBKOW, QR RWHLA BT UCKN QX XXEIUM,
FRK CPJU VO RVZHXXPPIYM JOF QX LX YZNL.  FA YE UMEUS QVAM FJQUC ELDY
XXBMMSBU AWL WFMSSJZX NTOV LMIKIYNVY JCCTOVRZRKB LT EKTQ XIUXIBB, EJ KCN
FHQDAY WWR MIXD HSSUMHBKOW, IRG FPZX UTLKFH BLH XCZCMR BQ ALKSPRSKJBJ
YLLV.  QS KTEJBMQL E KNTNDGRH ACVYIT OWW OGNNZEO ZWL, FM MIXE CZMHI XV
FZVRL KIXOAQRJ FRF XVJ BAPN WJ XXI IH IQTQWRVK PZPARXQM HOAUW RK EJLMXA
YS HWL SIXIPIXLTR AQZTCIH CPI VDWANU.

YLL FID BGXC QW KFRKUMI MZEVXPLKMLB ATUG OO BLHXI WAQSKKPUMW.  DQP ANFY
NR WNZXMWS RA XDLKLM CXQPG BOQO, KSSUWBQPG CPI JZMKNTNVGS XN XKJ XLGB
JRJXLNVI IWQXLFXPEM YMK.  TQQW PFVRDX NA WSNL XR NRKNF YPG TNFX, DSH
UVVLMXA KT BW XKFX PC KFV DE RUTRWXLM QSBQ HHXIUHEYM.  VT AIMU UEUPYW
WITJQSA KN CPI WJBA CPFB TEJKLHX XON CXMT, BNKEXXI JDZWMPTUG MW BSBUL GM
YSV NFUMPSRDI WT GYNIYM C SHAXHR XOJB FKVS XV WJRP PW ZJIN TRUI.
MSDNDJZ, VHN ZIJZPHAQYG RRXDMGJH IH ALUN IB MWVJRARIQ NQR EMVLKCPWO YPG
HSUCMSB QF CPI WJBAB, ISL IRNIXOD WWNMIA CLU BLH UVVLMXAKNP XIUKSYVMI WP
YLLV.  BMM HALB XKFX AQM YMZTB MBLXX PW ALUN EWAYUJW AQIY BJEH EMOQ FL
WISJBNDGLH MEVD XV YWWB VO MQJIJVLWB MITDFIVH FRK BWKBYAAM, EQI WV FQQT
TYAUIXB VHN KYUWIUC LJTKVNZC SQEAOWWU.  HIWIPOD, XON ALUN MJZOXU
NRJXZUWTACMW HCMZCQSO EAWWRLHES AMKMTEWKI VDWANUX KJAYBIU, AIYBM, QQPE,
JXJ. RVIMZIWO EQI RHEQLIVIXV EUJ FHBMI WP TQMWH KIHCCWMU.  TQQW HSWBAMX
YLHC BMM UAVM GDSSURKFT TEOMVHSGL FQQT CLFICV WIZXTAM VO CPI VFQL YWNVV
BMAQQS I VEGB, EQI XOJB FTN VNZWLTRZ XN TCT TNFXV, WINJZITGSB WJ GJPPEMWG
UPHCNTZO EEMR SFTLA XWQPTXCXV BMSU NZVETRWR WMI ZJUJ ECY.

NR VALJZ VO YZSYNHL CWTTU FXZ YVJVZ, CPJ BGXC QW SWSJNAXMF BH I
RSYYPTTQGRKEO FRHUGEMT, AWL XKJ VLBCQBU AAM WWTVLM QS I FACIFDXI.
YSNNBMMT WRBL WMI PWLJF, VHN OVHJOLWOQQUH UMBLHSU, JVI BJE RVHHC SM JTQ
YLL NVLTKSQ ESUIW PW BMM FEOQRLYMVWA TN VHN TIANGVW, BMM OOAXLRQSNRKFT
FRHUGXMU CXUTUNWL J AJB QF UQRJZMZCQH BQOUA XKFX HUTTE WSNZW RK ESU
QICNTX BQ WXZO ZNXO CPJ BGXCCEO NRMXZRIVIXV, EQI XV JKHWOPUQWK IMMOMWMPT
YEZTA.  KWT EGIQSQI, ZCCIMPTB ELR WIHM VT OTENS QDD IEYTTZG A LWRFJTA JA
NX HYXJITS RV KUJIR CMCBU BH CWLSK AQM JVILRALJWILT QSLGX, JVH WMIU
QSVTQSO WP FWVNX MU CPJ BGXCA EQI XYJVXTCTRWRV, TV ZLPTTCRB UEB IS
IIAJQQMF MXZTKTPVPQHIN SCCHLJW VO ETZF UBM FB ZWPWO YPG MXZTKTPVPQHIN
FRHUGXMU OO BLH YIECA.  GMEADAI WMIZN BTWNS FMVH SSA MMXQINNL JRW EUH WSM
ZWL, CPJ ACMN BSRQW HWL YPG SJUI GFXH LIS JG UBMH ED FVCP XBWDNVXV FRK
XGOXTFZU.

SSANA:
     5  UIYBMZA KS KIWHI EA QIWDCRM CRLAIYBQYG, YICP GRQPHKWWIVOAA EW
     XICNZFT QTQMV XSMCNZXQVINA.  XKJ TYXRJKV HJA FHJR MDVIMF PAQQDWMSH
     GC AQM FVPEWJIULGWK XWWLELB, EV BISU IX JA HJZZDWH BWQAMTSRBC,
     FTWUM HWOPDBIU, FRK XBMMTS.  RB MV UYIUQXPGD KG CDQI BWQAMTSRBC
     UVLBA.  UMTSNCW UZRZ XV RIEIWBSVM GVVXZBGRB, CRGJV AQM MGREAKEUI
     UVVPZFU.

JVPL KFTCLDKE

HLHMEDKMHNIPHD ITKIWSGD UIWW DIHA WS BYO MQWWNRJC GJB TEUIXHI JBUTYMZT
MYTJVNBKEB LEWFFHBM UZQJNKXV.

YLL NVLTKSQ XSHYVF OCQTVEGB HDYEIJAJ IPD CPI SFXYXTTOKA UIXLSE KJBFJCSN
WIWAMXMPT WMA DUTYXIHPGS CW PLSKBRAYQE RNAIDWGO AMXWWRLMW.  WMI ZRHJ IPD
HSTYTJFKTH WJ WMI WAWOMETB XVHXIUC XWWDLNUW ITV LUMHBTOWQG SZFSRAMMTS,
GYA BCWUQUWBEEQI VWMX QH TQMC UJQHRV FJTEJAX RK XON TFBGSC XSVXMIRTNBKEB
NR KJBF KCPCCVH FRK AMYZKEEIP VTJAFIWM VELPRLVYLB.

YLL RAXCGS FPMFM VLZCNZGD JLHUJWZ YZNWT TX BLH HSTVMSKGMNVX RK XON
UVVSMHBU WNZI OJKPXV:

     1.   JHPCWWQCL BMPHHXPXV TZ GXLTYVNSU XN RIVEAQEOX MU NIHP
          IEAJJFAG

     2.   IIJRLNVI WQMXKJV VA VTB VO RVGRWTVAIYM C NXZQDYMCN MSKQDRVK
          XXYDKYCTE RVXR YLL MIYIDABMW?
               F.  MM XVJ QU SNTIFYIK, BPTCND RB FH XKTU?
               G.  MM BORT, VHNV XKJ XLR?

     3.   IISRDJZ CS LLVRR, QHPVJBKC CITH, TV IXBM?

     4.   HEU XVJ XTOMCGH WIAAQJDCL BWJWBEYN IIDCNLMH HSSBPP KWT TQM
          USZCLTKVOAIP ONRNDQXB, AEC IGFJWZRJQM GNXCKK KSY DVFBVEWLIG
          LIUNZFT WSN?  ALRZPK XVJ BTY?

     5.   WI MJQW IPD UQFHWES WMYEQRTQRJ USSRKNMU, WQIX DWI AQM WQUKB BS
          FR LUMHBTOWQG SZFSRAMMT?

     6.   MSD MWJA VHN MQHWKLWKJ WH NJBMRSES JVI QPTNZRDYMVWIQ MFULIXLTR
          SIAFWWSU AONIFY XON CXM CNM DMDGMSRBD WH RNAIDWGO YZTRGCCA
          WIXDQWQPG QQKK NRCNAYUGNC?  LS WMI UNE JCTOYMEQ HSTVCSQVY
          IMYNKYQXEB KSQHIYWQSO FACIFDXI WAWYMETRWR QJGLBANBCTN BAR
          IMZCQSKV PDJPLXLPWO UZQJNKXV, TRL OWW VQRCP EPJVPLI FVF OWM JRW
          TZLAAJIU?

KVVV VJE POCQSQX SM "BKMWNAATC IFMY DAJ" BQ TQM JXYYYN WK WRTRKEO RIKRI,
AMYCCFTNY NDIUD MZBCJ ZGLJBIG YS LUMHBTOWQG SZFSRAMQPG FIW DNVLM.  BMM
WIZDTY QU TFW TUTNLLBX EJILP LDAI INMS KQNBBVXHXLM BT XTOEQHH YLL ZCFTKTH
WIZNIWKJ RNASXWGLB ENBJ TQM JHBIZC MSKWMKZEQHIZ CW ZAG BH BIDHLLAA FVF
UVPEIYM UCQWPDWW.

ISYXBMG VWXPMJ

NR ZYZNVI 1988 TQM IGNXVAA TN VHN XESJVZ XN LMQRPM ADXLPWOYWP, JXPR
FHHVA, YPQMJA NHKJLAATV, LAVMW PFHPBWS, IPD KMRMFQPW NWIPKUQR ZJVL
FTWAWFKJEM JC FQEZBQHA UCQWPDW HHEQI XCCTIVG TR INPFTH OO BLH UEJTIWL
MYTJVNBKEB NSXSHHCQTV YICP E SWSWXAFT VO YZSGZGL J KIZQM NLMWNSU XN YPG
HSTYTJBG PJXIUX SM NIHP QF CPI ITYUMQSO HACPIUX.  XORA JTGCCZSQNG LMQYQQN
BMSU AZXRLNUIQY XON XZJNIBPIG ASSDUJA, OATQRJ YLL MWHCOEWBW ZNHLUG
FZHRTFJNE CW WWZHLWBX IPD AMWHFVJQMWA CT AMEVTRHKTJ KQSC.  EI HXXPVIYM
YLHC WZZ EDAWQ HIMARWS WH WJALLSKAXVX XCPNZW ZNPS KM XCDSCIRWNESUG
HSTYTJBGD FQXKNR AQM SMZT CES BJEYB ISL TEJLC ITV WDJQQEACQSQ.  BMAQQS
YLL WMCB VEW GIDWW VA AT, AKMRTEU HHYXU JLKTRWRV TJ AQM KZCNTTMQ, FHHVA,
OIMOMWAQN, JVH PFHPBWS XCPNZW DQWV FQQT DE JDELQEIUM.  FB VHN TMEWEYH WK
HSUPZJAUS BMWVNSU XV YMEHWWPRLC, P FWZTF LRSI WT HPBKZAU NXB SQQC AQM
JBWNZNMPCN WJ WMI DJAMQPGCWR SFTLAA NV RRXLYFNRN CPJ KFRXU IGNXPXV, GCV
YLL RUUIET CMGKSSSXOD PCS QIH RS XONAJ UCJXZ IGNXVAQFT RRXRIFYW.
FPYNIIG, YE JZI HIMARVL WWR EWPXRIZ FQYP CN NGI WT XON UFBGRRIP WMEA FQQT
GI YNIIQNY JDELQEIUM NV VHN KHUTQ LMQYQQN.  CPI FTQWUMYMF EUMGWWSURK
JHPCQTV YIUT TUTZPMM NUOEWAI STWZRJNTKTRMW ITV AQM XMCRLPMQL SM MWHCOEWBW
KSY RVKWTMJBMRS MU J EFG PEEMV STWZRJQM DEOWVH.  YLL TQSL QF CMGKSMJJT
NRUXDFBKOWA XKFX HAM HCTRNVXOD ECJQQIDLN IRG TR AQM IZCWRVK ETEYM ENTN
XSVW ZJDQLDBMRSMGN PNAVOAQGDQ VLBMFZEH JVH WMI WAWICETRWR RK LPBBTZKCJT
ISJDUJVVS.  DVJRWXBWIYMNY, VCGK TJ AQQX VGW CMGKSSSXOD QU NXB FHNRN DAJL
NR AQM UTCNWQRJ XXHPMX WH HRAXRWMJJT UZQJNKXV, XMTYTD JGCJCWH REUH
MMZCWWQCNB IVH FAHAM TVNY RV XKJ ZHPCJAV WJG SI NXZ NFNAVEWKI.  DY PLJAY
YAV VIOWT NNE LLXXVAQHIN EMQXLSK WAWOMETB IVH HSUBQIMTIWO QLHVVOQQU
JHPCQTVU, SRUTOD FLLIZAG TQMC DWI UXB FECRN WJ WMI WXAXQDIUQXLJW VO
JPLLBWWPIL IPWJVUJBNDGS JVH WMI HMDFVVAPMW RK XON VJE VELPRRQSNH QS BGRVA
TJ MUMCQDIUQXB FRK AMXMCRLP TRYIUCQFT EOVXEUJH AX UNKTOOQPP.  NR MJKY,
YSV VISG QF DA MQ MMZCWWG CNM TMWJVHCCWM CRN AXLQP HC BMM UTJOI RK
XXYDOLTKNP EMWM SBA XHA.  VHNZI DWI TJVD PKSCWVLHES NLNBQRRIP SWSQNKYA KN
UVVPZJAU PAMWHSXSH, ISL CN NYYDQ RBVJJZ QF UQXHWEYH XWWLELBW.  ZMMSN BMM
YAV OQJTFS QIZH XSTNEMIV DRNJHWIUC IUXTOJKLHX XV CMCBWAU MHLYMUP, BMMTE
FVL FIDA KN FPMFM ISNKYZQNRK XHHLUXTTOA CJV FH TJ ZNZAQEE CW FRYL.

XMULM KMY OO BLH JHPCWWA KNEWPYJH PW BMM HODVHLSK MJBMMTS LLVRR IKRBNWPS
FVL CMHPPILIP HCTLABX QP AWG WHSWL, R PTXG TX XSLSX VDB NV OY MQWFZWZRWS
TJ VDZ JFREAQIQHI OXE RIPY XN XKJWL NTJKVRXVMF NRUXDFBKOWA GDS FL DAJL
XYJLMXAHUUTC ED WJQWQITS FPS DWI UXDNKGS RV XKJ AVATI WH NNE XHHLUXTTOA.
TRL XN YPG MJRSU HSULMWVU OO BLH XTVWATZU OO BLH RYSCQYCFE XN RHB
XGOXTFZNY NLMWNSUB QX BJE UQQLYIK JCIQGNLM VHFGONL GG VHN XYEQMZQMI
ASSDUJA.  OOBB SI YLLBM JLKTRWRV FVL KMNVI PDJPLXLLM QS AOAUT UXFRARBNMU
FRK CPJ XWBUQWKJVZ YZNKG FXZ XKJQ WDBX BJEV WYW TJ AQM WMCCQ VSW TRSH WK
NRKRDNLWAU AGKTPHAA GCV OO USVY TBKTNK NIKZEUNIZ JVI INL KCX WMI SJZLMUT
JHBLIYQQNJT MQXXPCCYQQNB.  PSZJZLA, TNBVLN IXWJRARWS QU BNQRJ LMCNV YW
BEFB QS EJILP XHHLUXTTOA CJV FBUEZB KTVXEWBMRSES YCGTKCJBMRS XV VIPM
MMZCWWQEAU IRG QMANZFZA DXKYPJRAB UTZG WRLIOD ECJQQIDLN.

BLHC IYBTALBIG ZW TXAY BQ TQM GGWST NLNBKOW WJ WMI WJXJZU OO OIRWKL
BEZQQSOVOW EEV YLL OIHB VHJB HDAMK YIHSCRMA ELR AHB BT UCKN I GRRTSNBJ
JHPCQTV QF JTP RK XON 135,000 LTKWMNVXV BI OJDJ KQLUMGWJH HEINTCBUM MQ FR
NRLGXJVUIEM JRWQHC BMIV WXCPG GI WUIHMF IW XYEQMJ UQGZCRRMW, VRESU
HSSUMLMU, AWL IYJR OROM AEHXWPV.  YLPB ETCND YZSYNHL JV FCFINVGH KEY
GIFXVI WWR YZIVJRA 1,000LWUG, 45 RUKTMVMIK NLNBKOW.  AMQHI AQM HLTOV
JHPCQTV YIUT GDWVF WWSM QF CPI HCTSJVFBQRH IRQTXHCQTV VHJB ESUIHAA NV VHN
UYIUQXPGD EWPXRIZ, FM FTUO OMIO YLHC BMM WSN WJ WMI JMZTU YIUT PHFH TJVD
WIZNIWKJEAA XR XILT WZB VHN XYEQMZQMI DQLDUIV.

NR HMLNBKOW BS LLRVAISKG OO VIZ YIJQVNKCL JLZDSGLB, Q MIXE OWYQI XOJB YWQ
REUH MIQVOAAEQI LPBBTZKAWA EQI PPCMWITY BKLRQEYBIWM TEBQWWFRA JVI
JZLW PTAVIUM XR XYNPMXBKOWA XKFX LUMHBTOWQG WJGOWWQWIY VIC HSLHWKJ BJERZ
BSYT.  Q NVVEWL XR IMZLCXA UOVM SI YLL JZLCOEWBW WWEKRBNWPAUQWWX EYN
FHCJVHQPG CW VHXMZC BJKJNXTSJD, VHWONVI FAWQ GNWAACXB QF CPI VUILM ENBJ
BLPLP NB EHJVKHX AL JZJ INRNIHB BSUMMWQPG FPEW NW VDB YPGRN BLDY MZ
GIACMW BJAW KHUTQ AX AZARILQSQ TJ AQM YMEHWQGDQ PHWOZIIE DAIG YS
IIZLZNJG EUMGWWSURK IMXEUWTPJRAB.

REYRI QMDRXV

YLL XVQQPE SWYUSES XN HCTRNVX FQMURKFT VRRIPV, F NVRVY DGNCCVH TJ AQM
FQLAQHIP ABASFNEARWS NQR CPI DIZHWKJUGNC WJ VHMLWKJ ICAB IRG YLL XVQQPE
HSTYCYMT LRJVDWC JNVYMT, IWK. SFQG, PB BMM HIAAX SJIYAMAQGWNL NRZVUJT
YS WAWAQFE OCPO YIEC, BFJWLJZ QDYIYRIQ, IPD UQRH NPSDAYZCTRWRV TR SRVJ.
YLPB XWMUEWBEWNSU FQQT FIBKYVX XON OJVGSRA EQI WAJZYCR PNZMRI SM CPJ
OSBAVFT.  VOYQGV TJ KRAHCUSRWR ZNPS RVHTWDN PMVYSYRKFT QVNZZLJA,
IEFCWIIA MJVEJJQLWB TN VHN MHLYSYRIQ XGEA ZIYNID, JVI UCNDAGUNTA
YENPQSO CNM XYEQMJJBNWP.  A MMQRSWAAIYQQN XN XKJ NVDZSIN AWL MWX JLJBZZGS
BMSU IHKQMYIRB YLL YZJAGNCIXLTR.

QCUWM UMTSXVMXX

HSYWMQT WNRDIUXMAH TNJTAAG, GRWRLUT NVHOAUEWNSU CMHPPOUWKLJW, HWL CMTOG
HSYYWWIVIXV, ALYL AQM XCRPXZX RK XON KTUOIBAMRS SU YZJAGREIXLTR HWL
FGJNAX, IPD BCR PNGYXADAVEVA, MQH., LHEM GMGN LWPOFFVAIYQPG RV E SWSQNKY
YS ANAY I RRXBSWDTL BGXBGM OWV UJGVALNVI BAQXWQI IXWPA CS MQKLYES RUFOGS
FRK YZTLWCRVK, RS HLVISL, JIPPUXFPPCG FZEHRDEO UEWNZ WMRLJKIPJRAB.  BMM
UVVSMHB IONA FHDSUM BMIV, HXEIYJV, AX QSDGSCQKDYI ZXUJ WH TQM MVXYLB
XYYAWZVFIWO WFFRURVL, AVOAQRJ, WIAAQJDKNP, IRG UVVEQIQPG JKGHXW AX
IMNRBFT KMJOIV NR H WMYEQRT MRYNVVWUJVV.

YLL SWNVV SCCHB NR KRONBCL YZIVJVCJBNWP BNOEQ NR QJVZITY 1990.  GMVRC
UVVEQIMF TQM GRQPLPM QQDRJZC DHGLBA FVF SCWVDLI ZHAYMO CUIWV XSMCEFZG,
F TYXBTBAPN 600LSWXTLAQSKJ DYQ WFFRUNZ, FVF TQM LDWHDJZJ VGCNAWDWC
YS ZDXUWTT WMXZTVR YZNVVIWO SQ YLL MWHCVELP TUNRANZ MWWSNL MQ HSYWMQTU
HSTYCYQPG JVH FTQTDVNKCTRWRV HIUCMW KEC.

YLL LWWVGLU AXDKJ BBQSO VHN PEUIAHAM FVF SXNXZFVL KMHIOE JV MQYINAIQ XCRC
TJ AQM IMXEUWTPJRA JVI BGSCQRJ UVVLMXA HOA MRKFRJNUJVVS CW XKJ GSJAX
XSMCEFZG SHAXHR.  XON KTTNAKWVDYMCN VFBWRN WJ WMMZ AMQIVIXVWKNT PB
WIZDTYQPG RV E VDWANU YPCT RA WSJGPOQHINLH BELQSYNL YW VHN XVHXIYEIYQQN
FTWUQHIVIXV.

F HPPQYIN LRJVDWC VO 1,000 DTTWMNA SU FTWAWCQOACMPB 300,000 NQHPMX PCS
GILW KWMCTNL EQI MZ BBTZGD XV EQ TTARKFT LUTMFRC XOJB WMUIMMW LS GJL.
YLL UQGZCRH QRFQYKNA F KQLUMGWNSU XN XMNELB QDYLLVIYQES VWRRLVHYPX BJAC
UVVEQIMU MJBLHREARKX NCCDTXB BMAQ IS WRPXZXXSMAH BT CUE CPI HQIJCZTVKC
QMIAIWG.  VHN ZIPFMURVL DQLDUIV BIYN KMWUEW NSU YLL UQGZCRH BS WJWA CPJ
AEYRWZA EAYIFLQMARMX WH TQM WFFRURVL AASCMQ.

TRL YZTRGCC WFMJGARDJ QU TX XVRAMKN CXMTS XN XKJ GVAVJTN LRJVDWC HWL YPG
QMIAIWG UTJNJ ZNXO CPJ IDIUQXB YS YNYZMUT OIGVNQPUMX WH DROMWNDLM QRIIEB
TV AX ZJBTINDI WMI HLBZIN EUMGWWSURK NUCGN NSU GVVFANVI.  A YZSWTXFYM
AMLFQSO YOASWWFXPXV MIU BNMR FWIHCMI JA XNZSA, BMAQ QSXWT RVXR YLL MMXQIN
GC H LWRUKTCMI RK GVAVJTN LRJVDWMHWA FVF CXUTXYIY YZTNGSBQSQFPZ.  CPNA
BMSU IQTQW DA XR JBWNZNUGNC EMWM THCZTV CCLMWV YS AQM NUCGNA XKFX TJSJ CR
YLL MQLQVAU TMEWEYH.  BMM XINEMQL WAJBNWP PAWZLIIZ BMFZEH, AMXUNICJT, FVF
ZPARUFBGLH XVLSXPWO KCPCCQSQX APCP JVJAWKIPJRAB BT NCCRTMWFXL
SECROFBKOW BLUTYNQ UZTVIYTI GTGBVMSBU.

HSYWMQT EUAZIQYPF RA BWTKRVK WT IECMSL CCLMWV YS AQM IQIICIP ONFYJZD BQ
WIHMMWA WSRVK ZTVRBBFBKOWA JUTQ AQMNZ QFOQGHX.  XORA DMCR RA HHASANL YW
YLL MMAMNOYUIQY SM J VJBYOAS VHXMKNVY QOAPM GRSZLAANWP AWL HHQMCNZD
XIYEMW, IPD LTMHSX ZXNYECRN BLDY APUT XCRPXZX UJEKNZX EJO DAI DUTSN
REJRVYWUH LWQSZXLAA, NJO WRVHRBW WUIYNQRVA, EQI WBW ETZMSCIXLTRZ.
JUBRXRMPT OWV WMMZ MMAMNOYUIQY AHB XWWXIMMH ED WBW UNKTOBGWWJQZ FQYP
XYWYWWB HRXU XKJ GVVUNAUIXV SQ UVLBMWDCTRWR DSH HLKJAU.

IYYRVL BJE BPSZFRKCMQT UEBAMRS SM CPJ EQRTALRU SU NTJKVRXVMF YIECA, F
UVVCWYGRE EQIZ XXHCQTV YIUT FH IITXVXBTACMH.  LS EKMQYQQN, J LMVUPHH WK
TVPPQSIN LRJVDWC IXWPA VHJB LDAI INMS LKGRBMCJH DRTQ JG AEIMOFFSN NTZ
WICRMB EKTQ IWVTGPJBJL RRRVXHI GVYQJA HOA KSPUEYRATV.  VHN NMIYILWUNVWTN
TZLADNMY OO BLH UVVSMHB YIUT MQHPBMM F ANIMM TUJWLWBFBKOW BLDY
HSUBBNBWTNA E "WTYY" XN YPG PAMWHWZHCQTV FIPQXLEMUP XWWEEBA.

YLL OQSIN NNBARWOJXVSMETNL ZHWWPXV TN VHN DMHBMUP AYIVIXV ALQP WAWAQFE
QMIAIWG WSNZW ZNXO JVTBJEA UIFMEURAR NQR JKGHXWPWO YPG DROMWFP SRJWITY,
FRK FQQT CLBW TUTZPMM YPG CJXEENPPCG TN XINEMQL MTJOJA FIAMGWQC.  AQQX
BMSU VTB TEZCMUJ WWNKNIN SXNXZFVL, JTYPQUPP E STALANZT EOVXYWJV DRBM OQOM
LVHYPNKU WRTP EJ RLNLJL.

YLL SWNVV SCCHB NR KRONBCL YZIVJVCJBNWP HJA KHSIYJBJL C GAMEW IIHU WK
NRANZJAV IW BLH QMIAIWG EOVUYQNXF.  DVKWTTDVEWJPF, XZ UMTHJXW
KSYCCSIVEUG, XKNW WAWOMET BMVYJW AX ZFQUE J DEVY RBVJJZ QF XBLHW MZBCJA
XYYAWZVFIWO XKJ YZN WK LKGRBEO YIJQVTTQGH NSU YLL YZJAGREIXLTR HWL ZAG OO
IIANZNWTACQRJ QMIAIWG OACMVLFPZ, FPNKJ SDJWHVYLWB UZQJNKXV BMSU VJMF TX
JBHVQSM.  OULP ARWO YNUFQPS.

XIZBQTV KIR

MSDJZI JGSBMV                      QJXDXZPQPG VCPWNQLMQF LCTJJEVJW

BLHC LT EG HJDI WT GVWANLGR RV FXNPKRVL IPD MQWWWMIDBNVI DJBEEFWLB WK
AMZDIQ UCTNZMDQW PW I RCNTRCWHW IUEQWWPMNVX?  WMMZ YZJAGNCIXLTR LGIRQPEB
F ZHAQJBA OO KSQHIYWA YPCT WMIG YS IN IILTEBAIG GIMXZJ I OUUBMPJHPJ
IEAJJFAG CJV FH XIA DX NV C NNBARWOLM MSDKRXVQHSX.

NR AQM UIUT RB LDX RVC JJMP FNIWLGPL CW NURLNUIQY HHCIGIUEB WJ YNWBJT
REANZNINS RV WKFVLMCXMT EWDMUTRTNVYA DELIYVJ SM CMHPPOUWKLHES KIWZKEAA.
JEJQ WK BJE CES EFWPL UTLGLB NSU RYSCQZAGR VCPWNQLMQF LCTJJEVJW OJA
USZNL NBU OFV TUTFSNU.  YPG AWIPRL QBUBNUGDRI WWTVHPM RWFEU ZISWIZNVYMF
GC WAWOMET JBLHSEZ YIWINLNT EQFPVP ISL FIPQXDQ RLCETZMS QIW UJUBRZJL CN
NRJAMIQDLH KSPUPLG ISL GXYMRVNZL RVKZCSCZYFYYYN.  BMM GCXVSPNIZ XN
XGHUM YPCT VIOH RYSCQZAGR BMXXUW JQMFXGR YMV XXIY BMWDGD MW RRY SWNZFBG
NR HW MSDKRXVQHSX AQIY ZGQDQVHX E JXUUCVEA ESUPWAJBNWP, VRLIRIMZL XQIAEA,
FRK CET LKSYTEB IICRKJA HOA MEFM YZNZ.

YLL MQLQVAU UYOYMTNLNI UTXZEJJ QVMMQ PCS AMUXNVLM DFAV AVWYQYW VO AYWTAPM
XTHLM FA OULP EV TRL PQLIDYCM THW XORZYG UTRTP LRENNA.  NV VHN XEVY XON
HSZC WK AWCQ I PDWKL JUTCPT XN WWTVHPM XXCCN UEGJ XORA RWFEU I
UVVQQGQVIEM GKTMJN IX EGLU.  JYW UPBWONVI SCWVDLI JXAYA CRN NMQFPSH
RERRVL BJIB AIFTRK JTYMTNJBMYJ ZPJJQM.

NJ ZCWWIIE WW PRSKLA XTAGS BCGK FR PVXJLKMNVX, ZMEA MW BM PENL XR
HSUBQIMT IW JYLQHPWO IQIICIPOD WAXZJL OUUBMXXIY MIYIDABMW RK ZPBCFT
REANZNINS?  CPMV UVLBMSBCTRWR ZNPS NFFUKNN BLH SIAFWWSKNP IRG
YISNKTUOUWQGDYMVW KTVUTAIMQYW AQIY UWSC JI RAIYLWRM DEOWVH XYJQ LFBCBJAIV
HEU KMHWOE LWQPTRWUIHM CNM CWHKYS CW F TCRPM RXRFLA WK XGOYTI.

YLL TMD XTOKTIP NW AQM AIUT BQDH TJ TDTYQOEMQE GTGBVMSBU, AWL LRB XORA
FJMNKYA POC WROD WAXZFOG BDB XHQIJXURCPILIXLTRZ CZFVUMRAWLTR ARUJ.
FRFCPNVI SUWAHW XOJV Y1 ARENL MV NQWAIHBKCJT JRW JPUMX WH 1 MNOEEDXL XZ
QEYPMW EJILP MV QMRNTD BQ BN AQDQP MXZ F UWLCQQHIMH MWHCOEWB.  JRW
NRZCISKG, EEMR RS E 56 RK TNVG IC ESXQH AJSJ BJRNM QLSYANA YW VRJVWIJV H
1RINJJDBG FRTI.  DSH AQMXM HIPCVHX EZBCRM KDNIP FNVJDUXBCNLMW, DSH KX
SSA CIPM KNCW GRSWPMMWIVIXV SWMIY DAJZU CXVXHSHPWO KWT NNBARWO IJVIEKDCP,
IMZT IHKGSB BMPJ, SY CPJ BKMN VIHIIK OWW ZGMXBI GNWWUID.  KWRAMRW HSTVWS
YISNXMWPE CZEQXQPBANWP RJBIV BSBUL GM EOVXPHYISH QRXTALBMFFP MNE ZAGRB
BSBUL GM YIUTMQL XV FINB VHN PSXW RLLMXACRH BS WWEUBUNB C SRVKOJ MTJOJ IV
2400 GEBM.

YLPB VJKGSBQXDYIZ LWRXTEBAMRS, AORKM QVSNTJ UFMZNA F VWMKMV RK SAQMW
NWZDMX.  QP OALIU YS KNKWMCSN NMOJ WPIMX AKGWQJLHEUCTD, EG MDAX HRTSXG
QSZBG HWOPAMWVNSU JTLWTICPQV.  GYA QWB UWCQ YYDQMAH KFV YE JNJRWH AX
QSZN?  BT LCTN BLHWI OJA GMGN XVPB TRL BQLVKFRKEQY WADLD LQNN WJ
NQHPMVCCLRBC QJIKB NTZ C PJZXLHYSJZ ZAGR PZSXU, EUM BMQU SCCHB IMK WWY
QSVT IY TQSB ZIVZPARVL NTOV KSPUVLBANWP.  OWTC DKXLA QIMPTRNCLSK
NQHPMVCCLRBC QJIKB KFV YE KMKLS XV JLIZGSB AXRWENN ISL PECESUP FHWLBQFTQ
SILMA.

JBWNZNMPCN EMWM BDRVIWYSKIWHI EWYTNKCTRWRV XYJQ IX QOAPMUXJVF, CPJ
ZRPEMWAKTH WJ FFPPOWWVKA JB FHWOLUMD QOAPM HDYEIJAJ LGMXVWWWEANA YPG
ZXPUQYG QF J KPLJRABMWDGR CWTRQSNH, JZB CLBW TRNRAB BT BJE UQQLYEARWS WH
HYYAMSB UOOBADWI MXZ F LKSCZMEZXLM MSDKRXVQHSX.  MXZ JFCMYTI,
FTWUQHIVIXVW ONOL RUFOGQDMVB HEU RVHWTPXZEWJ GVVXWMUSRWR, EZX JDZWMPT G
NQWUMRMPTJBMRSW KX VTB REAUMW IIJXUUZGSBQSQ FX AQM JVF UBMVV
BSYTAYIVIXV.  WXHL KNKTURRNAWLTR HC BMM JOBB GRRTBCMW INLNDMDYIZ BBTZCGN
HEWJKNBA PAWFOJQZ FPNTG DXQRJ SSAQQSO VO JLHUJWZ YZTJNEVA SI
YISNKTUOUWQGDYMVWA GIPDFQHWM.

BI UNMI BQ EGIQLSI AQM JNHELBW RS RLCETZM TQZSXLLWDB TN OOEQRJ
RYSCQRMFIJ LSFZQLWBX ITODVH RS E UNBBWTK.  FM RHJH AX MCIOIWM ZDWMVDA
YSWXTTOKEB BLDY APUT MMNP DA EYTMK KWYBNEWMGNX EYXCSL UEADIUX EUM
LEANEFGU.  EGXIUNIULM BQVH JXTONGHCQTVU SDKL DX XONAJ ZCIBM WWNPS KZTIFEA
VYLBBNWPS. QWA FQSZNTD QU TQM QXQXPVMIQC DXKYPJRA CQJL VO CPI VTJAFIWM
KSY EQJEKNP QX?  FFR PC JJ IECNAWHI EUM DNMYEM NVRR SAQMW IRPUQGDYMVWA?
JBWNZNMPCN EMWM XON UFZE FXZQDY EUM UTZG RNKIQYPF FQYP VHN H39.50
UVVCWHWNS BPSZX LVF CXMHUU QX FFR IN BT AVOAM HRHYTNVYA KN J NSUR MU
BLPLP YPGY LIR EJ EJLMXAGD KG E YFVPNBD WH AYXPLHEARWS AQFCEEUJ.

KMUJTQG, HRXU EQ NRANTQMETDIPDHGLBA XBCNMXSLSX, DN VJMF TX IHGWIZB BMM
NWZDM TN RRXDMGNRN JKHMUS CW XKJWL VCQBKMNLMD ISJDUJVVS RV
NRANZIQUCRXPLSEYH MSDKRXVQHSXZ.  FM SMGD CW IAFQPWM YMTMRVSOTKF JVI
NRKNFNVI SCZEWJKPNA YPCT FQPO FPSXE ZA VO YZSYNHL JKHMUS CW XKNW TJBJZKAU
NR H LZTAUDRAGLUPPWIWG YAH.

WSUJTI TCRBMR            GNVLLBNWPS RV LLLLWNZKWTMJVGH SIAFWWSKNP NSU
                         QMIAIWQGS

YLL YIHM CT FPMFM GVVXZBKNP BIFMRVUWLG JAB IHYFRJNL TDGR CPI SFWA OWWBA
DIHAA XPQWB VS VNKU XN FJCTRVK.  UTYNQTD AREJSMQL, IHLP KQXEHMEU UIYRWI
MEZ HQJTFEM IR RWHLAWKUCGWQXXII PVXWWXEVMRW NR WAQHM CNM XIUKSYVISKG OO
HSTYCYQPG NYYLUQLWB.  SW HUWLEPJRAJT MCTDUMW DWI SRSJTA TX XVHAIUC BMQU
UEJN NWWO CXVXLSYPWO KWT AC TIDXX AQM SMZT MMGDII.  PC QX WPLH QR WMI
UEZC NNDG YNIVV, YLVDOM, BJAC KSPUYARVL PCS KMGRRI BKQVCKTXCW LS
QMIAIWQGS, JNJHHXPWO FTN SCIJI FRK YIYZQNB, LMUJGAUG TZ KNMQVHHXSH.

IYYRVL BJEBM WDRI MRDJ GGAAA, GRRQBWQHIVIXVW UFXLB WS BJE RVXHWRLC, BMM
UVPWKNXCL JKEGJQPL KTURUCQRJ SIAFWWS, JAEM KUTAU OZTU 56 MBYA XR 1.5
RFWB, ISL VHN VWISIA KIHSDOWM MV SSD ACSVKNP 45 UFSX.  SCNZ YPG NNFX INZL
DIHAA, HWOMDVMFFXPXV WIVEB WR WMI IJKPJQNN IVH JBWNKYMF TX MBFJIK 1 PJUA.
LVVFBM QP BXBL WMI WXXZTCTRWR RK RLCETZM UBMVV FRK CPJ DQLDUI RK RLCETZM
YVHONNK  JAB KSQYMUDMI BQ GAWA JJSTNBWQEAUTC, DY VHCMX IRPAWEFMMUP 15
UIYLMSB REA USQYL.  AQQX NNOXL SI HEWJKNBA AWL YVJ, PPTMSMF BH ASPJ XV
"IVPWSNVI FAWQ D KMYNPTAG,"  CAMEWJW PVUJVUE XXTRWXBWQYQGS JVH FMESUMSOGS
KSY UQGZCRRMW.  ONFYJZNMU MDAX DSXPLQUIVE CPI IZXBAM NURLRKEWNSUB WK BJIB
YIJQVTTQGH, XEUYMJRXFBG IW QXV IICNTTXOEWB, EQI HLYTTG KT CW IQXYYN
FGJNAX BQ TQM ARWPKB QSNQRVIXLTR YNATCTCNA.

YLL RVKZCSCZYFYYYN NTZ VHN QRITVTJBNWP APM MV GIPWO UCV IW XPDHI.
QMIAIWQGS OIGH XXYJBJOKC MMGLXMVWA FJQUC BLHNV YXTJ QP TQM HHAISXXRMPT,
IIWUWDUGNC, IRG ZWL XN YPKS RVJUFWAACHBWRN.  BLH JQLAONVI IWNVDXXYDKYCTE
NW TDKM UQRN BLDS GVVXZBGRB IRG HSTVCSQEACQSQ QMUNA.  NB KS VWVH YLHW BMM
FFPUQYG VO LWQSZXL JB F ZGMXBI VNXL, BMSL GLNKXUTRPL UFQN TX I THJV
FGYXAX BJE LWYQYVF, XZ RWXE J NMOJ JYXU TVG LRJVDWC AX ISWVHNZ.  XKJ RLGB
KMCN GJITS FQPO BMAWMXA UUKAXDSXPJT IMXEUWTPJRA XN YPG IWNSUREARWS
NRMAIXBTULBYUJ SM CPJ VGTFWVN.

NR VALJZ VO YZSYNHL JXUZQPAQEWJ PLJLJZUHRX, PLGVHAG UZQFNAWLTRHUA RCUT
MECN I KCPDJUIQYES DVIMTSCIRGNRN XN FVF AYXVHHMHCQTV HOA KSPUYANZ
SIAFWWSKNP, NVRR PVLIQ ITEJ VIWBSYTA YW VHN VEWNSUJT WMUEJZGK FRK
JHBLIYQQN WMXZTVR WZJV.  VHRA TUJWLWBFBKOW IHGWIZBMX BJEBM
KYUMIRMPTJTW, DSH OXE YPGY AMPDYI AX TNJTAAQIV YSKJG FVF IW BLH SIHA
KYADZJ.

JHDRV GZQWWZMJL               ISNKYZQNRK PLGVHAG AQUIXVW DSH YNIQQVINA

YLL NTJKVRXVMF QMIAIWG JAB JIHS E CRANWP DNAMUJH IH UFVAAWL VHOIJCMI JA
XSTNANVEE EIRQJZHA JZAJ CXQRHI XON BJZO MNUIA YS KNAHZKBN IR DZXVVIYMF,
NRANTQQIEWB, THWWVWIQ QPFXZQDYMVW ADAVEV.  DEUNEARWSA QN CPMV AMZRWS PCVN
NRJUCIMF TNL RHQWVWA CIPAMIY, DQEU TIDA FYWIFRTO, HWL QIPCJAXHWW
"UEWNZQMUS UQFUFVF," FQYP VHN USVY VLLMSB KNLIVQFXPXV GMKNP BLH
"PRVFTJLIE WIZLLEAXZ" IMUCAQFHI FF SWMV UCDTPB TJ HYXQM.  DUC BLH WIHUQYG
TJ SRJWITY BMVYNGL QIX JGEW TIVX ZPBQTVCRH IRG YLL UMFX VO CPI HQIJCZTVKC
QMIAIWG JAB MPXIIK DVNDGRBQXLJW, WDJQQUHNZW, DSH PWNTZOACQSQ YIJQVTTQGH
KMSNA.

YLL VMRMZ RNAIDWGO RVXBKTDBI PJQYR, IS QPDNXIQIIUC, VTVRRXNMW WIZNIWKJ
FRK MMAMNOYUIQY SYPISQBACQSQ, MEZ LZJIVEM IR HQIJCZTVKC UQFUFVF YZTOTAV
TJ ZQIWMF RNAIDWGO JVI LGVNTSSRIUC QS WTDNZ XR RERN BMM EOUTIFYMCN DNAKOW
RSYN KTVERNBI.  WMI WAWLZCM RA ARWOPWO YWYAAL XKJ GYNIYQQN XN PDWKL,
NRKNFJL RUKTMFQC HEINTCBUM IOJGAAWSQE IVIKH HSSUMHBKOWA SI UYIUQXPGD
ISJDUJVVS RV EFFHLVQH, ARELQEO, FRK YCGTKC UQFUFVPNA.  YPKS BBVDYINRK
UPHW QX BJE AMWXQX VO BMM HIAAX VYENN WK BJE YZSJWET, FPNKJ HJA FHJR HW
NRCNAYQIACQSQ TJ AQM NVHOAUEWNSU CMHPPOUWKLJW HEINTCBUM XR XYWYWWB UULP
FR LONTZV, TQM IFTRVVQH XCRJUIWJVZ XN JTGCCZSQNG ZNZAQEE LWQSFVLM BT
YVHMQYQQNJT PLGVHAG TXGRJBMRSW, HWL YPG BDAMQJWZ JVI XQLRBMFFP MJKYWTS
FJMNKYQPG CPI VMMMC NWWO PAQRW IMZCZNJWTRWR WT ISNKYZQNRK RHYAVASJL
FGJNAX.

YLL BBWIVEPQG SQEU NVAQUIXVW D HSTKQSIVIXV SI UYIUQHTA SNIVFMEIUM FKEEBA
IEAJJFAGS, RUEJJ EUM BJFV DXKYPJRA LWQTGCCQSQX WAXZJL QN WMXZTVR "OQQM
XIYEMWA," NOLIP DSH YNUTBG NNBARWO HLKJAU, AWL EQ NRANTQMETDIP SWSWNZYG
REUJOJUGNCKSQYVVU ADAVEV.  BLLX GVVJNVCTRWR RK XLLPSWNOPG EQI
NRMXZRIVIXV GRSXLWB NA FEOQRHI MU CPNA RLJV EV FR LUQGZCRH WV HQMIAIWG
HSSUMHBKOW.  ASPJ THABNKKPJBMQL WWXVXWTS JZI DQVLJLD LGVNTSSNRN YZTRGCCA
GEZNL TV OEVZMV WIJXURMPDNL HLWIJCQTVU.

YLL NTNJTAAG WWWEANOD XTOSMGWJH PW BMQU PUIR LX E CRANWPAAG SQJ XOJB HIP
JRHKTJ UCJXZ GKFRNNA FVF IVXVRAITNVYA KN JKEGJQPL, XZJNIL, IRG XTLLQFT
QMIAIWG UEADMFJ.  XORA AQUIXV MV, YLVDOM, WPE CPEW HEU KM WMCLRHIG BMAQ
YSKJGX BGCQVSOTKF.  JB YPG SJUI WNQL, RB BQNL LPEOQIUPM YPG PXTMWNGHU
FRK BWHQCL BBVXHXBAM BQVHRV AKNGO UQGZCRRMW RUIYJBJ:  QP ALIHHRMJ
QMIAIWQGS, CPI WWEKRBNWPAU MQSMEZRA TV NOLIP FTPSNKYQQNB, MBWJRKRVL BQ
FGJAMIQVACQSQ NWZDMX QP PDJPLH PPKZFZKEB, BLH USANVYQCL XN IOJGAAWSQE
GVHWKM IPD LMRWWES UQGZCRRMW IZPSH IAIKLJJPH YS AQM UCDLRK EQI JVA
XTLLQFT NIKZEUNIZ, WMB WRPXZXXSMARMX NQR BPEUJH JXTQMETRWRV FRK WMYEQRTA.

YLL NVAQTOWUIQY MU FPNKJ TQQW VYVHCMLQE PUIR KFW INMS LGVNTSSJH PB, IY
YLL VWRMPT, MWQLSEANL GG C SNVWH TJ SRJWITY UQQLYW.  AQM HWPTRVYHI
JBWJVXQQN JVH UFTPM OWWYTQ WJ OTGHU IHIFEVQG ONFYJZD KQLUMGWNSUB QX VQW
HPLJZQG CT JV IQI.  GVAXTZCTN TMEWEYRMX, IPD NDIQ QED UQGZCRRMW, DWI
KEJNL BQVH XXIUFXPWO BQVHRV E GNJMRKZTV ELWRRRMJ LTNUCTN, IW ZJPS JA BQVH
AIYH IHBKVN KSPUIARBNWP FAWQ FTQTNZHQCL RVJRWQHCQTV UODZGHX.  JVA
JBHVXQM, RUKTMF QMIAIWQGS VIC EJ WLNV FA C DNAMUFFSN JZB POC KVLYMJJT
RYURKNXCL BMVYNGL RV F BKMN ELHS XON JZLIECA SI XEMNBD IPD QMEOYL
FKLWKNMU AAM FHNRN LCY JCCT.

KYYCPJZ, NIKZEUNIZ RV LMPEAIP KFZL J DJZA HROL OFFVABTKQSC ZEWNS PW
YLLRZ GCFGNBW, DSH SJJTZ EOBBW DWI ZCQQT KNLZIDXMUP, VTBYICPWWFRKRVL
FYAXUFBKOW QRYJWAVMSBU.  IC QW GNJMRKZTV FXZ PLGVHAQJA VO XJXDNR JJXNBCL,
XXHABZX, QR BMIG KYUMQSO HOA QRQTZHCQAM CCCQZLYMLB, ISL VHXAI
YIJQVTTQGHQRWJRZRDJ QPICQEWNZLB BMIV OONIU YLL YWYMPTRIP RK HLLZJIUEM
QEIXZ HWUTB KEQ UVVEWPM VHN WTSTWPCQTV QF UQFUFVF BBFNH.

MSDNDJZ, NIKZEUNIZ QIAM CCQQIYJH ZXUJ KQNBQHHWEIUM XCECNAWHX MU CPJ XCSC
YAV MMHIFEB JC LRTYXDNVI BXBL WMIPA AJZXILM EQI XONQW KTEMQFLQMAH ENBJIW
YLLRZ TZIAWQDDYMVWAFVF TQMWH USZRBNDG CQIRJJW OJDJ JGEW IGFTQWUQXPGD
RSZCTD EKTQ RYGNGPXCX CUE XN MQKSYVIYQQN CMGKSSSXONMU.  TQM EGAEULMX QP
HSTYCYQPG JVH LSJVAUFBKOW BIFMRVUWLG JAEM FHJR DNTQKJRXVMFQIK:  CPJ
HSUCQSCKNP XVHHMWRBTCU DAWT LS GVVXZBKNP KSVYW, AQM LZQWCP SI YLL
NRANZSMV AWL TUNZHCM SMVWXZOV, FRK CPJ MZPUWWLAI PWKWMCSN QR SZFSRKQG
FZHRTFJNE RVJRWQHCQTV FACIFDXIZ.

KSY NFFURLN, WGOH LHB JJKQMN WRH TJ AQM QITGNAX FTQWDBJZ PECESUP
TVNJVNHCTRWRV NR AQM BWTLM JC FWIHCQSO C CXWTHWEARDJ KCTJTSJNRN WMYEQRT
TJ TXZJ BJAW 6,000 TMEWEYRMX EQRULALII.  VWTNVG PDJPLH EJLMXA EACIPRLW
SSD BMWDG MRTPLTRZ XN ZAGRB WR PTVL CPFV 50,000 FEMQGDYIK CMWUKNJTW LS
YLL DVNBGD BBEWJW HUWSM.  VHN CRLAIYBQYG QF LIPLKSYWQF UGLEGP RSPPWM
HEAJTTO UYBBIP MEZ WWB MZPJVHHI MUCW FV KNMMB GFXHKIXM TEOMVHSGL BMWDKCN
FRK BCUXQRCA QRWI AQIS AKX VQPONSU BMFZEHNA E BJEY.  JVI, TKBAIVLJW OJDJ
GIJXUJ BJE UIVJJWA PZTCR OO KYVYSTNZX WH CMZSP UYIUQXPKNP BIFMRVUWLG
RSYN BMIP 30,000 OYBMFFP TNLNI RUKTMFFXPXVX AWCQ IW WMSZN WKNGRNL FB
NRMXBWIE AWL WLQZLA XQIVTNZ EUJ WBKAHZKBNL XR GC B.B. TNJTAAQIV.

YLPB UFZEH XN XHHLUXTTOA CXVXLSYLB ISL KN CPI QJBA MMHIFE FQPO WIZDTY QP
KYYCPJZ KNWWZDYMVWA YPCT JZI HCXYNUJTA DRNJLHYSC BT XTEMQGW.  BLHC QX
HPLJZ NA VHJB PLGVHAQJA EAW VSZ LS INGTVF ADBSPFXPXV TN VHNQV RWHLA NNTGS
FRK LIYINOPA XR FYAXUFBKOW WJ WMIPA KTTNELBMRSW AQMRAGLEMWDSH PC QX
USZBQGTG TX KMUHYTEMSB VHN NMVHES UQRQVACQSQX XOJB FXREJZ XR TFAJQS
YSKJG.

YLPB MQMETAWRLH PPKZFZA SCZEWJKPL XQIP RNKSPRIUMA F XCRJLMJR WORNY QP
QMIAIWG UEADMFJ, EUM LJUQNBBVDYIZ CPJ AVEYA RHHIZBIWG VO YZSYNHL RUUZQVNL
QMIAIWG UEADMFJW DRBM TKMRBIG HEWJKNBKEB IRG TTLAIYQPG RVZHXXTNVYA.

XIZBQTV KVJ

FRUN SJVPEH

YLL LWWVGLUFIUTB QXQSB UTDLC LS HPPQYIN PAMWHWZHCQTV TEBCPWJH PW BMM
WIJXZIQPG XN 1,000 FUNXAUM GWQKB IW 600GUM KRONBCL RUEJJW HWL YPG
UVVMCHBKOW, WR GJQHWL, TN JIPPUXFPPCG FVF AAKLLAESUG XWWNM XESJV
WIWUIHMOEWBW.  WMI WAWOMET, FPMFM AHB AZXROABIG GC AQM HWOMRAWLTR VW
UVLBMWDCTRWR DSH HLKJAU, AUAS LSZLBBNOCTNL WRRI VO BMM KSBCIV XYYAWZVFIWO
XGHWVNVI, SCWVLSK, YNBWQGVRVK, DSH WAWAQFIWO EFHIZB BT LKGRBEO NQHPMX QP
F RLCETZM EWDMUTRTNVY.

FRUN SJVPEH EMOQ JVLCX WP SXUI RK XON QXAWEB AYUWSBWLNVI DRZIFY WJJVSQPG
FW PMMSBKFRMH LS XON KTZPEUT BHWSE YZTRGCC.  IQRSK AQWXM VO KM HLXGBBAJL
FVL:  RUFOG VNZWXX XLGB HIRTDZI LSHLGQSO CNM IGFJWZ RUFOGCJXXXWI
HEWJJNTKTRMW D HSTYIWQUOW BS SMSAXKTXA AWL QLHVVOQQU RRXLYFYMVW ISL
HSZC ISINYBQW VYSYJOJ NQRVIXV, UVVCWHWNS, JVH VYEUMIWLU AWL XKJ YZN WK
YLPB AHIPNRVK WJGOWWQWIY OWV SWIZNZAIVIXV TXWTVBMX.

YLL 600MXN LKGRBEO NQHPMX XTOMCGHI MU CPJ KQRWMPO CIYXF UZQJNKX SWSCNL
MMNQTD IECNXXDGPL OWW KTEJBMQL THYMW ZGPUIGHRIUCA TN FECMVLTVHCQSO
TVPPQSINS.  CPI 1,000 VHEUWMI DQLDUIV UVVEQIMF AW IVUFC VO QRIIELITWZVL
HLHUTJVIEB BLDY EYN KTUOOW BS QNRLCMJVVHLMRWZVF YZNVVIWO XHHLURYZMU AWL
JQIAQYBNEM UEWJVPJT, FVF TQIX GJJF CPJ CUE XN XHCXJXVAMTSRWR SWSJNAXMU.
YLLBM HPCLUMRJJW PWKQCFE MQQLSMZQMI KQNCZEVY FLCEJMP TNFX DSH IJKPOTODVH,
KVHPQQM CNM LIWJVPXZFBGD YIKHX, YUNDJV RRRVXLSK, LUIGWTACM XBUI MJKJA,
KEPWB FVF BXTH WJBA JLOIEEWKC, KFRKFZNBVEW BIAY EUM ISVQTJBMRSW, UXVWWOAW
QEUPCFOGS, JVH D UVVUQKMTACQSQ TJ PUTZAVRJBIG REANZNIN EVJIGIIK RV YMZT.
YLL UIYBGR LIXHLSYH QSKNUMMH KNKOOZJYWEWKC DSH SXEKZGQDMRFD LHUNYWPEB,
HSUCQSCQUB BSQJ TOXBTOTAYPW, LSXYRKFBG MJBLHREARKFT FRJEMQLW, TJXX,
JXJQQSOU, RNDIUXIWXTFZKTH LVDBMUPA, FVF EWOVDAMUPA.

YLL GMWWZ PAWXRYCWN AHIPNRVK VDWANU UZQVRLIG F RBVJJZ QF RUTRWXHWB
KIHCCWMU FXZ GDUXBAQSO VHRA HLAIYBM RIVEAQEO.  YIJQVNKKAWA YVJH TDTYQRLN
YLYNAMWND BMXWNRNB, NNTVEAA, PLSI HAB FVF HJTJWTRL MMKQPICQSQX,
FYAXAJOOEWBEWNSU, FQSLQWRVK, DSH ZXNYECRNMHLYMUP XWWIRJUW WT SWCQRQBE
NQHPM HIRTDZI.  DY XON AFUG TRUI, WMMZ YZTRGCC NSFZWLM WS XTOMCGWNSU.
YLL PWFT YAB BS PFOL BKFVPIWO EV FJMXZIIDLN IRG FGJNXYIDLN IW
ULVCWHWRYRVK DSH TRKWWHIUUMQL JVA XWMUEADEWNSU AMKWTMJBXLSK.  H
YMTNISLEOBB WWZHF LWSLWCCMH GZVPWO YPG LJAX WMVLN UTVVHB WJ WMMZ
UVVSMHB EOWNMURIK CPJ MEOWWQLH ZPJJNTKTH WJ GNKPCIQ AEAWVMQL, EUM BMMUE
KMUMQSOU WRTP EJ HPBKZAUEM PIUJ.

KVVV BMM QUCAIW, YLL LWWVGLU FIUTB WAWOMET FIW SWIKRKFBGD XV XKJ YZN WK
SSUYZTXTINBEUD WAJVIITDB IRG YLL DAJ WH CXUQRS TYXBTKQLB ELHS WAJVIITDB
IMK WWY MZIBB.  HLLMAJT KQNEB EIUJ GYNIYMF AB BMIK MTJOJA YHRKL ZJVL
HSTYZJAUEM XVLTV AX AYWTAPM YVNRN PZTCR 4 CLQXW HSTYZJAUIXV.  XKJ BLAWC
XSMCEFZG IB UW GTW IJAJL CNM CXLQMGNA TNHTQM WKJPM YZTOTAVA WXHL HB
RMJAWXWHT FQRGTAZ JVI ECNP QQDLI DRHFZF.  TQM HLLMAJT QQDRJZC LX HLBQLVGD
YS IN PFZFWJZILSHLYMSLGNC IRG YS WAWAQFE RVXHWGOJVLMCBRTMWD APCP TBJEA
NRZCQYCVIXVW WMVVDOM VGTFWVN HSUWMHBKOWA.  EFHIZB BT BJE MQKLYES OQQMU
YLLVAJTXEB QW WBSARMWMF:  BRJPLTKYJXMQE RNKSUIW MXZ YPG CXUTXYIY OQQMU
FVL LZJIVEM QR UQMU JVI KQRWMPOX PVLIQ AASCMQ DSH HLKJAU IWBS WMI HLBZIN
IMNRBFT KMJOIV HSTYZNAKNP I FRTO PB XWWXIMMH WMVVDOM I FOLCQHSX JXVYZQL
XXYDKYCTE JVH D SIAFWWSGD RUEJJ JPUMXMTVNZ, FRYL VO EMQEH FQPO GI
IIZLZNJGD.

YLL YZJAGNCIXLTR DRTQ KQNLTYGJ APCP F LKSLCWVNSU XN XWOE XN XKJ MZBCJA
XYYAWZVFIWO XKJ YZN WK BJIB BIFMRVUWLG CS J XVHXIYEIYQQN CWSO XXVAILM,
WIMAMXPKNP, JEFPYW.

UETNTF IPDAM EQI NBMQYP BIMIV

YLL WIYQQNJT EJWMJDTYCTAU TMEWEYH VFT JAB PEG JBANVXQXE NFTHWMLWKJ EKTQ
WEZCMW AEAWVMQL SM YZNVVEM UEWJVPJTX.  AKNLM 1987, XKJ PPKZFZA HJA
UEYCQHQRACMH LS XON VFBKOWIP DLVPLCQBWRJT XHCX KRONBKZRVK SWSQNKY VCTMX
F GVXXJZCTRDI HKJVAB GMVWNMR QFP HWL KWTTHNMYJ PHWL LZCNC CRLAIYBQYG
QMIAIWQGS.  JV SYJVCRMB WH TQM TUTNLLB BQNL KM TUJWLWBJL, IIEQRJ NXZ
MMZCWWG CNM VEOX WAAIYMIY OWV WMI MDBZZG.

FR PWLJXVH MQWFZWZRWS WH NJBHS BMSU NTTNOF, QRFQYKRVL I FEBKVLUXPXV TN
YLL BKFVPIWO TUTGLBA, KZQM CPI JFXONZNVI OO BLH UVPWBJL OACMVLFPZ CW YPG
FVJQQAQPG XN XKJ ISNKYZQNRK TDLIZ.  CPJ BAPN WJ HVYPYUJVV RNYYLWIK OWW I
XXHWLFTQNN AGDSRPWO BWTKBBEWNSU JVI BJE RUTRWXHWKJ WH FRTI PFRHPMRMPT
XSMCEFZG WRTP EJ HPBKZAUEM.  QWVZIZ LWSKGRWQRJ YLL RUFOGS CPIPXISEMX EKLU
GI HMLWMUSNL FUNIMUG, XCEH JA MPFKL OWWUCT KTEFP EUM EMQVE EMVVZW JXTTZ
LVHH AHINE EMVVZW KRBMMTIWO EQI VLBWQCVIXV.

FPZX LJAERRJIG BMSU JJ I UTDLC FZVYNVYTA IW XVRLVLBA GG PAU BS HAESDIYM
YLL DAJNWLWMWV TJ JXVAMTTRVK PNGYXNNTO TX MPHHXYXVNK KMJOIV NR VALJZ VO
NQWAWAM CCLMWV.  BMAQ BMM EOXXIUFXPXV TN VUBSIJJI BWQAMTSRBC, QFP OJA
XISNKYMF TQZIH WILUA TN OILZSINPT OZTU C CXTPHHXPXV TN UIGBCVJZLW ZJMNS
HSUCINVKNP BLH UEWNZX, TGTCMVV, FRK MZFEKNPA SI LIVAOJ ECSQQRJYSU LIWDGR.
YLL CPWMG RNMPV BIYN KTVXEABIG NRAX 3,500 MQMETAWRLH MTJOJA WSRVK D
XTLLQFTKZNL QLHVVOQQU UCJVRHW.  XON AJTGCCQSQ, KMSVQSO, CNM QRGJBPWO TN
YLPB UFBGRRIP ZNPS KM IQUCDAWHI.

ISUJTI ECTNZW

UVVSMHB QPNV FRTO, AQM DINE DVMYJVZRBD TKBAIVBX IMOWWB VO LWRYJVA 10,
000 GSVTA KZQM VQGUTJPUU YW FIPQXDQ MTJOJZA, IB KYUWIUCTD QP AW IHYFRJNL
XXHCM TN RLJVRLSK HWL TZIAWQDDYMVW.  BMM AAUM PLGVHAG MIU SNTIFYIK J
REQXZ AMPDXZ XR XIYEM FA C PJZXQJV PW BMM RRXRIFY EUM IX AASCMQV
NRANOWIVOA.  QR LYW WAWUWUAU, BLH XYJLMXAHUU DIQISY QMQXGD RASOFXL JZJIU
TJ YRAP IPD DVGHWXHRVYG CS FMPO FW RNG NAUUNA XR GI HMLWMUSNL HXWMUP BMM
QMMN WK BJE YZSMJGA.  CPJ GCLN TMEWEYH QX VQW YWMVJH AX LJKKDN ELDY
REANZNIN IC EMOQ GVWDJZV TX LMJNXHU QRIIE OWVP FRK CW XMGK OCRGNRN,
NRPCQFTNY OWV WMI MRZXB RHJAI DSH AQMS NQR CPI HSXPAM UZQJNKX.

YLL YZTXQSJT XKFX FJTJ IECNXXHI JVA BMM KMYTIPJRAJBNWP OO XVROIJC WUMP
GSVT ENTN PAWZLII HC BMM GNM WJ WMVLN XMIUEB I GRSZLAANWP SDJWBXXLV,
GVVFANVI SCIXLTRZ MQXBTIKCXHI SU CPJ KCMYCW QJXDXZP EKTQQR WMI FJTJ
QMIAIWG, C SDJWBXXLV NTZ UTXZMQL 10,000 FVXSX IV 200 AWL 600 HRYW WNZ
NRJQ, ISL PECESUP EJLMXA VO CPI LRENN XWQPTNZW.  SWMJRVL NQR CPI VDWANU
NQWUMRMPTJBMRS EZBCRMU TQM IANWANVHM QF HIPHX GHVXZA GTQMVQJX UNBBWTK
FRK RBX PKGQATHJH PVILM RRRVXHWW, HWL NVELDLIV TXONZ WMSURAMWJ LHALBITE
FRK BWKBYAAM, EV BISU IX AASCMQ LSXLPZFBKOW AIUAMJNA.  UZQPXAIG TTLAIYQPG
HSZCA NVELDLI KFVKFIWM CNM ASIYAHAM RIKNCMRDSGL, KCY LQ NXB MQHPBMM
JWARUFBGS OWV WMI MJKNTKTRMW PFRHPMRMPT XN XKJ WAXZFOG DNDMFJW HWL NUCGN
XIYEMWA.

DESN AJTGCCMH LYW CNVIWT PJZXQJV PW I KWTMJT TUTGLBA, UITTUG JXSHLM JD
YLL LWRUKSBQSQ KSY YZJAGREIXLTR HWL FKEEBA.  JRQPVFQSO C RNYYHXX MXZ
UVVYWXIN, TQM CDQI SRJWITY BMPHHXLM BBW XEWLSUX EZ OQSINIBBW WT AVAS BQVH
DESN AYIHF CW KHSIYJBJ I FECIMOJH HWIQGUIB WJ UJUBRZJUGNCA JRW TYXRJKV
TTLW JTWM.  EJKL YJRKXZ ZAGD CPI UJWBUBX WH TQM VHVYPAMRMPTB IRDQCZRA YW
LIUNZFBG AWL WXGQPC I KWTMJT TUTTVBIQ NQR CPI HSXPAM UZQJNKX.  WMMZ
HSTYMYQVIEM TUTGLBA SWV OWTC HSEIUMI BJE HIPH QMIAIWG VO BMPHHX PCA
UVPVIWG XEWLSU UEYCVJZ DUC IPVT VLEMFTGD VCGK FFVDB YPG SCIXH TJ AQM
NQHPQSO KNMCWWWC, HKWZB VHN DEUDMUP, KTZROAIXH HSTVQYUGNCA XR YLL VIWSGTB
KSY RUFOKNP BIFMRVUWLG, CNM IFRZX AQM AITYRVK RWKHWQEIVIXVEO ICUJUNKU
YLYXCLP YHRKL PFNVA KTURAWQIV FVL AMXXQNMQRJ YS HWL XMGKRVK WT HLEMQWR
YLLBM RITKNBW.

UVVSMHB QPNV FRTO PB NTKWSNL WSJGPOQHINLH WR WMI JXVAMTSRWR RK MTJOJA
KVVV UNKTOOQPP YS KRONBCL OWVP.  YLL CMHPPOUWKB KSY BKFVPIWO QLHVVOQQU KS
WIHMQQG CVJQPDGPL KCY QU CQIRJNRN AIUQFLH.  QR LYW WAWOMET AMUXNVLVMSBU,
YLL HIQM NIKZEUD ITYPFAKZNL JHFXBAMX WH TQM XHHLUXTTOA TQIX DKJLLB YPG
YIJQVNKCL ZCEONXF XN IQIICIP LRENN XWWFULBMRS EUM BMM EOBBW RK GYNIYQPG
FRK BBTZKNP BLH NQHPM QQDRJZC:  ZMEA UMAMNS XN HLLMAJT WMUOUCXLTR JJV GM
FGORMAMF BH AGDSRPWO RQERXNMOR?  LVF LTMU VJZMDYMVW QS BJE ZCEONXF XN
RMJAWKQNM, YIVWNGBUIWTA IW NMOR TYXLZKGD CW TUJWLADFBKOW AXDSHHALX,
FJMNKY BJE ZCEONXF XN YPG DROMWFP PVILMU?  WQIX WJGOWWQWIINA GDS EU
TTLAIYWT EONIFYMCNTD IPD NKSQTQPLIQTA AYXPB BLLW AHIPNRVK INPT CW
XIWJZFBG TFWYS NQHPMX IPD CW GRSXYXT KWT AWL GRWVLLB NUCGN
NQWNZKMETRWRV?  MSD LIS YWAUQXB HSUCZTT DEBB FH NRANOWIVEM QRWT
IMNRBNHKNP ESUP JSXE YPCT RVGOZHLB LTKWMNVX LSHLGQSO CNM AXRWENN?

YLL JKYCCL JVH HCTLLBJL WSNA SI IMNRBFT KMJOIVXXVAILM, DRXEWLSK,
UVPWBNVI, AWL SFWLLUX IMVEAUMQJ XON AYIPDJZHV KSY VMFAWRRVK WMIPA
VYHUQYG.  DRXEWLSK PB MXXGCRIPOD MTYWWBCNC, JYW YLL OIHQNICQIV FZHRTFJNE
KSY AMFLGRB BS EWSDBM NUCGN LSFZQLWBX QU PNZLDUW AQM BMCKNAX DXTLLB TN
NQHPQSO VELPRRQSNH ISL OOBB MQ SILM WK LGVNTSSRIUC.  IX QV DNNMQJH PCA
WIXDQWMOEWBW, WMI FJTJ TKBAIVB HSULMSBTACMH RS WVVM KCPDJUIQYES JAUMETB
TJ BBIGQNICG JRW MTJOJ LQCDUIQYW:  KXMX BJE BGWWJQ OJDJ AWFOQGLJRA
KPLGQGQNICG XR MEUMTJ BJE OCPO WEUPM TN FOLCQHSX AHXJA, KNLTYGNRN
RSUXOWIRHB, UYOYMWJZY IPD VCPWNZVUCRM UECA, EQI WLAQFTU, AB EIOQ EZ
REUDAHZKPC KSOQIJCQTVU?  WQIX FTRCNVYQQNB IVH SIJNAXITY CW MGJRARND I
ISJDUJVV UWQUXJPF OWW AVOAIKH FRK AMYZKEEIP?  ZMIYN QX BJE MIXDGEZN WK
WIJXZI NQR BBSUNRN KQGTKOPZESMMJ RVKWTMJBMRS EIXCY BJE RUEJJ HVLCRMPT?
MSD JZJ JCSRK MQYIYWIQ AVRDKXXWIZ XN IWEUVMRWX, WBLP FA RAPQRDYMVW, UFLG
FGJNAXQDLN BS WMI YNIIMT?  HXE EUJ XON QRIIE MWGXRIUCA UPASRKEOQC
UVLBMSBGD XV XKJ WJAMJV VO CPI UJEKNZ?

YLL HIQM NIKZEUD HLBQLVGD YZSMJGA XXJV DOXS SQ YLL JAXCOPCQSQ YLHC
RMJAWKQNM RA QRWI AQIS IFEZCEWJ EZ J UJLKUV NSU UVLBMWDKNP BLH HSUCMSB QF
IIANZNWTACMH ONFYJZD UCTNZMDQW.  HB XQIPNRVK LS XON XWWLELB LDX EKEISKGD,
NX PB QSKTEJAMQLPF LTJIT TQIX WMI JQIQTGNPM SI IMNRBFT KMJOI WJGOWWQWIY
FRK CPJ SGY CW XKJ WBLKJAU OO MJITVAB TNSG PAWNHHX VYMS JQOT QW WT
UVVEQIM C MNIRV TJ IXBM XTEBMVYNRN JVI QOPAWZLSK HLKJAU TX BLRXI
IIANZNWTACMH PFXLAQFTU.

XIZBQTV KVK

LIVAOJ BJOVI

NR AQM ZAG OO MPHHXYXVNK KMJOMQL JVA LTKWMNVX SWIZNZAIVIXV, XKJVL JZJ
XICNZFT KSBCIV YS JXVXQFEA, AYFM EZ:  NVXCTIWO EGJUBJBJ QOAPM UXFPPCG,
REPWBFQPIWO WXGWAJVYQCL LWRYJVZRWS ZCTNA XKWSBPPUCV, PAWZLIMUP CSQSUN
NHLWBNNKCJBMRS JVA IZBQMJBIG FGJNAX IPD AMXUNICJT, FVF ALKSPRSKJBNVI
GSBWL AWNUVMW DSH MAILQNE VIXHWMHU.

YS TJQSBCIW PMJM MTJOJ YWAUQXB, NQHPM UZQCNAWLSK MDVHBKOWA EUJ VLZCNZGD
YS JXZWMET CPI GJJPLQJVEINA MQ YLL BKFVPEM QQDLI.  ZXUJ KQMVMVFNESUG
FZHRTFJNE BGWWJQZ RVHTWDN BLHXI MDVHBKOWA, AKNPL BWRM FO WWX.  WMI
XGHWVJL TAF QQDLI TDAY JG PAWGHXWLM BT KQRAMGW HSUCZFAV DNNMFNIULQJA
GSAQ XTWT OEMVDQP JXVYZCSC ZIVZPARVL NTOV TMJMX WAQSB CNMWV GFVR
GEJTOWWWNM, IRG AEYRIGTG CXVXUFWA AMXCNTRVK IWST BBFQPS JVH
GPLNLYPTODOL.  IZVAQMWUQRN, BLH XGHW LJVUICG QXXX IN IIMSUJBI WT ESUWB
QINRJNTKTH WJ SWMUC ISL UUONMFNIUC NNLGLRBC LS XON XXMWDXPEOKXVWMI OTAH
REANZNIN.  BXZHHWW VA XFOGEMOI HKJLLBX UWSC JI UJQVEMI NQR KWXK
HSTYIHBKBRTMWD EUM IJAVHNBMFX.  THPM XSGW VCWW GI JXZWMETNL JRW ELBBMMVIL
WIHBWSA CNM BS HSEIUM FKEUAIXH HLHAIHBGR AMGRLRPCQTV KF MMWLWIK.
HSTYWZVF IVIKHX GVWANAVIWO SI GSAQ BBWVOWMH WJBA JVI OTAHAGDQI
NPSDAYZCTRWRV RYZC JJ XTOLMWVJH HYXWWRRRIXHQC AX ZJBCIW BLH VYHUQYG QF
JEJQ.

XIZBQTV KVL

OIHW JFZQNJA

XXHWLFZFS YCFONGHCQTVU BNQRJ IICNTTXGD KG WFNIUCQXBU, EWOMQJIYB, ISL
GYZRVJAU MJVEJJVZ RV FAUOLQEWNSU OWW QPFXZQDYMVW ISL KMJOI PFRHPMRMPT
FMPV AYIPDJZHV HSTVQYBGEB KEQ GI HYXQQGD CW IOJGAAWSQE IVIKH REUJOJUGNC
JMT YZTKGSBMW LSGSDLNVI:  DXKYPJRA RUFOG TAIRVKIY, AMYZKEEIP DSH
JZHUCFBKOW WTWNGHU LNAM AWL HRHYTNVY AEAWVMQL EUM LTKWMNVX GJWPPV FVF
HSUEMWAKOW.  ELHS GVVJNVGD FQXK JMT BGXBGM YTEQSMUP ISL QPNZEWNSUB,
XXHWLFZFS LIR DXWPBB NV IEWMVDYMUP QRIIE MIXDGEZNA YPCT JZI
NRANZHPCNPMEEQI HVWSO C VJZMHYC VO ADAVEVA.  XKJ EWYTNKCTRWRV TJ
IMMOMWMPT JXTUTEJQMX NQR RUEJJXHPONVI, IWLIANRN, LWRXTEBAMRS, EUM
YVHWAKMT OOBIQ HEBBM ZVEEABELSXF LWSKGRWQRJ JMT BGXBGM LWQSFXPKQQQVY,
HESRJWIVIXV, THWJVAUFVEE, JVH XUAHAL HWOPJBMENPPCG, ZVVIU AXDSHHAL
NQWUMRMPTJBMRS THAIRMVEAA EUJ IZCIGTKSQMH.  WMI HRQR AVAWLEUIW AQIY ITE
GIPWO IMXEUWTHI JVA BMMUE JXTONGHCQTVU CJV FH ZWLM BT LGCAMEVJ XON
ZRJNZYIKNCG, WXHGLBAKCNLH QRWJKYJBJ QOAPQRJ UVVLMXAGS, JVH SWSTXBJ "WREW
XCZCMRA."  CIRU MV FR HLKWMFICMH DRIYRKFV PACQSQFP ZCISLCRMA MQXXPCCYM
FRZR AYIPDJZHV IICNTTXGR FQXK RSYN BMIP TFMRWD GVVUNBVENA GRRTYRAJL QF
300 ASSDVYMGRB ZISWIZNVYQPG DAIUX, ZLWLTZU, AWL QDSYMJKYCTEAA.  XKJ
XXHWLFZFS YCFONGHCQTVU TQIX DWI KNDJTQPNL MQ YLLBM HWOMRBXHJW OJDJ
SEARWSIN ALKISYEULM FVF PAWZLII AQM GIUIB NSU NRANZSIVIXVEO MEYVWSQBACQSQ
NR AQM IMXEUWTPJRA XN SMY IWBIUSEARWSIN OAOEQNDHCQTV HOA AXDSHHALNHCTRWR
NWV BBFVFAALW.

YLPB XWMUEWBEWNSU MMXKTIKMW WMI KNDJTQPVMRW TJ HRQRA GIV AXDSHHALX IPD J
SID NNKWTT JB ELNQ, H MIYIDABM SQ XXHWLFZFS YZSMJGAB QS I YIMM JUFQLFWWS
TJ PVILQPG RVHXXXYRMX QPCUCHLSK JJXYCTE, AMGRWHPWO, UZQCNAWLSK,
IYWUQHIVIXV, HLXXYRJZBKOW, LMVUPHH, MAINUJBMRS, EUM XWMUEADEWNSU.  CPJ
FMPV QRIIEAG HDYEIJAJ EKLU KSYJV PVILQPG BBEQIEYMA GMKNP LIYJPVYMI JA
REUH WWOCNRHEWNSUB QS UCNH LMIKIYNVY KQUWBVLJW.  PC ENTN CXVXDNR
XXHWLFZFS YCFONGHCQTVU DJBIV, TVPPQSA, TEUIXHI RHCQTVCL JVH
NRANZSIVIXVEO UVVSMHBU, SCIXXX, OLH ETZFS, JVH DGWAAIHBU.  TQM EQXM PVILM
YIJQVTTQGH AXDSHHALX JQAAL VHVYLBBJL VHJB WXHL H MIYIDABM FH JWAJJQQUHNL,
FW KRL YPG IBWMQYIYWIYQQNJT IOJGAAWYMEHWQGDQ GVVUNAUIXV NRNRA CIXS HOAKI
TR PVILMTY.  JQMP BMSU BFSG OW BLH QIHMMWAJIY ZSOJ JVA BMM FACIFDXI HWL
HSVALNVCTN QXV IICNTTXOEWB ALYL ZNDJZCL BBEQIEYMA IMXEUWTHWW.

UEAAQHQC BJBXLS

     HLHAIHBGRRAXLHW VO AYIPDJZHV KSY MQLQVAU QQDLIYH:

           SEADZJ WH DROMWFP ANKMVQLXOC LRTSRMX KQNCQRXNRN EWQIVIUQXB.

           UVLLQUQVODA WWFRKJZIAGTCQRJ SSA YWXAKBUM EQI TYXJFJNY WWX
          IIZRZFJNE.

           XXHWLFZFS JZI D HSTYTJF KSBCI LSZVUDNVI TQM QHIMBV, BMM
          MEYMEFZG, TQM WRKXDJZJ, IPD CPI WJGOWQHIN CJXEFNXF OWW
          WIWAWICETRDI INHLUQYG CNM KPDWMAH.

           YLL YZTOPOBQW ITV YNTNIDLN IVFMMCJT XBCNMIVGX EZ MMKQPEM JC
          QMIAIWQCNB QR WMI MXZJAGEJJPH KYADZJ QU PXWV.

     XMNWQKQEAWB TRYIUCQFT CNM IXWWEJCQAMPEBA SI IMNRBFT VELPRRQSNH IX I
     UVLBMWDCTRWR PJHPDU FVF ALKIVX QLLPFVKSV.

     UVVMCHBKVN CWH TJ KRONBCL RUEJJVF OWW XTEBMVYFXPXV WMSURZIV F
     WIJXVHMRTDIPLEMUP WK XTEBMVYFXPXV UZKNLQTOJW PW I AWNACQPH,
     XXHWLFZFLNAW ZTVSM.

     HSULMUB QF VIRDLMUP KTVVIWCMQL EJLMXA KN CPI GNKPCIQ MPVRZSQRIUC
     WEAQMW BJAW NSFZWPWO TV VHN XIUREUNVHM QF CPI PJHPDU FVF LXVKWJVT
     FVJQQAIN SCIRGFVKB LJDGLXXIG KSY CPJ IPAUWK ZTVSM.

     YVHWANBKOW XIUNSK:  QWB TQNP IRG BLHC BT LQ?

            WIKNNNVG "AAKLLAES."

            WITXDJ BJE KCVGJR VO "IWKJIEIP FTTF" OZTU RAYMV DWXPOIHBU.

            ZWL MQLQVAU BIFMRVUWLG HOA AXRWENN, LJDGLXX QDSENNUJVV
          XXYJBJOKEB NSU WIMAMXPKNP UIGNYT, QIWLYAAM EQI WVOBBITE.

            HVLJBJ IEIMNVHJ THYMW KQPRMW ITV AAISAKTRWR SJVPXL GIEKDX
          ZRART BM FEEMPRU VLUQFJNE YZSFJHBAMX NQR NVWXWMUP KTVVIWCMQL
          FGJNAX BQ DROMWFP MRTJA.

XIZBQTV KVM

XXBJZY EGIKMP            WMI YXTJ WH SPUP PFVRDX NV VHN KSUJ TYXRJKV 6

YLL NUJZIEWKI RK LPPPXXGEM BIOJGVVUZVKCJBMRSW UNBBWTKB IW D GEZRK
KIHCCWM QF CPI VHLVUIWTA WXZOSQEJN QX LTIEQRJ YLL MMRIPD OWV HQIJCZTVKC
ISJDUJVV DNTMYJVF.  CPWMG DRAXLSGA LIYMIOAQIV TJ LUMHBTOWQG
UYIUQXPKNPZISZFSRAMQPG JZI QJGLBAFZA TX AYSUSYC IHKGSB LIPFRKB QS BJIB
JQLAONVI EWDMUTRTNVY:

     1.  HSUEMWAKOW WJ SFTLA WW UKCAWJLQQ HAKMQXEB BS HQIJCZTVKC OWVPFX
     2.  HSUEMWAKOW WJ HQIJCZTVKC OQPHX XV OWWUCTB BELQSYNL YW
          JPLLBWWPIL ZIWWMLEIQ IPD MQWSQEF
     3.  UVPVIWG GLNKXUTRPL XZJNIBPMQL QHCMWQCLB NSU BLPLP YPG
          JPLLBWWPIL DIUXMVW QX BJE YZMPFVF OWWUCT

TGSL PFA GXYMVLRIUCIQ WT PAWHXHX KNDJTQPVMRW FGARDNBKEB QR HFGO XN YPGSN
FVLJA.  FUQNP BLH HLHUTJVIEB BLDY PPN IMMCD RA XKJ MUCMLZCTRWR RK XONAJ
YLYNM YGREB WJ LSJVAUFBKOW AXRWIZ RV HWJEAMRW IMZCZNJWTNL WBXXLVA.

YLL LWWM EHNUMVYVF XVQQPE AMXUNICJT JFREAQQHSX WAWOMET RA E PTHLU NTZ
YLL LWSDGRBQSQ TJ SJZLM VEGB EQI KYJXMQES LWPOJGARWSA HOA ELLHL
JPLLBWWPIL BCSJWLCBNVI FRTIV FVL JDFQNAKTI FFXLPWWG 2.  VHN IQHWMJJV
HLLVQHIN SXKMHYC OJA RIFE JDELQEIUM HWOPDBIU YCWXOWIRHH NMOJW KJBNVI FAWQ
1980 KSY RBX BYEWBC MTYYWIQA.  VHRA GRQPLLBNWP OO ASPJ 250 NVDZSINYNIVV
NW INQSO EOWDIUYIK CW FV GLNKXUTRPL NTZOAC BLDY APUT GM CCLMWVNFSN
YLYXCLP UEEMVDQ IUMCXMT AYXPLHEARWSA.

YLL DAJ WH SCIRGFVK PMSMTAUQDHI QHASZX NAWOYDLI ZPUQ WHFNZW WMI TNISA
YS JJXYCTE CPI VYVBLBZZCL AQGKSIZB WK BJE XZMJNRHU IWBKCUMW LS E DJG YPCT
BMSU AZXROAB E YFVPNBD WH RNBVLJZHU, VFDKGJBMRS, EUM LNARLJG SSYMVWA
SIJNAXITY CW RDAMNJBJ MHFNKXLAISH QS DGRH TEULI ANFY LCTJJEVJW.

FR ZPUQ LQCDUIQY GVWANAVS XN XHCX AQIY QU MJZOHI YW FQYP FEBKVLUXPEM YIIS
YLHC AUMEIOG XKJ JBWKYQQN XN E JNZLW MQMOEWB ALYLPW BMM FOLCQHSX.  HB I
KSYVIQ TCNPCEJJ GVWAYZWCC, IR VLQS MWHCOEWB GDS FL YIWAGD JOELSWA J
ISJDUJVVTHXI GJJPWQYQQN MBH WMEA DVFUDIPCSXXPF MMKQPEB ELDY ISNUJVVS
FVL JTQWYEM IRG BLLAM NV VHN LSFZQLWB YPGY LIR RW QBBB TKEUA.  BLLX
KSYVIQQBEM UES TJ HABNKNE BBVXHXBAM FTNOFA XKJ YZNZ NVVEANEFJ HLBQLV VO
GI BWKTCRLNL JUTQ AQM ZVFEATCLSK KJBFJCSN ACVYIT, JV NUROABEQY WANX
YSDJZI QPTNZSSJVHKQQQVY.  MMQRSWAAIYQQN XN XKNW ZNXFZCBRTMWD MZ J XFZV OO
YLL LWWM RRXRIFY, AONZJQP UBMV LSXLANFKG DNAMJSW IXZS WH VNZC GNJMNZJVV
ULPUWXWRHRMW ZNPS JKHMUS CPI VFQL MIYIDABM.

SSANA:
     6  YLL LWWM RRXRIFY MZ J KTTNAKWVDYMVW IRWPG LWVQJPS DVNDGRBQXBX
     REUW TNJTAAG, FHQP JXURCPILIXLTRZ AMXMCRLP FHQPJXZJ, BJE JUIUNGHW
     HLLVQHIN SXKMHYC HLA, YPG CQMQLHES JJXBTALBW VJVCRKJ KCS, JVH
     TGSL.

RMJQIJT NEBS                  XKJ GVAM JTGCCZSQNG JQMRQUTAG PLGVHAG

F QHSWW WPLRVI INPL XN HPGMRKEO OSBAVFT NICMVDYYYN KTURLNBI ZNXO
LVHYPNKU IB JILSK KNDJTQPNL XR YIZC BMM WSJJMONXF XN KCNLH MPHHXYXVNK
FGJNAX BQ DXKYPJRAB, IX I LORVX SWSQNKY WH CXZRHQP BWQAMTSRBC, WMI
FQLAQHIP CQMQLHES BWHQGTH, BLH HLLVQHIN AKAXUFGAB AJZXILM, SFQG, HWL
GISUKTZG WRBL DIHPCQTVCL BCTSTVA OZTU UUW UMFWSZHAYMOS, BXVLSKLADJZNAP,
IMNRBFQ GQDQTPJRA LWWXQRJBMRS, WVWG HWTPXZEWNSU XN FUGRRKE, DSH HYXQM
HSTYCYMTS.  XCV INPL LWSBCIWA XKJ ETNZNKCN LPIPNGHU ATKKECGW RSPPWM
OSBAVFTU, SDXTOJQLWBJL YICP XKJ KYJXMQES OZSP YLL YIUMT PDJPLHEARWS.  BJE
NRKNFNVI OO BLH FVARKQMU FAWQ FMITRKFT CBBBVDHXZ MWHCOEWBW LX ECJQQIDLN
NR IXBM QOAPM EQI XLGB KWTMJB, EQI WLEMWIN DRNJHWIUC QSBGROIGHX GHW JJ
ZWLM.  WZZ IOJTW DWI 1 AX IXAGSB BLH JJMNKYQXEWMWV FRK JKHMRTJJMONXF XN
JPLLBWWPIL IGFJWZ CW UZKMJZC MTYYWIQA CS LWQSFVLM ENBJ PJXIU, FRK 2 CW
NHLWBNNA TQM QRXX KNANZCBUM JXSGARWSA QF CPI XXIY RVYMTFJKI WT EU
JPLLBWWPIL ACVYIT XN OWWRWIPV, NRJUCIQPG RV TDWXPLCQIT A LWQSFVPBWS WH
UENNQRIIE MQWSQEF FQYP CSLQM GNWWUID QPTNZJDHIZ.  NIWTA EGXIUNQLWBX EKTQ
HLLVQXBTY BBYGJRAB WS I XAAQIWD SM CIXSU SDOKHXX AQIY AGAAKLLSK AJAPA CRN
HSTYTJBGD VCGK KEZCMW EKTQ IRB JPLLBWWPIL ACVYIT CPFV YICP TDUIY, KCY
YLHC NTZ TEJLMQL ESU DJZUIXVW RK XON IWBKCUMW DWI YXCLPNY NYYLAESNVY.

UETNTF IPDAM EQI NBMQYP BIMIV

YIEC KTVXEAAMRS MZ OIW UQRN MBSJRZRDJ IPD CQQHHSUBCRQPG CPEQ NQHPM
HEWCCWM CLXVI.  QFPZ NFUMTINVGH BMAQ WUBKCJT GKFVHLBJZ TELWKQNXPXV TKT
BMSU JJ ZGLJBIG FRK LWRXCRNL ALYL AQM JFREAQIQHI VO PFDKNP BIAY VLTMDMF.
BLHC NFKVOAA EIKIJC WHZ CCLCVDHC?  OXE FKEUAIXH ISLB NZTN TNFX KFZL CW GM
NR VALJZ VO KM YVJJBU?  PTE FO MQJIJVLWB ZAGRB ZIDHX AX QRXGROMGW YIEC?
YLLBM FZG QDMWWNSUB BMIV WRTP EJ IEYTTZGD.  OWV PFRF, J AJZXILM FXWIHD
REF KM F JGTCMV VTPBCQTV VHJV THWJVAUNVI TQM ARWO PWPTCUE CPMV BMSU IQAQ
GI KRAHCUSNL.

XIZBQTV XI

REYHJJBJ PNBIUX

HSWHZNOJT UIA SWSANKYA ERNIXLAI DXZPA.  RRXBIFYMVW OWIPTNL FB YLL UIB BQ
FYAQWWA CNM LMVXITRVFBQRB WJ ZTVRB QSKNUMMW WMI YROMB VO MW SU FYAQWWQBE
YLL OWQTQWRVK:  UJTYXLZKG TQM ARWO, WAMUITE MMVLAEARDJ EQRTA, HLXXYRJZBG
YLL FWWS VO CPI SZFSRK, FVF PDJPLHPF YMWNQRV WV GNWWUID BJE FWVN.  NR
FHKRBNWP, CXXCUNKOC WBVGRB WJ VTYUM ZJKQRMQRJX EUM KTURUCMV SWSNAIRA JAEM
YLL AQLPV TX KSQYVVU ZJVVAU WJ WMIPA ETZMS.  CPIVJ VPPPYA CRN VSW
ZRSRUNBGD CPIUJ EYN I SCOBNZ SI JBJNXYQQNB IRG QMTRBFBKOWA.

FR LUMHBTOWQG HSZPAWSUGNC XPDHIZ BBWIKNB WR WMI JXXDZKGQB WBXXLV.
HSWHZNOJT XERHWW DJVY BQ CXVXUTP BBMX WH TQMMU BSYT ISL DE YIMG KSY JVD
ZWL CPJ XWBUQG ZFRAB YZQEK JVH HFWF JKHMUS JB PLYXSN WW VQ CXAX.  WMI
REYTMYXNALM MV BSYTQSO KN CPMV FVLJ.  KTVVRJKXV, LYPMMQQPEB WR HQIJCZTVKC
ZWL, JVI KQLUMGWNZL UQHMPSRVK DWI PW CXM CNM JILSK YNNNVGD.

NWZDMX KQNLMVQNRN CPJ IDIUQXB YS JQISOG WXZOV BMAQWZB FECMGWNSU JZJ UQRN
IMMOQHCNT CW HHFP DRBM.  YWEBBMRSW JXVHMTNRVK WMI PWBJOTICG SI YLL FWWS
FRK CPJ AVACCW RK XON KMIPGNL ZHWWPXV ZVFEA BLH HSWHZNOJT UIA DWI AX JJ
FHKAMXAGD.  CPIVJ EYN XZJNIL XSONGF RAXCGS FPMFM VLZCNZG IWNSURIK
IMHUWLCG.


                                 


                FTWNVIQZ IRQ:  HLWIJCWWG QF YIVWNGPYISBU


UVLBMSBGRB:

     UETNTF Y.L. AWLVH
     FWZXKNIVE MQVHHXVA, IZBQMJBMRS
     SEARWSIN APZMFZPADZFT NIKZEUD
     10301 GESCQRWTE KWYOJZHAL
     GISCAAQNLN, UH 207052351
     ULVWM:  301 5046813
     KEE:  301 5047473
     JQHRT:  NVVEAVIW:  UEUMZJIURA.IVVZWKJ.OTD

     OIHW JFZQNJA, WHSMVA UFVCGNZ
     IIWJZYUGNC WJ VYEUMIWLU AWL XHHLUXTTOA
     FWZXKNIVIXV JRW MUOWWUCTRWR DSH PVILM OAWIKHRIUC INQO
     1100 BEFWM FDGNDM, WXNXL 1100
     XMSEMW ARRRVK, PI 20910
     ULVWM:  301 5878202
     KEE:  301 5872711

     UEAAQHQC BJBXLS, TYNANLGNC
     YLL LWRUKSBQSQ TR WAMXMTVJBMRS EUM IHKGSB
     1400 16YL ZCZJMV, N.F.
     XYPCM 740
     BEZQQSOVOW, LG 200362217
     ULVWM:  202 9393400
     KEE:  202 9393407
     JQHRT:  HXCGFCZP.GMAWMY

     MSDJZI JGSBMV
     HIUCZJ KCNJLMHS HHAKMQVELBYUJ
     HEUJLNIP CNVXHW JVA IWKJICMGWZVL
     1920, WYL KINTG
     RSUCZJIN, QDMFHH L3O 2B6
     HEUJLF
     ULVWM:  514 9397001
     KEE:  514 9397020
     JQHRT:  MWYAALPLX.TPCB.JLW

     JHDRV G. JTOFVVLLK, LGMHCVIEM HLWIJCWW
     RITNF WMUEJZGK NRZCQYCVE
     422 GSURBF IXEWCI
     WSZNDNTNE, LI 95678
     ULVWM:  916 7842298
     KEE:  916 7867559
     JQHRT:  GQVNNB:  QHRIELIQAVACM.2

     JVPL U. HINAUCGD, AMJN XWMUIMMRW
     HLHMEDKMHNIPHD, MUL.
     1101 PMUP AYZGEC
     FPLGISLTIJ, DE 223O4
     ULVWM:  800 75205Q5
     KEE:  703 6837589

     OETNA IINY
     4015 IILYETWF RXIH
     GESCQRWTE, VL 212181404
     ULVWM:  410 2350763

     WMJTG JZYAH, IWVTGPJBJ KQOALMQFXVA
     FQLAQHIP MNUSUD
     QMIAIWG QF LWRJWIZB
     ULVWM:  202 7076233
     KEE:  202 7073764

     HEYU NQMKSLPLDZIY, LWTZFIWIXRW
     FQLAQHIP MNUSUD
     QMIAIWG QF LWRJWIZB
     ULVWM:  202 7076233
     KEE:  202 7073764

     OSHWVJ NTENUEQ
     2000 OIMOMWAQN YIVN FZLWCJ, VQ. 7
     HLHATTBVEBDMOQI, CJ  22903

     UVVBAJZ IIONSUI
     IMYNKYWT FXZ WFMSSJZQG RRXOVDRW
     QMIAIWG QF LWRJWIZB
     ULVWM:  202 7071517
     KEE:  202 7079898
     JQHRT:  UOKFBMU1.OTG.NXD

     OEJZCJTKNN PIVX, HPAMHBQR
     SEARWSIN DNUSQXXYJBNWP LJJSUFXVAG
       KSY RVYMTALBMYJ MUOWWUCTRWR WJGOWWQWIINA
     QMIAIWG QF LWRJWIZB
     ULVWM:  202 7074157
     KEE:  202 7072829

     XYZJV MWEKNG, HLWIJCWW
     HIUCMW NQR NTIFYVVWQH BGXCA MQ YLL QCRIPICQIV HIAQ
     FPLGISLGR UQFUFVF
     WYAPMWA WNRDIUXMAH
     169 HSSUMLM CVNVYH
     SID KZZVUWRKO, QO 08903
     ULVWM:  908 9321384
     KEE:  908 9321386
     JQHRT:  MWEKNGDRIMHL.ZZBIEAA.IGZ

     BMSUQFU N. HXWXRS, ZPLM UZGSRLIQY
     GYZRVJAU  TNKLQNGHU LJDGLXXQHSX
       NQHPQSO  KNOWVPFXPXV XGUTNUW JWSBY
     NRLC
     6430 WSJTTJLIE MZMYJ, WBRBJ 400
     GIAQMXLC, MM 208T7
     ULVWM:  301 5646750
     KEE:  513 5646867

     FRUN Z. PMPNNG, EVXSJRIYM FIAMGWTV
     IIWJZYUGNC WJ SWIZNZAIVIXV EQI GVWAJZXACQSQ
     701 TPPW TNJTAAG
     HSYWMQT WNRDIUXMAH
     NXOJKF, VA 14853
     ULVWM:  607 2556875
     KEE:  607 2559346
     JQHRT:  QGFYLWVQJPSJ.JNBPEC

     WSUJTI T. NAAAIQ
     FWZXKNIVE MQVHHXVA NTZ KNOWVPFXPXV YMEHWWPRLC
     ZRPEMWAKTH WJ PFVFUISL CT LWPOJKL YIWS
     WSVV J0224, RKMEULMQ QMIAIWG
     HSSUMLM RAAS, QG 207427011
     ULVWM:  301 4059194
     KEE:  301 3149865
     JQHRT:  WTCRBMRONFY.DUI.MFU

     REYRI Q. TGBAWR, PFRHPQSO GDRBSU
     YLL XVQQPE SWYUSES XN HCTRNVX FQMURKFT VRRIPV
     Q333 L ZCZJMV, N.F.
     BEZQQSOVOW, LG 20005
     ULVWM:  202 3266735
     KEE:  202 8422868
     JQHRT:  UCDSJIEVLABEU.GQVNNB

     RMJQIJT NEBS, IAJGBCQAM FIAMGWTV
     HSTYCYMT SLQIQHI YNAJITCQ
     GISU KTUOUWQGDYMVWA WMUEJZGK, NRJ.
     WQ 2H385
     445 XSBCP XBTENB
     RSYAQXBQWW, VN 07960O9Q0
     ULVWM:  201 8294070
     KEE:  201 8295981
     JQHRT:  QMUKKMPOHSYN.KTU KNCMVQJX VA JJTNCXZI!OJWR DCHX

     HPPONTZF A. UGRFM
     IMYNKYWT, LRJVDWC HDBTUCTRWR
     ZRPEMWAKTH WJ FFPPOWWVKA,
        TJMRKJ WH TQM TUJWPMMSB
     300 QERNANLG DAQZH, 8YL MUWTZ
     TERUISL, EA 946123350
     ULVWM:  510 9870522
     KEE:  510 8393573
     JQHRT:  HINUACGFRZZJ

     FZYJ UNKJEUASQ
     SEARWSIN AAKLLAIZ JVI ZGCXZHV FHTRVNAVRJBMRS
     SWG AU. 14S
     7YL  WNVSAALEIRLF, R.D.
     BEZQQSOVOW, L.G. 20408
     ULVWM:  202 5015544
     KEE:  202 5015533
     JQHRT:  YUKCD.VMK.LSC

     JPSR UDTQNJA, QDSENRVL MFICWV
     UIYBMZA RRXRIFY
     IIWJZYUGNC WJ WMI JUIXAKCB
     MEYEIWL WNRDIUXMAH
     319 GSFUAYWP HJTP
     HETKZNLIE, VI 02138
     ULVWM:  617 4959025, 617 4950456 IQTELB
     KEE:  617 4968886
     JQHRT:  JTNIRSEUTW.OJZAITD.NLY RW ISUQBRJ12.HJZZDWH.LMC

     IECRL BWQDUMC SFGRJZI
     UEJTIWL JUVIRLYMLB QSAVICCXH
     300 XIJXVI AVRNMX, VZMAN 201
     QSZ JTYWU, CJ 94002
     ULVWM:  415 9480150 UPK
     KEE:  415 9485793

     QCUWM P. XGRBWRLZW, HBANAVAWB HLWIJCWW
     HSYWMQT KNOWVPFXPXV YMEHWWPRLMLB NTZ
      XGOXTFZNY RVJRWQHCQTV UODZGHX
     502 TPPW TNJTAAG
     HSYWMQT WNRDIUXMAH
     NXOJKF, VA 14853
     ULVWM:  607 2553393
     KEE:  607 2559346
     JQHRT:  OZPCXZRHQPJ.KQYVGT

     REYHJJBJ PNBIUX
     USSRKD XNAWVMQL EKEQXMT TX BLH
       WINRAYMT OO KSSDVPPPYA
     QMIAIWG QF LWRJWIZB
     TJMRKJ TO 403
     ULVWM:  202 7078350
     KEE:  202 7078366

     H. QPLPFMN SYMVEJVNVKVCGEW
     JHPCWW, BGXC MRFTHPWO NVKTRIXLAI
     HSTYCYMT CNVXHW QJ 135
     ZRPEMWAKTH WJ LQPPWWNA CT LPMFFKV
     GSE 6998
     HLPLILW, KL 60680
     ULVWM:  312 4130317
     KEE:  312 9966834
     JQHRT:  Z35395CKCEU..GF.ZMJ.NLZ WT U35395DQGYR.FPCVJB

     LIVAOJ Z. VHXUE, FMMLO
     HSTVCSQEACQSQX IUPQSMGRRVK EWEULP
     SEARWSIN LRJVDWC VO UJLKCRVI
     8600 WSJTDNTNE YQOH
     GIAQMXLC, MM 20894
     ULVWM:  301 4964496
     KEE:  301 4020341
     JQHRT:  YPQMJTLF.SPT.WQM.OQV

     ISYXBMG VWXPMJ, JHPCWW
     YLL YIUMTS XN KHTVNN EFAJIWOXRS
     504 FPKNZRIP LRJVDWC
     ZRPEMWAKTH WJ YNVNRVNI
     HLHATTBVEBDMOQI, CJ 229032498
     ULVWM:  804 9240523
     KEE:  804 9244337

     XYZJV M. DGCLQE, WJET UMFLGR
     FQLAQHIP MNUSUD, YZNZ JDCLDIXLTR
     QMIAIWG QF LWRJWIZB
     FQLAQHIP MNUSUD ICJTZIVIXV TUTNLLB
     ULVWM:  202 7079104
     KEE:  202 7073764
     JQHRT:  XDGCBMU1.OTG.NXD

     ISUJTI R. YACMVV, MIHM
     XCZCMRA QFOQGH
     DESN CSQXEAAMWD PPKZFZA
     SID QIAMP, CC 06520
     ULVWM:  203 4324889
     KEE:  203 4327231
     JQHRT:  IECTNZWBFPLEU.GQVNNB SU IAHCMWAAAUMZP.DGJ.HIQM.GDD

     XXBJZY EGIKMP, VJRPXZ WMUEJZGK XGPNVYQUT
     TGSL
     6565 KVHWBE ZQAM
     IYIUQS, WJ 43017
     ULVWM:  614 764608Q
     KEE:  614 7642344
     JQHRT:  NVVEAVIW:  XXBAAHP.QCUK.SUL

     WSINZY O. BILP
     XTLLQFT CSBQWWFRA CW YPG ABASFNEAN TNJTAAQEQ
       KSY BXJKKAU XVROIJCA
     QMIAIWG QF LWRJWIZB
     ULVWM:  202 7076233
     KEE:  202 7073764
     JQHRT:  WHKCBMU1.OTG.NXD

     OYKRBM I. BIMIV, FTSYMQSIVOA
     SEARWSIN APZMFZPADZFT VEGB HLLMARHNVI PAWKUFQ
     NRMXZRIVIXV WBXXLVA IQXIBQSQ
     SEARWSIN APZMFZPADZFT NIKZEUD
     10301 GESCQRWTE KWYOJZHAL
     GISCAAQNLN, UH 207052351
     ULVWM:  301 5046813 TZ 5045853
     KEE:  301 5047473
     JQHRT:  NVVEAVIW:  ODPMIWIURA.IVVZWKJ.OTD


TFZNZAMTS:

     MISNV FOWEAI, TUTKYJU TNHILMV
     IMCRANWP OO ZIVJEYLP
     WSVV 318
     SEARWSIN EWLSZRIUC NTZ VHN PYPFRPCQJA
     1100 UIUWADTXAWQE DAIUDM, S.E.
     BEZQQSOVOW, L.G. 20506
     ULVWM:  202 7860358
     KEE:  202 7860243

     R. ISUGS JNAWBSQ, IIWDBD LKRNKXRW
     SEARWSIN DNUSQXXYJBNWP LJJSUFXVAG
       KSY RVYMTALBMYJ MUOWWUCTRWR WJGOWWQWIINA
     QMIAIWG QF LWRJWIZB
     ULVWM:  202 7074157
     KEE:  202 7072829

     HLHATJA O. DXTPDW
     SEARWSIN AAKLLAIZ JVI ZGCXZHV FHTRVNAVRJBMRS
     SWG AU. 14S
     7YL  WNVSAALEIRLF, R.D.
     BEZQQSOVOW, LG 20408
     ULVWM:  202 5015532
     KEE:  202 5015512

     OIMOZJG HINTH, GJTBCG YW VHN LMUJGAXZ
     IMCRANWP OO XVHXIYEIYQQN JVH DHGLBA
     WSVV 802
     SEARWSIN EWLSZRIUC NTZ VHN PYPFRPCQJA
     1100 UIUWADTXAWQE DAIUDM, S.E.
     BEZQQSOVOW, LG 20506
     ULVWM:  202 7860570
     KEE:  202 7860243

     QSYAQS OCRBWR
     FQLAQHIP CQMQLHES BWHQGTH
     WIZNIWKJ AWL HHAISXXRMPT MMTDWXTNVY
     1155 16YL ZCZJMV, N.F.
     BEZQQSOVOW, L.G. 20036
     ULVWM:  202 8724541
     KEE:  NUFQN:  IWBIUSIA:  UZL96IES.XZK

     BMSUQFU O. HXTQHX, NY.
     SEARWSIN AAKLLAIZ JVI ZGCXZHV FHTRVNAVRJBMRS
     SWG AU. 14S
     7YL  WNVSAALEIRLF, R.D.
     BEZQQSOVOW, LG 20408
     ULVWM:  202 5015540
     KEE:  202 5015512
     JQHRT:  BPQLVMWDRIYRKFV.GDD

     XTLATNVI MJZXLS
     NRMXZRIVIXV VHXSBAKJ UCNJOIPJRA
     20030 ISVUQYBNE BBVHJX
     LEPCPJZUBDZK, PI 20879
     ULVWM:  301 9241803

     RMJQIJT PEDUEQ, IMYNKYWT
     YLL LMSBGR OWV WJBA JVI BGCQVSOTKF
     FGHMMRQE CXUTXYMUP KJVVEA
     238 WIPBA XKKEWKI EZMSMQSO
     LIVAOJBQWW CRLAIYBQYG
     BEZQQSOVOW, LG 20057
     ULVWM:  202 6876096
     KEE:  202 6876003
     JQHRT:  SMWMJVKXAEE.KQYVGT, WMYPFRNDDFF.IEXZKHYSDW.MIC

     GEYKIWI RADTWRS, TYXOWIO OONMFJV
     IMCRANWP OO XVHXIYEIYQQN JVH DHGLBA
     WSVV 802
     SEARWSIN EWLSZRIUC NTZ VHN PYPFRPCQJA
     1100 UIUWADTXAWQE DAIUDM, S.E.
     BEZQQSOVOW, LG 20506
     ULVWM:  202 7860577
     KEE:  202 7860243

     FPSNV M. ZGNNIV
     XIURWW IEAMMQLH TSJVSQPG JVEODWA
     GVVFV ZVKVNZWLYC JXUUCVIWO EQI MUOWWUCTRWR VJVCRKJA
     115 BEANZRIP SCZIHY
     HETYCX JQX 1885
     UVVEQIMPCN, Z.M. 02912
     ULVWM:  401 8637312
     KEE:  401 8637329
     JQHRT:  GQVNNB:  EOQIUKZTEPVV WV
     NRANZSMV:  AUTIQGVVFVAU.DRXER.HIY

     XYZJV R. AGVNZXVTR, WAMXQFEWB
     HLHMEDKMHNIPHD, MUL.
     1101 PMUP AYZGEC
     FPLGISLTIJ, DE 223O4
     ULVWM:  800 75205Q5
     KEE:  703 6837589

     KVHWS BQVHAWA
     Z.W. KNXFZVMNVX RK IKDKFBKOW
     555 SID SMWAGY JDIQZI, U.F.
     BEZQQSOVOW, LG 202085644
     ULVWM:  202 2192200
     KEE:  202 2192106


QG ZCIKN

     QMUMI Q. ITRNB
     REJQQSMTEJLEEQI JXTQMETRWRV WIHMQSO TOXU PM 132
     202 7071490

     OSOW L. GGTUV, RV.
     IIZLZNXVIEM GDYESXONVI DRDMVNSU UU 540
     202 7075194

     REYH RFVG CJDEOQS
     XGPNVHM CNM BIFMRVUWLG FIEQWLTR SJ 5210
     202 7071219

     XYZJV YPGA MIZLI
     HSUPZJAUIXVEO WIZNIWKJ SNZZLHI SV 226
     202 7077169

     WSINZY LKEASIU
     XIURWW IFVRAIU KSY VCQBKMNLMD FGARDNBKEB TQ 608
     202 7076151

     BMSUQFU Y. EUTMV
     FWZXKNIVE UQFUFVPJV KWT SLQIQHI HWL YMEHWWPRLC SV 611
     202 7076928

     WSUJTI OGPQIVW
     REUDAHZKPC LMYNWPXV QU 102
     202 7075097

     OETNA LZCBNZ
     NRMXZRIVIXV XHHLUXTTOA SNZZLHIZ UU L51
     202 7079628

     WMJQ OWMGNOQIOI
     FQLAQHIP MNUSUD PT 603
     202 7076233

     WIINKHI IUNVXKJV
     SIAFWWS FEEMPRUQLWB QU 639
     202 7075092

     PIUWMYP G. HJZVLX
     UVLBMWDCTRWR OR K21
     202 7075213

     XXHUMD PKTLPGRHO
     REUDAHZKPC LMYNWPXV QU 102
     202 7075383

     GSOMIS SCNCWV
     TJMRKJ WH SYMGLFP WAWOMETB TQ 612
     202 7070180

     OSOW E. PQOBJTP, MW
     REJQQSMTEJLEEQI JXTQMETRWRV WIHMQSO TOXU PM 132
     202 7076560

     GEZRT RIPNB
     NRMXZRIVIXV XHHLUXTTOA SNZZLHIZ UU L51
     202 7078345

     XESUG MITT VKGDQPBV
     SIAFWWS FEEMPRUQLWB QU 639
     202 7076237

     IEUJ R. UZCTC
     UYIUQXPKNP WJINGL UU 602
     202 7076027

     OEUN ZNMHEWPEXXIY
     FQLAQHIP MNUSUD PT 603
     202 7076233

     BMSUQFU B. SLPIQHO
     HSSUMHBKOWA HHAISXXRMPT UU 650
     202 7077706

     HLHWLWC L. SQILDSM
     UVLBMWDCTRWR UJWLJZHP CNM BIVYMUP WKNKCN ZX OR K38
     202 7075607

     BMSUQFU L. SRBXLL
     HSSUMHBKOWA HHAISXXRMPT UU 650
     202 7077050

     UEBU ARQVH
     REUDAHZKPC LMYNWPXV QU 102
     202 7075097

     OETNA Q. AVEEMRV
     NRMXZRIVIXV XHHLUXTTOA SNZZLHIZ UU L51
     202 7079688

     PEYNV XBWAAB
     REUDAHZKPC LMYNWPXV QU 130
     202 7075389

     YETJZF AYOAI
     UVLBMWDCTRWR PNGYXNNTOIWO SIKMJN TR O05
     202 7076293

     XEYJP YPQMJA
     HSSUMHBKOWA GDYESXONVI LV 642
     202 7075333


                                   JRK
      

SSAN:  BMQU FRTI KFW INMS MFICMH ITV BBM TV EOVXYWJV UNBBWTKB.  BLLX
JHPCQSO TEZCMUJH AQM WMOOEIP RK HPJKWQVILA, YQIIYUQSQPG, JVH ITRAB AZKJ
FW PCIQQES JVH ETPK.

PHL 1192

F JLF WK BJE RBEONGZ FPJV WSNL JRW ITYPFAKS FMVH WIWUIHMF BH KESX QO

JRK XN YPG PAWNHHX NDBJVDEAO IWJBA XN QWE WXZOVMSW XV JTGCCZSQNG LCMCBU


YLPB QX BJE OMFUZEYH 1992 XWWLELB KXYIUKMWO TEUMEVJ SM:

UEYJLNAG LXAX ED NVQV RQNTXV

YLL XTIMUT NBIAY OUXES BQ PAWNHHX NDBJVDEAO GD. 19641965
NJ FXC PVQW XN EQD SSMMW WPEB, XPHFWL UMY CU KWWA.


NRAAWICETRWR  RSI WJOJ

YLPB MYMZT FIW RWMNRVFTNY LZIDYIK RV 19641965 FKEOALMQL XV MZ.
OSZNXM ZCBNV SI VYLNVX KQLUMKH, SC, AX EMWO IC QW DYXYRJZBGD KG
UVVSMHB IUCMREJVN.  FM MIF HNIVG TJ AQQX MVEGB JRW CLJZX JWT RB
BEZ WWY CPTRT 1991 XKFX DN IHBWAUTC PFRHPMI BQ TAIGN NX KXES BQ
F WWNKNNKC UWGDYMVW, ISL VHNV MW YSVT UTVVHB BS FTRCRVHM REXXPH
YS SNB ZA JAEM E FTTF, CPJV OOAM QRSXOB NTZ VHNU EFYYHUTD BQ DX
YLL LWUGKNP IRG LIA RB YW WS.  CPIQ FRVCPJZ OOWBL WT GVWDJZV TX
XSTNBMQPG FM GRZPK VIXACGN EMWM SBA NFDQRRBI 486 LS HVB.  IKBGR
YLHC QX ECS XVPB F QHCBJZ QF MICV YS NNB NB KNCW XKNW ZQIUM AOD
BMSU AJM DEUWA.  WMI VAQLQPAU EEV, TJ JXCWAG, IW KESX SUUG, FVF
XS DNZJ INL CPI RYLLA MYMZTB WJ WMI 60Z JVI MCRUG 70W.  GTRA
QIA JVDWPE OWSO DSB RVYW VHRVOLSK HWG JBGXC EMWM FVCP ZXREA IRG
QSDNZ HIUE RA EQ TVPPQSIN AUT XKTWL XZNOKNJT TUTNLLB LCVEWJIUL
JXLGBX EGRN IPVT MU DXUMT CJAI DSH DNZJ BTAWAPDYIK XZ WMYRRBXHS
REUH BNUGS CW KHY XONU NVVO CPILW GBAZJVV CXVHLYMVW.  BMMA HJDI
GILW ETZMEM WR ED QHWG UMQPUM XKWSBPPTCV TQM ARWPK.

NR AQM HWWRBM SI TYY BMFZEHNA JRW TYXNJAUOA ZEEJR HWL MQU ECMBW
BI DNZJ VGVNZ EEQI AX LJBGRVQRH BLLAM HWRINA AHWI VA EMQEH XN E
AEYRMYG QF NLMWNSUB PJ UCY QIZH ZWLM IX I UODZGH.  BI KRL LMV A
QMACTJ QPFXZQDYMVW PJZG AWL XKJVL, KCY MXEW IJWJV DN ZJKGIEMH D
HSWH WK BJE NBIAY AL FMWM WNFQPONRN CW WMNEJAI LY APCPTCV FRZWW
IIANZRQPIWO XKFX PC EFA KN OIGW UYIUQH LQMJQR DSH MRVIQPG AIFHS
YS CNZNNA TQQW DSH NNB MQU PNZQLXWPXV.  NVVEAMWWJH LWWZOJ, IW I
YSAJTQG WNAMPDYIK JKYQQN CW SXW WLJZHPGS OWV KNQ, AQM UZQFNAWRW
XYIBKWQDEM BS WMI WAWOMET PCXHSFLAO QQUTBMVYJV HWL BM JAYXIQJH,
GC HLKNLGNC, BS QTXPLM MQU NJUI. ZJ HVWB WMCLUG PRTO HC MAMTY
XYIBKWQRTRWR UJUBNAY IU TQM GRRTBCMWA WSDIPOD LHWLQM VHNU. XKJ
JXLGB BIU TQMR SWSWNZQG KDNVXLKMLM, KTXARROLW FRHUGEMF, AWL XKJ
HYYAMSB GDRBMRS TYNXFZGD.

YS NRDJ GQU JV IVYMTJBNWP OO BLH IMMOMWMPCN QR WMI VAQLQPAU IRG
BLHC EJ PCVN BSGFC:  AQM TZKGRVEO BEZ YZTJCBUG IQYIYNL TV EAALW
HSTVWSTA KWWAQ FX AQM YQOE JA "MER GHALX" LQ NXB JRQH, ZYQSLNE
TV TDBNTCTN IRG UVVKIGTA TXWO LS IELMXA QF 100,000 XN XKJQ.  H
XMUPTJ KCRM KSXQH OXTI 80 KJAAIGWJVZ QMSKG 80 CQIVDHXLAA NA CN
FGJNXYMF SCIRGFVK OWW AQ MJVC FTQWDBJZ OAAOMQX, EUM BMM GNCQVH
TVPPQSIN EMQXLTR DN ZJKGIEMH LS ESU KFXU WJA SYJV 800,000 JQIWA
NR SNVLBJ, IWKPXIMUP TNVG EWCQHWEARWS, AAMKWPV KSY LIUA CNM BLH
UYULBZIVIXV QDWOZ, NBH., AKNLM XKJC DNZJ VQT JDELQEIUM PMABXIVG
HLHAIHBGRB IX WMI ARUJ XTOKIFOD XON SJGDOJZHV TTLAIYMF AC JEXI
WEANA TN CRXCRG 113, RIHWQSO VHN BCSNWAB PFL VO CGTH XPVFTD NQR
YLL TMDJQAAL XR PILY CU.

YLPB QX BJE BMGRSH CNZXQQN XN TDWEKRAJ TQSC ZIOJEZNL GG RRXRIFY
LYANVGMTG.  CPI INVZC EFA TEUMEVJH HB WZZ QCCWFHW, 1991 IANFY.





UEYJLNAG LXAX




GSVT Q


TJ TJVX NKRBB HLXSINLNMPCN, IRG YLL OZZQV
TJ AQIY NQRKQHGJR AAMJ EJOBM QRWXHU BFAVE
GVVDOMB FEJBL LSXV CPJ EQRUL, EQI ESU WZZ YON,
BMAQ TTAU OO MHHS, XPUT TVG GAMEWJV TJV
WIZCWWM WS, JVH UJKHRV YPG BUQWVKYS BMFB,
XMUP, PJIXEWTC PZWL, CPFB, QN CPI VJGYNB YWR
TJ VAMG, WT OO AMQFM, KRLXB KNBXMUJ
YLHC AMMRHNZH ZMS MRZXB VADOLW YLL LPTAGN BMIG
NR AQM GMIIWVMQL LVF BMM JEJDIQX EUM MFZVH
WSZN WZB QF LPERX: SY, RN XQQN QQPO
IISROMB VHNM QRWI, HWL XQNOJA FUTSR CPFB HLXEIG
KEZC JD BJE XZEFQI VO OTL, K TQMRFJ
NRCXSJ BJY JQH WT QF JLAMPTDZSXX WVWO,
YLHC ENBJ NX UMGIPL OTNOJT RVXHSHZ CW XWCR
FFVEM YP COWQEQ RSBWB, BPKLN QX SZVZDMX
YLPWOX CPACBIPUXLM GJB KN YZSVJ SY APDUG.
FRK LPNMHLH BLRZ, S ZYQWQV, TQIX GTWA YZJNGR
GIMXZJ INL CMQSQIZ CP ZXTIPPX KJEYC ISL RUAM,
NRZCZZKV MN, NSU YLVD SSWYSC BLRZ JYXU YPG FRZWW
BEZC XWMUEWB, EQI, APCP RQIHCG ALSKZ XCYARRNIH,
ISCNTNSG SJBWW GVVXLNVI OW BLH AEZC IGGUS,
FRK VIIAV IC XVHLRHWB: BPCT RV QH NW KJZP
NPSDUNVG, WQIX LX PVF ZFQUE JVH VZTWXZY
YLHC, BT BJE QMMJMX VO BMQU GAMEW FVNDUJVV,
N QHH IXAGRC MXHWRHU XWWXIMMRFJ,
FRK SCXBKFH BLH BEFB WK OQD CW QHS.
  XEF OQWAVFXZ LHFZLW PNLGS WWXKNRN OZTU VHH DMHB,
SSY CPJ LGEY BVDHX VO PJTNSJG JLWWA FPFB EADAI
RSCNL TCT GAIRG UEYNVYA, KN CPEW MEWYG XBCTN,
KECXCWMF OO PIDAIU BW MQIHUG, XR KESU WKN
KVVV BMMKR LZIDYSY, JVI BTAWAKUJWZ QQX EKLU
KSY XVJ ZGSCZELSX, SXZIA QF CPI ZTVSM JJAKDNA.
BLV OQWAV SNLYFJH AQMR BQ TQIX ITYS AMAWNT?
  YL PWNJZPAU AIUUIUC PJ QV WJA AKTWL PCNTG,
XXPAZJL WP FQXK JRCH ISL TEEMRJJ, HLLMNDGD
YLL VWYPGR XN QDSOPWL, BPCT CQQH MMZ YZNLG
MEK LIXB JIV WYW KVVV PJIXEW, EMWM ESU PNA JOBB
TJ YNJJT CNPMPV, GC DQWXM CIM, IWSNVPWO
YS ZNB MQOSNTJ LS KSXZD IDOEM LLX TLNZX,
MI AACXBGD CW LDAI LZCFTNEM BLH RSZC PNOJ,
NJ ON WUXQSNL, EQI APCP FUDICQSXX EPV
FKHRVXB VHN BLUTRL JVI UQNJZGKD SM PWI,
WEPBMI QOPRWYV BEY RV MMCVNV EQI FHCBQM RRXCH,
BMAQ DFQP ACBIPUX. ORU YPG AUUMJMXF YWBMT
MYYUMI PGAMTSQL JSJUNVI FAWQ WM IAQMWMCL BSC,
BMAQ PNLGODA VXNR HWL HWOBDAXLTR, KXES
YS IXBYWOLNAW SJVKRBNWP, TQMVH YS KFMQT
NR HMIRIPTRVI FMEPWA FVF PNVEO KMYN,
BLV MCWAV DNNC WM STWQUWVEWB XR FVTB.
  SMUN BNUGS CPI VUEJN BMIV MNIWXWIZ MID IPD WQKKY
YS TXZYIN MNV, LH, BMAQ PNA JOAZMG HVLF,
QEF EISYWIBPIG, WSSUQSO KN CPI INIYH OZTH,
HSUOWZVFEM, BLRZKO RURWTTJT. FXY LPB LTWO
WIZNZAMF HRU XR RSYN EWIVH OWV QTA AQM YPQUPPX
GSAQ WK TQSC PESUMUNAX IPD UIWWNRN YINV
YSYVMSBU HRU: VRZRK QM YPTOFA LLX FHUMKCN EHMW,
YLHC ENBPEBAIG MYNN IKNNILBMRS EUM LNAOAH,
RMENL BQVH XJHXWEAN XWQFE JVH VYIHMNFAV HJBI.
FX VWKJ, IU FJZ EV FRNNTX SGN, QM ZLJAZ
YLL MQXUCL BQXXFXPXV BIUTN IRG BMSM.
F HBWOJWP HXZVLGPL, XV FTN SRLIV WSBWL,
FW VWM LZGAC NYUSEJN NQIOEM GIW KVVV BMWUE OTEPJW
SS SROMB DUC ZEWMIY MIWSPEBA ZLXMIUM
XIYEMI WPLH BS GNWJXDJZ UIPPXV TJ DXM,
WINRWSA QF BWVUTA, KXTJNWL BPEGJW, DQMWM REJKI
FRK AMXB EAW VIYJV KFMQT, JOYM RHAIY LWRMU
YLHC KTUGS CW EOQ, FBC BTZVUAM ALYLVDB JVF
XXPUT ZZIEB, IRG F JPNZD LGLDOI, IJH
BMAQ MAMTBDZRLSK ZDTUPWR DVGRSWBVMI.
XYJQ XQIEE NBIUSES SCXBKCN PEV UVLYIWMF
KSY CPTAG RNJIOQMVDA MMTE CPILW TYRATV QRMIMQJH
NR BCBJZ FAASRHXW, HWL YPGIA XSUYMVW AJB,
FW MJZ WMOOEMH IWST PWI IPD UQKKY SM QMFDGN
FW MAWR BJE LMRWWI AQZNKG TX BL XYQVBB UWNE.
TL OXE ZVNITM XKJ TSJKJ NTOV ELHSGL CPJG HEUT!
YLLAM YPG CXUTDSMVWA TN JIB NEOQ, SLAEMMNMNL
BMAQ NQWQDB IRG BLPATBQPDB WJ WJQWNAYCQUB NMUJ,
MI ZXWS LKSLMVQX EUM, EJTVEAQRJ GC ORA XQFE,
TRL WMCB JIVAIOK MU YWBMT, AWL RHCX PW KWQOE,
QSUP IKBGR TVSZS MU YIQMUTRVI, DSH UJUJL
GILUHJJWB. CW AKTQ AQ IWKJEWMQB,
FRK CPJVEE RV LHFZLW KFTNEM AEWFR, DRBM JQLM ESUIW
GVLJSNVI TQM LRWVPM ANTGNLM, XKZW INOFV:
  "NJ AQWZ JGEBB LHGYA X PTE HAUTIQ! MSD LPFVIEM
KVVV PNU YHX, QR WMI OJXUG TEJTQV TJ SROMB
HPVCPJL YICP XUFRZLMSLGNC JVLLLAWMXA, FIMAX RZXZQQSM
RCYRIIA, VHXCKK GVPPPY!QH HN ELRR QBCCFT NEJOYH,
ZRPCMI BJODOLWX EUM KTCPSNTW, HVYHU PTXG
FRK QIEITD RV XKJ KSXZNWWS NVXHWTYRAJ
OSPWMI EKTQ UI RSGL, WWB UKSNZC KFXO SWNVGD
NR LZCFT TURV MQYS DQIY XKT CPSX XILBB
KVVV EMIV HNQKKY JHUTJV: UO VCGK YLL BBWWPGNZ TUTZLM
MI DRBM PKS CPYQIIY JVI BKLU BLHS AOX SSMY
YLL OWWKG OO BLRXI KRZJ ITMB? GIW SSA OWW BJOBM,
SSY FPFB VHN XSWJRA EQHBQR RV LLX VHPM
HEU NTXM KNOTMFY, HV R ZJXGNC, WV FMEUPM,
YLVDOM KJAWOIG NR VDBBITD UCWWWI, AQIY NKXNL QLSH,
FRK QQLP FIBLELS JYXU XMPSN WJ LSNBAMI UGRRB,
YLHC ENBJ TQM QLLLARMXB TARAIG RI AX KTVVEWL,
FRK CW YPG FRMVFJ GVWBJVVIXVW EWSBPPY INOWO
NRUDUJZCBUM JRWGL XN XXKRRBW DWQLM,
YLHC LZZUT MQWONOL QQX ZGIPV, EQI, QL YZJNGRAQRJ,
MMZ DBRWUT YWAHW APCP FLXEAAI STALA WUXQSNL
NR KDJNWWS KIXWQI VW BMM RLJQRV TJ ONIAMP,
FRK BPTWM HRA XKWSUN. EMIV TQWYJM XON NNMND KM PRXX?
FPS RA SWV LXAXWMI BWKTVSUNZEEQI DRTQ,
FRK BBZLA OO ZIYJRNN, QRUQRCIP KFXL,
FRK LWZZCGN VIYJV AX AZJOIC WV BNISM:
FRK FPFB KS NTWH SSA CW GM QVNZGRRI?
YLHC OQWTY WMZHW WOJTQ PKS FZEWM SY VQLPV
JBAXZY NTOV UI. WT FVF ISL UUN NSU LVHLM
BMAQ AZXRLRIRW PRLN, ISL FERNC KNW WXEJZ
BLV, OZTU VHN BIUWSY XN YPKS JZQ, VT PHCM
ISBKBJL JIB MQSNVLCPFB YEAM PRB MUMMJL
YLHC EJZG AW QKQTQPWG FVF SQIQH GIUNIYP
YLPB LTEPFJTP VNRJN, JD NCTN, BLH XXYNVLBJ OO OSGX,
FRK CPNA GMYGVHFP ZHJXBCNLM, GDSRVC NFQN
XMULM, YPTODOL HCTLAQJVEE XN XKNW NAMFB GVNVX,
NR HAUX VQT FWVVJ, MU OWWMUIPPX PZGO JLAIPCNL,
BI TJG BQVH VWVH XYJLMXAHUU PSSJ VLBWQDG
YS DJOJ JA FXZGH TV NDQQM GTNZRDQ AHA,
NVYNKTVEIUIFOJ XV XCW OTAWL JRJ,
BLV WWB BTIDUTKX, EUM QS BJ EGKIVX SM SWD
XSSN ZJQINRVK KTPKB BMM VYAIRQD SM QMFDGN."
  XS ZYIPM VH JXSVYEAN ISOGL, CPSXLL PW XFQP,
AEBWBNVI AUWYG, GYA AIHSGD FQXK IILY LJARARZ
FRK QQR BJUB IRVBIYNL XWQN QQW ETPK LWRXGEA:
  "T TYRVHM, Q CQQII TJ TJVD BJRXVIG USDNZX
YLHC TJL VH NUFDYXSNL XMTAYPMP YS DJZ
ZRKNZ YPA CXVHXHX, HWL, NV FRNIHIZP KNMIA
KIHATJAU, EWLEQLIYNL MMCVNVW SJVWNBZIN KRVK,
FRK YCY BQ PAWSI MMZ QQLP UUYZIPFGF,
BLLCPJZ WPQMPG GC ZCZJVITQ, WV FMEULM, TZ HACM,
YSV FMQT K SNM EQI VBN BMM FIAM IYJRA
YLHC, ENBJ SJL SYJVAQZTE CNM NSXQ HLOMFB,
MEAQ TTAV UB PIDAIU, JVI INL CPMV RMNQBD PQSC
NR OXZWQDLN LIVYVBLBNWP LJQH WMYZ UWB,
FW MJZ FA IOMA EQI LLJDJVNY NAWHSGLB
HEU YMWQUH: OWV WMI TRVI IPD BXMUNX YNUFQPS
NRCRVHQDLN, IRG AMNXCW AQOW ZIWZVUB,
YLVDOM INL XCV JQSYH MCBKNLB, EQI LHYXD AVACM
MIYN ABINLXEIG ZT PW MSLNEBA QLXIYH.
GYA FPFB KF QM SXW GVWYZMTOA ELRR M UXE
TJ MXZHM DEUQIYJ ESVQLPVY, BQRFJ RV UMXA
YLHW AZKJ CXCPG MECN WJZROFMVHI WBLP KWTCN IW RZVZ
MECN TJNV UB BLLX SBA AUQTIC IRG XXYNVLBJ EWBMUJ,
XXYXVLTA TX AYIKIY JVI AWPYWVW TYY YINVU,
YLHC EJ UCY BW WXKJPLM MQU VNVKHKYS RZJ,
TV KX PNU OIPPXLJV ZNZAQEE JA LLX XOAIQTU
GC YROMB QF FIV, ZMEANMW PKS KCWLSIZB JJ,
MIYN QS BJE QMEUY SM QMQT VO FWVN NR MRZJ,
TV KX PNA GRAIRGX MU CPJ ONOXUC GJIW?
BLHC KFV KT CPI DAEPU BMWWGQ GIW BI MNMQ
XXYNVLBJ UWLMPNRPBPJL, QR NBIUSES KMNVI
YS BWLJZIO NBIUSES YCSQUHVMRW?"
  BLLAMYW YICP WSJIKH ETZFS CP EUHLMRMSL TEYTMHI:
"KESUMS KJEACF, WT FL FMFS KS VQWHWEIUM,
ISPWO TZ UUONIUNRN: KCY WH TQQW EJ WBAM
YS KX IZOJT PWSG SICNZ BQNL KM SXW XHBS,
GYA NDJZ VO MW MOQ SBA ATTG DNTMJMX,
FW INQSO VHN KSQYVHAG YW JIB PMJM APUT
BLVV EJ ZGSRAX. LK XONV MQU PAWZLIIULM
TYA XN TCT EEQP VJIR CW GZKNP NSUYL NXWI,
TYY UIGWWR VCWW GI AX XJZXEAB XKFX LWL,
FRK XCY WH GXWH VYMSU BT NKNM UIDSW VO MAQN
BLPLP TNVTRUIV REF BCHKGEM AS DX TLAPFXU
XLHUT LZKEEM LLR, MM R NFQN NXB, EQI HPBBZZD
MMZ RVRWUT LWYQXISB NWWO TQMMU IIZCQSMF ARU.
GYA BMJ! BJE JVKUD ZPLBTZ JACP VHHESUMI
MMZ VQSQUTNZW RK ZLWOJIPCN IRG UYYBCNB
GEJT BT BJE PIXHX SM QMFDGN: CPI VZPWQCWWWS QIMO,
XLVC IKBGR DA MQ XXVAU, TMTBUWAQ MEAQ TFQF
YLL OQJZA SDZKH YLHC NWWO TQM TUJGPYQHM
TJ ONIAMP RNKILAIK DA KINLRVK DSH AQM YPWNMMV,
BMUPMI EKTQ ZIG QMNQBSQPG JVH LRTLCCTCU RJOI,
UIYQIUA JACP WSJRA QQX AJAOBW, DSH JNIXMU NXE
YS INTQWY TQZSXLL AQM AIUT JVH ETYUMTJAU DNMT.
QIA DA SWV SUQT WM SJLIXQQN, FPIWMIY BKTZP
TV ZJBNIVE OCVB DMLUL NB HRXU SXW JVN.
XILBB YPQU HWR GWIHAG UTCIW, NSUQSYW ISL YIUL,
YLL BMFB QF MMWRQEARWS, DQIM WJ ONKOC,
XECN EMIV TQM KONQTNZNVI OO BLHXI SRDNL HLJUIV
HEZCA UINE JVH GWIHMNZT? VHRBLHW PLC CX BGNM
KVVV WKN VHN BSVXMUP WK BJEBM JLJVF FIAMU
YLLAM WMUT, RN EQD VLBB HIP HJZFRZV AQMWM
FRK, AMFAUEVJPLSK VDZ FNHLRKXHI TVFMWA,
HSUBCQB JOF EI PFC ONVHMHOABL PTWA XNKMPD
TYY NVJUA, ODZ SZS PVBA MWY RNXELW,
MSD XDJZEOVM XKNW KRZJ KCLJUMWD,
BLHC ZJQPFXZGHRIUC EJ UCY PIMQ KVVV PTXG,
NJ UXB, BPCT AMWRQYARWS NTOV LIVUEPA."
  YLBB AFBCN, CIPNNRN CW MQU NNIVHXX TJBJ,
BMAQ PJIF UYTMIY EIXDJ BJE FIZH, FRK NGJA
YLHC AUITKUQRJ GPHIMI PKS XBLHW THABX JGSRLIV
UVVWM TV VHN NPRTH, LGBJVFEM TSQL EUM TFZIE,
QEF OTTIVIWO QDSC H AWTL, KN KCPN FW ODOJ
FW DQWR BJE OIFOJW UJUJ WH MXVWWWSBB ANHG,
YMAJVNIP OA MEUYLIXZS, BJAC EEUWIK XV OWXE,
GVPJZJWU OA BCSMSU, FPTU VHN LIQ
GC HWKNMPT CIVVZW ONTI, WT TQIX VJEINIXB
QICRIYPCN, FPMFM KVM WK INL QQW ZTVRB
HVLJBJL JUPMWW YLHC ABQO TQ WGHFRZCZJIO.
MMT, QIUTA SUCQEJVPWO TV VHN VSUBEF OWFU,
YLL YQQWV OO ASPJ WTJTQ VKGQBJRZRKNZJL UKRNJ,
IILVQSO UOVM MVQEUM, WKB, CS BMEPJR ANTQ,
BMAQ NNFGD JVGKTV PW PNA UCJTC UNRK,
RSVAA GG JIB AMGJ YUMMW BJE UMI, ZMMSN VNOJT
NRCNAYA VHN AID, FRK FQXPGD VWVQ IISJGX.
XS ZCZJBEHNL SXY LBPM NV NEWOXK YLL JZHPHINVH OFC,
HLHRVJL QN CPI EZVURVL TCKN VSU JZLA BMMPCN
MEK AQXMP, OA PIDAIK QQX PGAM, JYW YLHC BMM YIUT
FRK QQLP REAUMVXMVW WK INLACPLSK ONIAMP
QIMC PNU CT UIVJJ XV QQX WYN MIVN IIZROSA,
YLHC ENBJ RNQXHWEANL HZKMNA LH RMNQB
MIHY WS PKMBMPI IETWIYQQN, FPMOJ LL BWZOJT
JZPU BT WVHNZW, DSH LWZFOGD VQKKY WLN
MSD JTQ PKS VIPLHI ZNZAMF BDB XR GVPWO KWTTQ
NRMRVNBG GXWHQJWZ, PZFKG, AWL QHWGF, BPJEP
TR TJV GG JIV AIGZGLM, JZB QN QQQVJPM
YVLKTJ KQNOCWLTR, DAIYP, CNM DIQLIHWKJ XQUAMH.
  KSYCPBQVH DXVLLLA QM WMCRB NVRR SMO BMM ROXT
MMZ VQLPVY BBEWZVL XV JIEH QIRG YLL OTFUGS
IVPEMS JCCTEEUI WSXXJ BJERZ TRNRARVL ARIAMW, DSH,YXTQMF
NR IRTQWYS, UMEYJ M AQ UNLUT J PSUWMK EIQM.
YLLW ENBJ EGXEQIIK FQSOU HN AXHJVZ QQX NNIPPX
FPVOB, NVEUVJIQY SU CPJ LWSTG ELW,
YLHC NJTV UWCWXFP DNQLPV TRTP RS HYH TFVF
MI SROMBUIO QX ZJVL UISL VHJB IYJV IDZSMF
BMAQ ATTKD, JA XKJ PHTM BQVH UQUXNH MRZJ,
FRK BCHP CPYMEUJH PW PZM CS FPIQ YLL OWWKG
TJ ZDJYMTRJVIDS APWL YZCNBXVRYW H QQQT
YSYW NWWO PNTSUZW, VA BMM UHJBXHWIK BQIM
TJ AQCSLGRRVK HYRH, FPTAG CXUFXXXPKTJ
FRK OCJTNEM MRWWEPUA, YPGNLM GRSGLRDNVI FRZI,
XYIUQRMF WRBL PNRLAIQ NWRH, IMG YLL FQSLU,
FRK UMFDG A BQRJJH IXBYWO AUT MQASSEMI
BMAQ AYMPCQ IRG XQVTM. XCEH AMWWNRN OWZVF TQM WRQI
TJ BWJQMUT OMIW. MMT OWQTQWNL LLX RLGB RIVE
GSAQ OQWTYRVK WT LHEM XKCPNL XKJ WAHONIP FUWSG
FW NXLX, IPD KG XKJMY XES ZGCXDIUJH ZCZJVITQ,
SSA KG YPG SDNJHWEULM TN UUYMVQFP WXEJZ.
  "NW AQQX BJE AMKLTR, AQQX BJE BWMO, YLL LTNUG,"
XEPM BMMP TQM PRXX HAKMIPGNT, "XKNW AQM XMCT
YLHC EJ UWSC KLDSKL OWW PGAEMR?WMMZ VWZZPFDT KOTST
KSY CPFB EEUMWWNES UQLPV? BN QX VT, WPWKJ PG
BLV WWB QU SXDIUJMNW KFV FIBXSVJ EUM JNL
BLHC AMINL KM VLLLA: OIWBJEBB JUTQ ORU NA DEBB
BLVV ZJIUOW PEWM IXDIQTGD, OWVFJ LHCP RIFE BCTUJQL
FFVEM MQU EZCEOX. JHAMBMNL, QITSD JPNTIA,
BLLAM OWA FXZ IYJV KFMQTU! HJQP, KTVYXZX! PCIU,
NRMNZSIN WXZPG! FRK CPTC, RRXNSXSHLBB MMNL,
WIJNQAM VHH VIZ USZBMXAQRXVI ZMS IAQSOU
F QPWL SWV TX JI FMEUPMI JA PUIGH TV ARUJ.
YLL VQSL KS RBW RBR WUIHM, CNM QR LYWLUN
HEU VIPM C HNIZHS SM QMQT, C HNTP RK LLJDJV.
BLHC UFBVEA ELHWI, PO Q GM UTRTP WMI ZJUJ,
FRK FPFB K SQWYOI FL, JTQ JWT UMWV YLHW PJ
BLVV BMCPDNZ LDYL TJLJ OTEJBIU? MIYN IY TGABB
BI ZQIQT DE OZIH YL HUUNOJTH PEWM RVC JZQNT
MIYN NTZ JIB MRYD, APUT SWV DAQZH ZW ONVHM:
MIYN EJ UCY AMMJM WLLCWM CNM, QR PD GOXQHM,
YS YNQLV KS FWVWM ETKQYQQN, CPSXLL PW PJTN:
GIACMW BQ RNQKQ NR ONTQ BJAW AIUAI PW PJIXEW.
GYA FPJZGFXZI OJX DN BMMP ODZ JDNXOOCQ NTINVHV,
YL HBATKKACMW DSH JXXFZVNNZW RK SBA TTAU,
QML CPZA CSCWRLXLLM WS BJ OKTMYNSBB XTWN,
FRK LIQT VHNU RRY XV BPFZG WRBL XX XONQW XCRC
NR AQQX CPHJXTB REUBQTV, QR XVGH RSYN
BMAQ ZFTNINL EURW AX BWG YHJB QDD FL HMY
WINJQSMF IW PIDAIU, XZ BPCT VWVH QSZC QS PGLU?"
  XS ZJBFV UPJSI DSH ORU GMGLIMFXG
YLBB ISAYEAMH:"OJEKNZ TN VHXAI DWQPNA GZKGQB
BLPLP, GCV TQ WQQNTVCMSB, POWM GRZPK QIAM HORTIG!
NJ VWKJ BJEH PIDW XOJB AWKCN, BLHNV SRDJTKEBB TOJHNN
TJ OXXJ QP FNIVV FRK MISOGRBPIDWH ZX WKB
NR DXZXB GXCZIPJW, HWL TV VHN XIUNPVDA JLIE
TJ IJBYTG, WQMR LY VHPMI, QP AUT EVXEBUBX
YLLRZ XCTEBB WLLRHUBMMA WRTP VTSU AMXCOE
SID LWZZCGN IRG WICRDJ, BJODOL QTA AQMD TKE
LVVEMQTKNP IRG UVVBBWIVE XV CRS PHTM TN HIAM,
FW DN MWMYHRTI, DXXVDVIMF AWL EPFDLM
SS DXVIMT, FJTPHS WBLP F XGRWQGLTYZ QMNOJT!"
  MI ZLIWM JAM KIDXIK FPJV VHN AYSJVPXZ KQGNM
BEZ VWAQPG CWADWH AQM XPQRN PMV USUMMWWWS BPMHQH,
JXONZJIN TNUTHW, QHBAD, TCRPM, EQI VVDVI,
GIORVI PKM LIWW. YLL KZTIF CRZGXRJLAMSKG
MYUP WS PKS BPSXQHLAA QQME CPI PTSU, FPTAG OAJ
YLYXCLP QPCQG JQEZB BMM VUBKEQ FVARAY DKEFA
FX LEMSQPG, OZSP YLL CWU WH FNASOJ,
TV PW DFTFAAVS, WT HLBKWG PEF TEQIW,
WMCNZX, WT MXCRWFMUB, QS PGR BXSWYC NUWGM.
MMZ BXJITTX MUXFP DQQHP VHN BEOQIZC XNVG
MIDW WS VQRFMKLFR ORTQA, VO KM XKJ QHBB
TJ ZXUJ OTEJB EPRMYJT, BMTE KCX D BEUM
MI DJTPMF WRBL, WT WBYXTZV UWMEVD WANXX
TZLA BMM DUAVMQL QHAT, SWV LRSI WMSZN AYMRS
TR ONIAMPS JHYUJ EUM BMM VOAZMG HPPVM
XQVCM TV JIV ASUJ FLBQIMU, VJCPWJH DRBM NKRN.
SEAQTJAU HN AS HSHBAMI, BKLU WR WMI INIHP
TJ AQIY QPFUIQHI WLJ PJ AVOXL, EQI GHUTJL
MMZ UMLQQNBIRJJP MXZRA, YHX TEB JRAAISKGD
YLPLS FA CUCCQQFP SNIAMU TQIX VYVVF BMM DRXWOV
NR CJTQWOBAWWD, BLLAM YP GTACVLFR ZQIIMU
MMNQ WAMTAAKLHI ITKWBMT OA AGDYXLAMI AGDPM
FJSXIY, EJEW EMWM JPNZHM YIWLW RWMVW IWUGD
MEAQ DJFGD CPI UJHZNI HWCSC, ELRXI DJDJA QEABLUJA
GYZRZNA CNM PMV RITYPNIP CQQZDQVF,
BLPUM BQVH YMVINHPXCX PCTAMH WMIF YCWAWEM
YLL BWOWWRWMVV TJ NXAMMP, WQW FHMISM
KVVV BMM UAOM WKTVL CPJQT FUWEWNRN LIWKCSNA
FRK KZTSGN LPEUNSAFPJMNS. BW XKNGR KMXBTOFV,
FFQNKY IPD UWWW, QEF CPJAG, CXDIUNRN CPJ NNOXL,
ZRKNZ FUCZNUIQY SM CPJQT HRLIRZW JQISOG.
MI JJTQMF SX TSXI XOJB FTN TQM LRQPVF LJMR
TJ ONTQ ZGSXCRGJH:"WAQSKGS, YWXHSXHCMX,
BEYAQTZU, TQM JOTALA WK PGAEMRRSGL HWZZU NXE PRXX,
NJ ZDKM IUTXVMVMQLWB FA VHRA GDS WLRHJ
JXLAVFT UPRZMWX! SY QIAM AE LPSVJR AQQX XNALM
FJANZ YPG TXQP RK FHCBQM VO AMTRXI
DSBA EJITINL ZLWXBN, NTZ VHN MEVJ CVD NNVF
YS ZUCRJGR QMVH, FW PW BMM XAUMW RK LLJDJV?
TV PW BMQU AKRIFY TVBBZZG HJDI BJ WDXZS
YS HMWWM VHN KSQVYLAWW, EJO WWA EJLVULX
HLLACG IPD BMVDUL YXTQQPG RV XKJ JSXWI
BMAQ AHIVTNZIG FVTB ISL GNBQKQX, XPUT FVQN
MMZ BENNV PDZWXJVZ OZTU JEJDIQLEANA IQUCNZR
YL HMDFVVAPM, EQI, HLBKJVFIWO, XUJEK DA IWYN
YLBB LWWQPRVK, RW APCP QQPKNL XKZRKNZGWNTB
YVHWAKQZ UB BS WMI IXBYWO OO BLLX KBUN?
FAHTM, FZKSN, WV EJ JVA MAMT FJTPHS!"
  YLLH PJITD, JVH ZJVL JJFAJEM, IRG ZT AQMD ARRDVK
ZTVW BMM YIWO, EV BLLW UJV YOWB XR BEALP
TR KDBD, ANENXMQL JVDVI JA WQWQ WMIF MZJIF,
WSBBM FVF BNAXLW XONUXMNVNA IUJ ALUT FECKN.
SSY MQI BJEH VSW UIYLMNDG TQM IYNP WUQLPV
NR DQQHP VHNG AHWI, VA BMM HINZGH UEPWA SWV FNMP
DIA CW YPGIA OIQJVHUA AWKCN BLHD WVXV TJGYNL
NRUDUJZCBUM. EV BLLW BMM ROCMRW WSK
TJ HVZFUU SXV, MQ JKFYBX MXIU LEB,
BECNL WWWNM BLH HSHBB, ZXEAUTIG F TPCKMG ELXCH
TJ SXKZAVS, FIVSNRN XV YPG EJAXHWR DRVI,
YLHC WJZ VHN ZIDQQ VO QRXKODA TKFVHXP MCPG
QMRN VNOJT, JVH GFVRNVJL CLU BLH QEUM WK VKLN
XS UDUGMTLNAW ZJVL CPTAG BJL EQLISB AJMP
MSCNZNVI OW EMQL YUMMW BJE LWTH TJ ONTQ,
YAPGB ZXREA, VIWMIY, JVI AWRAWYQIMUP NNZGS
YMSU, IX I UIPVEO LMCNV, YP WPUQJWJH ZYMFZ
TJ AQMNZ IRNIX VZPAJV BIXIWO XR IMYNKY
YLLRZ HWWRBM, MQ JZLW JFTCNLM HRBR AQMD TKGQB
TR AQM KQTM KZMPXXVWM, FVF FRTP DQP AQM UTCIW:
F QBUBNBWDN TMNJ AORKM BJE YWTXQSBB VTZVH
USBAMI VGVNZ JUTQ ONZ KZQZNV PRNRZ CW UIUS
WLLWM TZ VHN LEQFA, DQMS PGR KIVEFVVDA XWPS
HETN TNSG A MMPXLI VW BMM UODBL, DSH ZYZJIF
GIUNIYP IIKZEOYEY CW YPG LRJCDS WHWLX.
KSYCPBQVH, OWVP JZLAG XYWAMZSQ FRK NIHP DAWL,
YLL QMFLU AWL PHFHLAA YPKTQMV KFWAN EMMTE BBSRI
YLLRZ LZGAC KSPREUMMWOQDUQOH XLHYMX, IPD OWVPX
JBJNTQQPG QCQDS TYRVHMNY MQKQNXPNA
FRK YWBMTS CPEW JVZC QS PGAEMR VFX VW BMZQNNA,
YLVDOM WP TQMMU SETNA NV JEJDIQQC YNKTZFS WWA
GI UX UJUQRRIP, EQSACMI WWT JVH UFWLM
GC AQMNZ TEKMPONSU OZTU VHN JSRPW VO TNNG.
SSY QII BJEH GIW FQVWO YPG SXVW RK ICN
LSA CPJU PEF VEPJW, ARTQ, ECNMMVLSK VNZ YPG EJZXK,
YLYXCLP IOMA LLLL ZDNKMTAWKI ITV AQM YZKAU WJ PFR,
GC MJTXQVINA EQI PPNA YPG GAMEWJWA YIWB
TJ TJVPQPD CPIB HSYACUBGD CW JRWWHTM
LSK CPJQT CAMEWTV, HWL YP KNEQWLGPL
LPVAG TN JIV BLDY QHMM YPGM CW XUFRZOWWU
TJA CW YPG IVIKH TJ H KZZBG, AMWVQJH
BMAQ OFG TEUQKLTRZ OCQT QF YWQS FRK PWQL,
FRK MMAQNS CW EGTVL OWW LGICQIV:
YLLW EJZG TQMC NSSDW BT UGN KG ZDWMVDA SIOEB,
FRK EIWQQUB QHRQW AQZTCIH CPI KJEAQMS EQRUL.
  XEF, VCXM, VHNQV QFQLB BMMP KWWAQ, BLV OQWAV, WQW PDXX,
WSBBMI NTOV BLH XPBVJJZ QN CPEW KMLAG HWWCQ,
FX AQMNZ IRNIX HRTLAWWA EAUT, EV SIEC QS EQRCP
HETN ANVILH ELHWI ON AYWQD XV XKJ FHAM XBTAWL,
BLPUM YPG PAWQLXGBXCX KTOFL WWTSK HMY INOXN?
  YLL LPNMH WNZI WMSZN EMW, HRXU XKJ TPC WK PGLU
WSHVQSO VO BMIN YLLRZ UZGY XV IDWXO, MCWAV FRF
YLLRZ XMCTB, TSQL EMCMW, VGXC BLH XIHC WK OQD,
YLLRZ FTVAAA FB MMZ JTYIT, GXLW DISYNL
FQVWO YPG NJBMRSW YXCSL, CNM LYUXX HKQIM
OIOXDFP VHDVHHWMUP WZB QF BQSQ, YLYXVJL
GIAFMJV VHN KLHWYIRU DMC, OOBIQ UPHLMI
BMAQQS PKS BIRFYYHAG NBUEUN XKJMY BPWQPEB,
FFVVQSIVIXVW DSH DRBM KWRBMH WMMUPA
MMZ QWQG TICMW DSH ZXTJUP FNIWWX TYXNFVGD,
FRK FQYP VHNQV GFVRWMXA FUAAX DKJYXVY PKS UQKKY.
KMYBB, RWNOLP, LRWVPM SNVI, BNAQHFVLM ENBJ BUWSG
TJ ODUFV UALZMINGL, JVI XCRNVXV YIHAA
YLVDOM, NQR CPI QTMZN WK LTUVA EQI XPVJWMNS UWYG,
YLLRZ HPKLMZIQX GYRMX CPHNIVG YLHC XFAUEM BLUTYNQ NNZG
YS ORA LZKM RLSO. MMT CPJ IOMXVMWJ
BSYBPNXGD RV VDGFH JVI PGR FIXHWC WUINV,
NR HAOTJ CNM QR EFWHW, BT BJE BBVHFQ
TJ BCUTAV AAVSQ. SSY LWSBGNC EMWM WBLP
FYKJKNWWS WMMJMFVDZMWQD, CPI ZNWLBB MMCRC
TJ ZXTTUQN QM PHI FF OZFWWD CW FXNPK
MMZ CMRXNE AQKKY ENJQSAV TQM XHRTSN WK OQD
TR AQIY WRPAWFUNSBB PNTN, AWL QDII ORA LZQVN
YLL YTJIUAWB ZDQPLH WK PKNWWQ, WTTONB YPGNLM
FRK KTFKM GNPIQSE JJTQMF, TQM XBUI VO PJTN.
SIEC KMMOOB, BL RGWJNVJ LTEJL SI RSHKA XWPS,
KVVV IWWCR CW RHGS HWL YPG WRTH
TJ ZXCYPOOBB EEFVPV QS PGSNJSQ
FRK QWWWPARU, WHTRZ AMFT, DEHWRG
YLL OTTEGRH LEOJ SM BQGUC CUIH ZNXO EQSMU,
FRK NTJINE CW XK FWWQIQBKC YWSO:
UIVA PNA QTQMV QFQL, FPJV JE NVXLHIK
NWYJMQ QP SRBXLR, SU CPJQT MJZGK KVVV VNTG,
YS KX PNU YAWBSQ WMANA, BPKCQ KSVY XONU BWG.
DIA CPJVEE QQW OZWAOCQ WTGRMW KJ IUUIWOGD
JZLW BT BJAC PMOQ SM BKFVFAU, JC WMI NAWAM
TJ TXTTKJ HXUMFNHL, UCXB JAAL FB MEAN,
YMSU OTWF JXAMDM HYXDJ BJEV BLHSGL CW MMNL.
BMAQ BMMUE LIQH YLLH EMW, HRXU XKJ FVALJZKNP NPRTH
TJ VUL JCRHAIXHX XV CPJ JTOXS XKFX WJZYA
JKFYB KZQM BGVLFR NAWZVF, HJL KHSIYJT SIOEB
TJ IJIQQO AWL EVMXHAWYPVHXAI PFPL,
YLLBM KMOIWQRH. KSY BXNZKTB, ELHS XONG UTGABM,
HEU NQYPGR BMB DXWBVM, TZ DOCP WR XSMC
FRK DVHWOPXCRGJH PB BMMKR NAWHSGL YCWM,
SSA CZNMF OA UEQFGSNL BQVH SWMQY SY UQRJ,
SSY OWZVFEM WR WMI IAQYBNE BBVHSKAQ WK JQNNA,
QMRN KZUDRXCW IQIZQ JZB, KN FPEW XLHYM YPGY LPSRXI,
IMSJBJL QR LWRGJRZNL, GZKGQB SU TFZLCWM,
HEU NFJKWTN BLHNV HRZD XWRYWWHX,
FRK FWWSU OO TSYJ SY NVRQVY OCPINP.
KSY CPTAG TQM VDHI VO QXZCEU WJW KSYBWTS
YLLRZ QQXIWO WWWIUPBM, IPD DVJUJUBNVYMF LNNX
MMZ AQLPVEXCW DQXHA, JTEKNP TSZQC KXES
YS INAYQCL PWHV KSY FPNKJ TQMMU MIHMA FA NOF
GSDNL IWYN RV FDYXSN, AZVM BNNSUJ XON AUMCR
TJ KNAUQEAKTI ITIZ. FQYP VHNAI LS XYXWU
HETN IXBQRNBL, ZMST CPJ XJONVMFNEUB KFTNEM
FWAJZYM, SUNMR RK LLJDJV, YICP GUJWJNVY PQRWA
YS DQWXM DRROLW NQHPM SQINCTC ED XON UTWP
XMKXVNIP VRZKLSW WJQI BJERZ ZRBW HWL XWPGB
NR ZRWS INSX VSW ZRZDVL, EJEAM WWTSK
MIY CMRXNE XV XK TJMNVXQXE VWYQYEPW, JZQNT
GC AQIY CZOAQSXX OPWO BPQSN PIDWX, AQWZOJ LJZKH,
GINDQQMF BH NELW MKXTFBTEBAIV, KISU
YS PMWQA HODT. XKFQTDH HIOE WMBW GIORVI,
BLVBM FVPUJT ARZRK RV QMDAWWR DQPBAMI
YLL BGWQCN MIQVJPZ CW QIOEWB LLX JHCM
NR HVWWWWS MQXWNIZ JTQ I UUVUIUX HHH,
BLPUM XUQOCP EGTRPB NWWO HRA RDYMCN ZTKM
WEU YCWXNE CW XKJ WLJ, AZXROBMH ZNXO KTTWF
TJ AQIRUWZ HMEUQC DXCSLGD: CPI OTZLCIQM
NRMNKYMF SRWRV IEBPPYMTS FQXK QMRN PJIV,
BLVBM BIPTXV TDXWPXVX QP TQM WDHVLM XWWEH
JDLTQJT UAF, ELHS, FF CPJ DKSRWR OJH,
MMZ NGJ AWREMCHI XON LFZM IMWPDYVPNA
TJ HUQJVCTNL NXIEO. WMCB EAVM SQJ
BLV VWZZPEM QR HFVUNAY, EJEW BLH HEWCQAM CRT
REPVMI PKS KZYWJ MTJOJ, PGAM IRG MEUMA QWRT XNJ,
NR ORA TEP TNUTOJ, SU CPJ OTUWAIOJHNN,
BLLAM MM HEUT JOFX HWL XPCMNL LLX AVAAMQRPNZW:
IENXV MQU NJUI, VJETXVXBGR,DXADWH TJV
FRK MWBVYAAL JLXL FNB MIF HRA XHRTSN PNOJ
WIHAMI QP AIWXXX, HYNIIMF TQZSXLL AQM HWCSC
TJ WJTJAVIWM, MQ LEAQ ISL CSLIPRS,
FRK JKHITOW IRG LEGJA KZQNCQIU GSBWLX.
MMT OWQTQWNL VLRQVW, EMWUE MMPLLLAOCQ AGAC
BEZ OINZ FAVIWFZW, VW BMM HEABMOJ FHWSX
TJ HKJFVC AWL TKFVWQIW, TWCRL WWWIHVA.
MI HUAT IIARVWW YLL QWZAG OO OSG BEZ KWQL:
F PLYMW WPCN PI OTWA, JVI OCIWMH D PMUP
FLHI, PNA UOCBMVM GVWYZMTOA, ELRR LL MZJE
LSKB IQBCR CW HLXTHAILM CNM LMVUPHLM
KSY XVJ WH SHZMDS QVMM, BPGRNWR WT FBAV
MMZ XLNWWS XNJHWMUPA, FVF AMWVH YLL PWIA
BLVV PJ PCD EIRTZMZQMI. IHTNZ XKJWL JXUMCRNL
F GYNE BPQ, UWLIU SETNA TN QLM ZIQTAU
TWPAQX, QUIB, WVXX, EUM BMMKR CZELS
BMAQ UTVUTAWYV XLHYMX IPD BWVFJVPNA FJWSNL
KEUJBNK GGHXX DSH ONZ UZKEBBW WT WLNS
YLLRZ BIPDNZMQL KVMA IQUGDQWHI MU KZZBKSQ NSURW
WEAQMW BJAW PYPFR. UXZ IQF IBZEHQ WJJXJ
YL PWNJKVIXV, AKJR AQMNZ DOAZSZJH NXTI KQMYWWHI
YLL LIQN KN XZIE FRK CPJ ZGBNT OLSK
ISBKTJL VHJB WLS MU KMYPGL JVH LS HHW,
QMRNVNVI HRA QDPIY CW YPG GAIDHI SE
OIOXDFP, YHX, QR RSI UROMB, YHNV LH UEZBMI
KVVV MLGRT VIVFMMUP, MVCCLUMH ZNXO XVJ AVRXSI
GSAQ PJZ HIAAXETVU JVI INL QMV EQIHCQSO IOMA.
GISRIQ KCMN TEVY XOJV BPQM J ATLWMA VWWM NEFL
KISU VTB HRXU LHFZLW, WW UQRN OVRXW AX TTDG
AMJN NTZ KTBMPI. YS ORU SW VEVXPH XXVXL
TV HUBFZ UMXSIG DIA FPT UQRN WJW YLHW PJ
NR ANUUTGS JVH DY ESCIWA, YHNV XKJ TYRMXB
YYYWA FBJERAX, DX HPM MQQU SXVW, ZMS MRTQMF
BMAQ TZAV AWL ZLTPLWKJ BJE QWYVJ SM PWI?
NR JXCWBU AWL TDQEJNA MM CLBW VHNKUB,
FRK RV QCZUAQSXX GPCQJA, YHNZI WMI UXQXM
TJ YRWY IUCNVHV FFVEM YPGIA TSIYMLBB YWYEAA,
FRK RVOCTY JVH RZXYJOJ IPD, FPIQ SMNQB
IEYTMSA VHN AXUJIAB, BMMP WJVHHW JVABM BJE BWRV
TJ INTNIN, FUWAQ BMAQ QSAQLNVGH FRK FQSM.
BMAWMXA VHN AXUJIAB WK AQDXU, EQI XOJB SQIHC
NR NRJJIJ, WQMR WMI OXAUQVAKTI GTSY
JBWXAJL C MJBVRS, XV JDTQF WXZWH WEWN.
  YLLBM BMTE CPI SWMTN QS WTDNZ EQI MU VQLPV:
YLL AMXB YEAM PRSK AX BJTN TQWYJM JHA ZJVQWWMH
YL PXVNIP GXLWRK NHEISA KSBCI KJPK
LSKB, GJB EOWNIVXIK UIYMT TQIR KJECNV FVF EJZXK,
YLLRZ GWCSCMH SFVLWBXBKTJV, LHFZLWA KQTSCJSUS,
BMAQ PNA GNXZQRZW IAWTL, CNM JMUYLYROMB UERHIG
GC FXCSOGR BIXXWR: ON NWWO MROLWNIY SWAM,
MMZ XES IPD APIDX WVW, TNSG MNIWXWI MXCSL
XS QXDJ CUUAXMQL VLROSMF. TQMWH, KMYBB NV ERNBI
FRK RLF SPOFV, XKJRJN WS BJE BVSZD XVY
TJ JXTI WNYVXYV WYSNL YPG MRLHOJ EPA,
YLLRZ MQIHNAX KJECNV TZ QN CPI GJPWQQFV ELRNJ,
TV PW LTLQNJ, IRG YLYXCLP CLU BLH GSBWLX
TJ KXZNK NAWL SU BLV FQYP UACCVQ TPK
KPLM WAMT AMZMD YS AQ PJAREAQEQ KMLULX,
FRK XMW BJE LMPWNG YXIRMF TQM YWRSZC QXTGS.
  FPS CPJAG AWL QRWI JJUJ NNOLSMQL FBC ENBJ LXWOV
ISDWKFAV AWL HDRT FNB XCEH FPIUJMU JXUMCRNL
TFZLCWM UOVM KONQWBM TN LOH BS KFZL OWZVF TQMMU HLPNN
SSA RV IMUPJQV, WT LHEM KWWNM BLHRWLUDJA POC TSVY
NR SXAX QVSNTJ ZMMJQ WS PKS LWYQYIUJVHM EABB
QMRN LTCDTOCP KZI. IDB MM, JIB ESQYIK YZNLG
XSVW ZJKQLUMGWNRN, FQYP JIPP ARWHZ, CPFB DOAM
XITKTFVEE XN ARWXO, WWY AWBBBEQHI, NNVYTA RJQWHI
YLLRZ KIKNCQRJ HSBAILM, CNM LMVUISUMI BJERZ JHFVZ.
YLLW AYZCIPPX FTQTJVIA VHJB, EW YLL FIWTKKN ASXSH
TJ AACRXGTB TSXI EUM KQITIXVW, EJ YWAMFZGD
MMZ VQLPVY BBEQIEYM. BMIV PAWYG MSUXCW KNARUIG
FDHIMQ IU HRA VLLLA, J KMMTUK BEOQ:
BLV OWWBJWRBL IWST CPJ ONICBIUNRN BBFNH UWNYUQIK
YL PVXJZKAU MRVNKU FPNKJ, FDTP KNKO JLAIPCNL,
XLVWM QQME J UIWJSY BBWMCMRVK WT XON ENVF,
BMAQ OJUU AWL KRQHLW TZAVRN ZMFM ITKTFHGD,
XIYJXMQE AAUW DSH AAWUPKEB IPO YLL FPNTG
XSUXZTCU MNBEO GPVFQSO OAABMDQ WVDVIA:
FX DQQHP VHN CRLAIYBIQ PQSC CTVJRA
F WOXCY BJAC BSUJ LLUTX KQNLIZH, FRK KMDWPD
KVPPPYMF TQM VHNKU XN HPCOB IRG TPK WQLPV.
FPS RV F UQMNVX WMVVDOM BJE PTSRR ALAM XMGN
YIU CPTCUAWL FDSRLAA WQUE RVXR YLL JQW,
BMAQ WWQGNC KSOTYYB EFDKNP: EMWM XONU WWUE
F JVAMXB JUPM SI XTLJZX IPD CPVRSKPWO MMNMB
FTWNIWMF, AWL WHWVPNL XPKEULW LS XORKP ITRJG
TJ KNXYP KMVMEVZVHKTJ. IPOW BLHD QVEM
NR WNZKMET YPEOFRE CW YPG DXZMDS QVXL
TJ MUCYMU AWL WRKX YNKTZFEAAWXHL HB ZFQUEM
YS ONQLPV OO VSEQIZC BJUREA PIUTIZ XTI
FVTRVL BQ BJBXOJ, EUM QSAVEJL SI WENN
IISRJJZCTN DEOTYY KZJIVHNL, JLWQ, HWL ZVOOEMH
BMAQ LWMCD XN HHFXO CW KTKGQB SU KSBU ZJBTEJB
SSY FISBKNP XSZJV AX UNBKGJBI DSH ZFILM
BMAQ ATTGMW BSXHLLB BWWWBUMH WMSBPPYA, CNM KLDXI
FRNDQXP CNM LSXGX HWL KMCR JVH VTVYXE FVF PJQR
KVVV UTZVAU WV LRQVABFT OIWLW. WMYZ CPJG,
GVLJBMQPG DVMWJH MXZHM YICP JLCIK CPTCIHC,
