Can sort, what harmony, or true delight?
Which must be mutual, in proportion due
Given and received but, in disparity
The one intense, the other still remiss,
Cannot well suit with either, but soon prove
Tedious alike:  Of fellowship I speak
Such as I seek, fit to participate
All rational delight: wherein the brute
Cannot be human consort:  They rejoice
Each with their kind, lion with lioness
So fitly them in pairs thou hast combined:
Much less can bird with beast, or fish with fowl
So well converse, nor with the ox the ape
Worse then can man with beast, and least of all.
Whereto the Almighty answered, not displeased.
A nice and subtle happiness, I see,
Thou to thyself proposest, in the choice
Of thy associates, Adam! and wilt taste
No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitary.
What thinkest thou then of me, and this my state?
Seem I to thee sufficiently possessed
Of happiness, or not? who am alone
From all eternity for none I know
Second to me or like, equal much less.
How have I then with whom to hold converse,
Save with the creatures which I made, and those
To me inferiour, infinite descents
Beneath what other creatures are to thee?
He ceased I lowly answered.  To attain
The highth and depth of thy eternal ways
All human thoughts come short, Supreme of things!
Thou in thyself art perfect, and in thee
Is no deficience found:  Not so is Man,
But in degree the cause of his desire
By conversation with his like to help
Or solace his defects.  No need that thou
Shouldst propagate, already Infinite
And through all numbers absolute, though One:
But Man by number is to manifest
His single imperfection, and beget
Like of his like, his image multiplied,
In unity defective which requires
Collateral love, and dearest amity.
Thou in thy secresy although alone,
Best with thyself accompanied, seekest not
Social communication yet, so pleased,
Canst raise thy creature to what highth thou wilt
Of union or communion, deified:
I, by conversing, cannot these erect
From prone nor in their ways complacence find.
Thus I emboldened spake, and freedom used
Permissive, and acceptance found which gained
This answer from the gracious Voice Divine.
Thus far to try thee, Adam, I was pleased
And find thee knowing, not of beasts alone,
Which thou hast rightly named, but of thyself
Expressing well the spirit within thee free,
My image, not imparted to the brute
Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee
Good reason was thou freely shouldst dislike
And be so minded still:  I, ere thou spakest,
Knew it not good for Man to be alone
And no such company as then thou sawest
Intended thee for trial only brought,
To see how thou couldest judge of fit and meet:
What next I bring shall please thee, be assured,
Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,
Thy wish exactly to thy hearts desire.
He ended, or I heard no more for now
My earthly by his heavenly overpowered,
Which it had long stood under, strained to the highth
In that celestial colloquy sublime,
As with an object that excels the sense
Dazzled and spent, sunk down and sought repair
Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, called
By Nature as in aid, and closed mine eyes.
Mine eyes he closed, but open left the cell
Of fancy, my internal sight by which,
Abstract as in a trance, methought I saw,
Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape
Still glorious before whom awake I stood:
Who stooping opened my left side, and took
From thence a rib, with cordial spirits warm,
And lifeblood streaming fresh wide was the wound,
But suddenly with flesh filled up and healed:
The rib he formed and fashioned with his hands
Under his forming hands a creature grew,
Manlike, but different sex so lovely fair,
That what seemed fair in all the world, seemed now
Mean, or in her summed up, in her contained
And in her looks which from that time infused
Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before,
And into all things from her air inspired
The spirit of love and amorous delight.
She disappeared, and left me dark I waked
To find her, or for ever to deplore
Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure:
When out of hope, behold her, not far off,
Such as I saw her in my dream, adorned
With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow
To make her amiable:  On she came,
Led by her heavenly Maker, though unseen,
And guided by his voice nor uninformed
Of nuptial sanctity, and marriage rites:
Grace was in all her steps, Heaven in her eye,
In every gesture dignity and love.
I, overjoyed, could not forbear aloud.
This turn hath made amends thou hast fulfilled
Thy words, Creator bounteous and benign,
Giver of all things fair! but fairest this
Of all thy gifts! nor enviest.  I now see
Bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh, myself
Before me:  Woman is her nameof Man
Extracted: for this cause he shall forego
Father and mother, and to his wife adhere
And they shall be one flesh, one heart, one soul.
She heard me thus and though divinely brought,
Yet innocence, and virgin modesty,
Her virtue, and the conscience of her worth,
That would be wooed, and not unsought be won,
Not obvious, not obtrusive, but, retired,
The more desirable or, to say all,
Nature herself, though pure of sinful thought,
Wrought in her so, that, seeing me, she turned:
I followed her she what was honour knew,
And with obsequious majesty approved
My pleaded reason.  To the nuptial bower
I led her blushing like the morn: All Heaven,
And happy constellations, on that hour
Shed their selectest influence the Earth
Gave sign of gratulation, and each hill
Joyous the birds fresh gales and gentle airs
Whispered it to the woods, and from their wings
Flung rose, flung odours from the spicy shrub,
Disporting, till the amorous bird of night
Sung spousal, and bid haste the eveningstar
On his hill top, to light the bridal lamp.
Thus have I told thee all my state, and brought
My story to the sum of earthly bliss,
Which I enjoy and must confess to find
In all things else delight indeed, but such
As, used or not, works in the mind no change,
Nor vehement desire these delicacies
I mean of taste, sight, smell, herbs, fruits, and flowers,
Walks, and the melody of birds: but here
Far otherwise, transported I behold,
Transported touch here passion first I felt,
Commotion strange! in all enjoyments else
Superiour and unmoved here only weak
Against the charm of Beautys powerful glance.
Or Nature failed in me, and left some part
Not proof enough such object to sustain
Or, from my side subducting, took perhaps
More than enough at least on her bestowed
Too much of ornament, in outward show
Elaborate, of inward less exact.
For well I understand in the prime end
Of Nature her the inferiour, in the mind
And inward faculties, which most excel
In outward also her resembling less
His image who made both, and less expressing
The character of that dominion given
Oer other creatures:  Yet when I approach
Her loveliness, so absolute she seems
And in herself complete, so well to know
Her own, that what she wills to do or say,
Seems wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best:
All higher knowledge in her presence falls
Degraded  Wisdom in discourse with her
Loses discountenanced, and like Folly shows
Authority and Reason on her wait,
As one intended first, not after made
Occasionally and, to consummate all,
Greatness of mind and Nobleness their seat
Build in her loveliest, and create an awe
About her, as a guard angelick placed.
To whom the Angel with contracted brow.
Accuse not Nature, she hath done her part
Do thou but thine and be not diffident
Of Wisdom she deserts thee not, if thou
Dismiss not her, when most thou needest her nigh,
By attributing overmuch to things
Less excellent, as thou thyself perceivest.
For, what admirest thou, what transports thee so,
An outside? fair, no doubt, and worthy well
Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love
Not thy subjection:  Weigh with her thyself
Then value:  Ofttimes nothing profits more
Than selfesteem, grounded on just and right
Well managed of that skill the more thou knowest,
The more she will acknowledge thee her head,
And to realities yield all her shows:
Made so adorn for thy delight the more,
So awful, that with honour thou mayest love
Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise.
But if the sense of touch, whereby mankind
Is propagated, seem such dear delight
Beyond all other think the same vouchsafed
To cattle and each beast which would not be
To them made common and divulged, if aught
Therein enjoyed were worthy to subdue
The soul of man, or passion in him move.
What higher in her society thou findest
Attractive, human, rational, love still
In loving thou dost well, in passion not,
Wherein true love consists not:  Love refines
The thoughts, and heart enlarges hath his seat
In reason, and is judicious is the scale
By which to heavenly love thou mayest ascend,
Not sunk in carnal pleasure for which cause,
Among the beasts no mate for thee was found.
To whom thus, half abashed, Adam replied.
Neither her outside formed so fair, nor aught
In procreation common to all kinds,
Though higher of the genial bed by far,
And with mysterious reverence I deem,
So much delights me, as those graceful acts,
Those thousand decencies, that daily flow
From all her words and actions mixed with love
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned
Union of mind, or in us both one soul
Harmony to behold in wedded pair
More grateful than harmonious sound to the ear.
Yet these subject not I to thee disclose
What inward thence I feel, not therefore foiled,
Who meet with various objects, from the sense
Variously representing yet, still free,
Approve the best, and follow what I approve.
To love, thou blamest me not for Love, thou sayest,
Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask:
Love not the heavenly Spirits, and how their love
Express they? by looks only? or do they mix
Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch?
To whom the Angel, with a smile that glowed
Celestial rosy red, Loves proper hue,
Answered.  Let it suffice thee that thou knowest
Us happy, and without love no happiness.
Whatever pure thou in the body enjoyest,
And pure thou wert created we enjoy
In eminence and obstacle find none
Of membrane, joint, or limb, exclusive bars
Easier than air with air, if Spirits embrace,
Total they mix, union of pure with pure
Desiring, nor restrained conveyance need,
As flesh to mix with flesh, or soul with soul.
But I can now no more the parting sun
Beyond the Earths green Cape and verdant Isles
Hesperian sets, my signal to depart.
Be strong, live happy, and love!  But, first of all,
Him, whom to love is to obey, and keep
His great command take heed lest passion sway
Thy judgement to do aught, which else free will
Would not admit: thine, and of all thy sons,
The weal or woe in thee is placed beware!
I in thy persevering shall rejoice,
And all the Blest:  Stand fastto stand or fall
Free in thine own arbitrement it lies.
Perfect within, no outward aid require
And all temptation to transgress repel.
So saying, he arose whom Adam thus
Followed with benediction.  Since to part,
Go, heavenly guest, ethereal Messenger,
Sent from whose sovran goodness I adore!
Gentle to me and affable hath been
Thy condescension, and shall be honoured ever
With grateful memory:  Thou to mankind
Be good and friendly still, and oft return!
So parted they the Angel up to Heaven
From the thick shade, and Adam to his bower.



Book IX


No more of talk where God or Angel guest
With Man, as with his friend, familiar usd,
To sit indulgent, and with him partake
Rural repast permitting him the while
Venial discourse unblamd. I now must change
Those notes to tragick foul distrust, and breach
Disloyal on the part of Man, revolt,
And disobedience: on the part of Heaven
Now alienated, distance and distaste,
Anger and just rebuke, and judgement given,
That brought into this world a world of woe,
Sin and her shadow Death, and Misery
Deaths harbinger: Sad talk!yet argument
Not less but more heroick than the wrath
Of stern Achilles on his foe pursued
Thrice fugitive about Troy wall or rage
Of Turnus for Lavinia disespousd
Or Neptunes ire, or Junos, that so long
Perplexed the Greek, and Cythereas son:

   00482129
If answerable style I can obtain
Of my celestial patroness, who deigns
Her nightly visitation unimplord,
And dictates to me slumbering or inspires
Easy my unpremeditated verse:
Since first this subject for heroick song
Pleasd me long choosing, and beginning late
Not sedulous by nature to indite
Wars, hitherto the only argument
Heroick deemd chief mastery to dissect
With long and tedious havock fabled knights
In battles feignd the better fortitude
Of patience and heroick martyrdom
Unsung or to describe races and games,
Or tilting furniture, imblazond shields,
Impresses quaint, caparisons and steeds,
Bases and tinsel trappings, gorgeous knights
At joust and tournament then marshalld feast
Servd up in hall with sewers and seneshals
The skill of artifice or office mean,
Not that which justly gives heroick name
To person, or to poem.  Me, of these
Nor skilld nor studious, higher argument
Remains sufficient of itself to raise
That name, unless an age too late, or cold
Climate, or years, damp my intended wing
Depressd and much they may, if all be mine,
Not hers, who brings it nightly to my ear.
The sun was sunk, and after him the star
Of Hesperus, whose office is to bring
Twilight upon the earth, short arbiter
"twixt day and night, and now from end to end
Nights hemisphere had veild the horizon round:
When satan, who late fled before the threats
Of Gabriel out of Eden, now improvd
In meditated fraud and malice, bent
On Mans destruction, maugre what might hap
Of heavier on himself, fearless returned
From compassing the earth cautious of day,
Since Uriel, regent of the sun, descried
His entrance, and foreworned the Cherubim
That kept their watch thence full of anguish driven,
The space of seven continued nights he rode
With darkness thrice the equinoctial line
He circled four times crossed the car of night
From pole to pole, traversing each colure
On the eighth returned and, on the coast averse
From entrance or Cherubick watch, by stealth
Found unsuspected way.  There was a place,
Now not, though sin, not time, first wrought the change,
Where Tigris, at the foot of Paradise,
Into a gulf shot under ground, till part
Rose up a fountain by the tree of life:
In with the river sunk, and with it rose
Satan, involved in rising mist then sought
Where to lie hid sea he had searched, and land,
From Eden over Pontus and the pool
Maeotis, up beyond the river Ob
Downward as far antarctick and in length,
West from Orontes to the ocean barred
At Darien  thence to the land where flows
Ganges and Indus: Thus the orb he roamed
With narrow search and with inspection deep
Considered every creature, which of all
Most opportune might serve his wiles and found
The Serpent subtlest beast of all the field.
Him after long debate, irresolute
Of thoughts revolved, his final sentence chose
Fit vessel, fittest imp of fraud, in whom
To enter, and his dark suggestions hide
From sharpest sight: for, in the wily snake
Whatever sleights, none would suspicious mark,
As from his wit and native subtlety
Proceeding which, in other beasts observed,
Doubt might beget of diabolick power
Active within, beyond the sense of brute.
Thus he resolved, but first from inward grief
His bursting passion into plaints thus poured.
More justly, seat worthier of Gods, as built
With second thoughts, reforming what was old!
O Earth, how like to Heaven, if not preferred
For what God, after better, worse would build?
Terrestrial Heaven, danced round by other Heavens
That shine, yet bear their bright officious lamps,
Light above light, for thee alone, as seems,
In thee concentring all their precious beams
Of sacred influence!  As God in Heaven
Is center, yet extends to all so thou,
Centring, receivest from all those orbs: in thee,
Not in themselves, all their known virtue appears
Productive in herb, plant, and nobler birth
Of creatures animate with gradual life
Of growth, sense, reason, all summed up in Man.
With what delight could I have walked thee round,
If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange
Of hill, and valley, rivers, woods, and plains,
Now land, now sea and shores with forest crowned,
Rocks, dens, and caves!  But I in none of these
Find place or refuge and the more I see
Pleasures about me, so much more I feel
Torment within me, as from the hateful siege
Of contraries: all good to me becomes
Bane, and in Heaven much worse would be my state.
But neither here seek I, no nor in Heaven
To dwell, unless by mastering Heavens Supreme
Nor hope to be myself less miserable
By what I seek, but others to make such
As I, though thereby worse to me redound:
For only in destroying I find ease
To my relentless thoughts and, him destroyed,
Or won to what may work his utter loss,
For whom all this was made, all this will soon
Follow, as to him linked in weal or woe
In woe then that destruction wide may range:
To me shall be the glory sole among
The infernal Powers, in one day to have marred
What he, Almighty styled, six nights and days
Continued making and who knows how long
Before had been contriving? though perhaps
Not longer than since I, in one night, freed
From servitude inglorious well nigh half
The angelick name, and thinner left the throng
Of his adorers: He, to be avenged,
And to repair his numbers thus impaired,
Whether such virtue spent of old now failed
More Angels to create, if they at least
Are his created, or, to spite us more,
Determined to advance into our room
A creature formed of earth, and him endow,
Exalted from so base original,
With heavenly spoils, our spoils: What he decreed,
He effected Man he made, and for him built
Magnificent this world, and earth his seat,
Him lord pronounced and, O indignity!
Subjected to his service angelwings,
And flaming ministers to watch and tend
Their earthly charge: Of these the vigilance
I dread and, to elude, thus wrapt in mist
Of midnight vapour glide obscure, and pry
In every bush and brake, where hap may find
The serpent sleeping in whose mazy folds
To hide me, and the dark intent I bring.
O foul descent! that I, who erst contended
With Gods to sit the highest, am now constrained
Into a beast and, mixed with bestial slime,
This essence to incarnate and imbrute,
That to the highth of Deity aspired!
But what will not ambition and revenge
Descend to?  Who aspires, must down as low
As high he soared obnoxious, first or last,
To basest things.  Revenge, at first though sweet,
Bitter ere long, back on itself recoils:
Let it I reck not, so it light well aimed,
Since higher I fall short, on him who next
Provokes my envy, this new favourite
Of Heaven, this man of clay, son of despite,
Whom, us the more to spite, his Maker raised
From dust: Spite then with spite is best repaid.
So saying, through each thicket dank or dry,
Like a black mist lowcreeping, he held on
His midnightsearch, where soonest he might find
The serpent him fastsleeping soon he found
In labyrinth of many a round selfrolled,
His head the midst, well stored with subtile wiles:
Not yet in horrid shade or dismal den,
Nor nocent yet but, on the grassy herb,
Fearless unfeared he slept: in at his mouth
The Devil entered and his brutal sense,
In heart or head, possessing, soon inspired
With act intelligential but his sleep
Disturbed not, waiting close the approach of morn.
Now, when as sacred light began to dawn
In Eden on the humid flowers, that breathed
Their morning incense, when all things, that breathe,
From the Earths great altar send up silent praise
To the Creator, and his nostrils fill
With grateful smell, forth came the human pair,
And joined their vocal worship to the quire
Of creatures wanting voice that done, partake
The season prime for sweetest scents and airs:
Then commune, how that day they best may ply
Their growing work: for much their work outgrew
The hands dispatch of two gardening so wide,
And Eve first to her husband thus began.
Adam, well may we labour still to dress
This garden, still to tend plant, herb, and flower,
Our pleasant task enjoined but, till more hands
Aid us, the work under our labour grows,
Luxurious by restraint what we by day
Lop overgrown, or prune, or prop, or bind,
One night or two with wanton growth derides
Tending to wild.  Thou therefore now advise,
Or bear what to my mind first thoughts present:
Let us divide our labours thou, where choice
Leads thee, or where most needs, whether to wind
The woodbine round this arbour, or direct
The clasping ivy where to climb while I,
In yonder spring of roses intermixed
With myrtle, find what to redress till noon:
For, while so near each other thus all day
Our task we choose, what wonder if so near
Looks intervene and smiles, or object new
Casual discourse draw on which intermits
Our days work, brought to little, though begun
Early, and the hour of supper comes unearned?
To whom mild answer Adam thus returned.
Sole Eve, associate sole, to me beyond
Compare above all living creatures dear!
Well hast thou motioned, well thy thoughts employed,
How we might best fulfil the work which here
God hath assigned us nor of me shalt pass
Unpraised: for nothing lovelier can be found
In woman, than to study houshold good,
And good works in her husband to promote.
Yet not so strictly hath our Lord imposed
Labour, as to debar us when we need
Refreshment, whether food, or talk between,
Food of the mind, or this sweet intercourse
Of looks and smiles for smiles from reason flow,
To brute denied, and are of love the food
Love, not the lowest end of human life.
For not to irksome toil, but to delight,
He made us, and delight to reason joined.
These paths and bowers doubt not but our joint hands
Will keep from wilderness with ease, as wide
As we need walk, till younger hands ere long
Assist us But, if much converse perhaps
Thee satiate, to short absence I could yield:
For solitude sometimes is best society,
And short retirement urges sweet return.
But other doubt possesses me, lest harm
Befall thee severed from me for thou knowest
What hath been warned us, what malicious foe
Envying our happiness, and of his own
Despairing, seeks to work us woe and shame
By sly assault and somewhere nigh at hand
Watches, no doubt, with greedy hope to find
His wish and best advantage, us asunder
Hopeless to circumvent us joined, where each
To other speedy aid might lend at need:
Whether his first design be to withdraw
Our fealty from God, or to disturb
Conjugal love, than which perhaps no bliss
Enjoyed by us excites his envy more
Or this, or worse, leave not the faithful side
That gave thee being, still shades thee, and protects.
The wife, where danger or dishonour lurks,
Safest and seemliest by her husband stays,
Who guards her, or with her the worst endures.
To whom the virgin majesty of Eve,
As one who loves, and some unkindness meets,
With sweet austere composure thus replied.
Offspring of Heaven and Earth, and all Earths Lord!
That such an enemy we have, who seeks
Our ruin, both by thee informed I learn,
And from the parting Angel overheard,
As in a shady nook I stood behind,
Just then returned at shut of evening flowers.
But, that thou shouldst my firmness therefore doubt
To God or thee, because we have a foe
May tempt it, I expected not to hear.
His violence thou fearest not, being such
As we, not capable of death or pain,
Can either not receive, or can repel.
His fraud is then thy fear which plain infers
Thy equal fear, that my firm faith and love
Can by his fraud be shaken or seduced
Thoughts, which how found they harbour in thy breast,
Adam, misthought of her to thee so dear?
To whom with healing words Adam replied.
Daughter of God and Man, immortal Eve!
For such thou art from sin and blame entire:
Not diffident of thee do I dissuade
Thy absence from my sight, but to avoid
The attempt itself, intended by our foe.
For he who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses
The tempted with dishonour foul supposed
Not incorruptible of faith, not proof
Against temptation: Thou thyself with scorn
And anger wouldst resent the offered wrong,
Though ineffectual found: misdeem not then,
If such affront I labour to avert
From thee alone, which on us both at once
The enemy, though bold, will hardly dare
Or daring, first on me the assault shall light.
Nor thou his malice and false guile contemn
Subtle he needs must be, who could seduce
Angels nor think superfluous others aid.
I, from the influence of thy looks, receive
Access in every virtue in thy sight
More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were
Of outward strength while shame, thou looking on,
Shame to be overcome or overreached,
Would utmost vigour raise, and raised unite.
Why shouldst not thou like sense within thee feel
When I am present, and thy trial choose
With me, best witness of thy virtue tried?
So spake domestick Adam in his care
And matrimonial love but Eve, who thought
Less attributed to her faith sincere,
Thus her reply with accent sweet renewed.
If this be our condition, thus to dwell
In narrow circuit straitened by a foe,
Subtle or violent, we not endued
Single with like defence, wherever met
How are we happy, still in fear of harm?
But harm precedes not sin: only our foe,
Tempting, affronts us with his foul esteem
Of our integrity: his foul esteem
Sticks no dishonour on our front, but turns
Foul on himself then wherefore shunned or feared
By us? who rather double honour gain
From his surmise proved false find peace within,
Favour from Heaven, our witness, from the event.
And what is faith, love, virtue, unassayed
Alone, without exteriour help sustained?
Let us not then suspect our happy state
Left so imperfect by the Maker wise,
As not secure to single or combined.
Frail is our happiness, if this be so,
And Eden were no Eden, thus exposed.
To whom thus Adam fervently replied.
O Woman, best are all things as the will
Of God ordained them: His creating hand
Nothing imperfect or deficient left
Of all that he created, much less Man,
Or aught that might his happy state secure,
Secure from outward force within himself
The danger lies, yet lies within his power:
Against his will he can receive no harm.
But God left free the will for what obeys
Reason, is free and Reason he made right,
But bid her well be ware, and still erect
Lest, by some fairappearing good surprised,
She dictate false and misinform the will
To do what God expressly hath forbid.
Not then mistrust, but tender love, enjoins,
That I should mind thee oft and mind thou me.
Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve
Since Reason not impossibly may meet
Some specious object by the foe suborned,
And fall into deception unaware,
Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warned.
Seek not temptation then, which to avoid
Were better, and most likely if from me
Thou sever not: Trial will come unsought.
Wouldst thou approve thy constancy, approve
First thy obedience the other who can know,
Not seeing thee attempted, who attest?
But, if thou think, trial unsought may find
Us both securer than thus warned thou seemest,
Go for thy stay, not free, absents thee more
Go in thy native innocence, rely
On what thou hast of virtue summon all!
For God towards thee hath done his part, do thine.
So spake the patriarch of mankind but Eve
Persisted yet submiss, though last, replied.
With thy permission then, and thus forewarned
Chiefly by what thy own last reasoning words
Touched only that our trial, when least sought,
May find us both perhaps far less prepared,
The willinger I go, nor much expect
A foe so proud will first the weaker seek
So bent, the more shall shame him his repulse.
Thus saying, from her husbands hand her hand
Soft she withdrew and, like a WoodNymph light,
Oread or Dryad, or of Delias train,
Betook her to the groves but Delias self
In gait surpassed, and Goddesslike deport,
Though not as she with bow and quiver armed,
But with such gardening tools as Art yet rude,
Guiltless of fire, had formed, or Angels brought.
To Pales, or Pomona, thus adorned,
Likest she seemed, Pomona when she fled
Vertumnus, or to Ceres in her prime,
Yet virgin of Proserpina from Jove.
Her long with ardent look his eye pursued
Delighted, but desiring more her stay.
Oft he to her his charge of quick return
Repeated she to him as oft engaged
To be returned by noon amid the bower,
And all things in best order to invite
Noontide repast, or afternoons repose.
O much deceived, much failing, hapless Eve,
Of thy presumed return! event perverse!
Thou never from that hour in Paradise
Foundst either sweet repast, or sound repose
Such ambush, hid among sweet flowers and shades,
Waited with hellish rancour imminent
To intercept thy way, or send thee back
Despoiled of innocence, of faith, of bliss!
For now, and since first break of dawn, the Fiend,
Mere serpent in appearance, forth was come
And on his quest, where likeliest he might find
The only two of mankind, but in them
The whole included race, his purposed prey.
In bower and field he sought, where any tuft
Of grove or gardenplot more pleasant lay,
Their tendance, or plantation for delight
By fountain or by shady rivulet
He sought them both, but wished his hap might find
Eve separate he wished, but not with hope
Of what so seldom chanced when to his wish,
Beyond his hope, Eve separate he spies,
Veiled in a cloud of fragrance, where she stood,
Half spied, so thick the roses blushing round
About her glowed, oft stooping to support
Each flower of slender stalk, whose head, though gay
Carnation, purple, azure, or specked with gold,
Hung drooping unsustained them she upstays
Gently with myrtle band, mindless the while
Herself, though fairest unsupported flower,
From her best prop so far, and storm so nigh.
Nearer he drew, and many a walk traversed
Of stateliest covert, cedar, pine, or palm
Then voluble and bold, now hid, now seen,
Among thickwoven arborets, and flowers
Imbordered on each bank, the hand of Eve:
Spot more delicious than those gardens feigned
Or of revived Adonis, or renowned
Alcinous, host of old Laertes son
Or that, not mystick, where the sapient king
Held dalliance with his fair Egyptian spouse.
Much he the place admired, the person more.
As one who long in populous city pent,
Where houses thick and sewers annoy the air,
Forth issuing on a summers morn, to breathe
Among the pleasant villages and farms
Adjoined, from each thing met conceives delight
The smell of grain, or tedded grass, or kine,
Or dairy, each rural sight, each rural sound
If chance, with nymphlike step, fair virgin pass,
What pleasing seemed, for her now pleases more
She most, and in her look sums all delight:
Such pleasure took the Serpent to behold
This flowery plat, the sweet recess of Eve
Thus early, thus alone: Her heavenly form
Angelick, but more soft, and feminine,
Her graceful innocence, her every air
Of gesture, or least action, overawed
His malice, and with rapine sweet bereaved
His fierceness of the fierce intent it brought:
That space the Evilone abstracted stood
From his own evil, and for the time remained
Stupidly good of enmity disarmed,
Of guile, of hate, of envy, of revenge:
But the hot Hell that always in him burns,
Though in mid Heaven, soon ended his delight,
And tortures him now more, the more he sees
Of pleasure, not for him ordained: then soon
Fierce hate he recollects, and all his thoughts
Of mischief, gratulating, thus excites.
Thoughts, whither have ye led me! with what sweet
Compulsion thus transported, to forget
What hither brought us! hate, not lovenor hope
Of Paradise for Hell, hope here to taste
Of pleasure but all pleasure to destroy,
Save what is in destroying other joy
To me is lost.  Then, let me not let pass
Occasion which now smiles behold alone
The woman, opportune to all attempts,
Her husband, for I view far round, not nigh,
Whose higher intellectual more I shun,
And strength, of courage haughty, and of limb
Heroick built, though of terrestrial mould
Foe not informidable! exempt from wound,
I not so much hath Hell debased, and pain
Enfeebled me, to what I was in Heaven.
She fair, divinely fair, fit love for Gods!
Not terrible, though terrour be in love
And beauty, not approached by stronger hate,
Hate stronger, under show of love well feigned
The way which to her ruin now I tend.
So spake the enemy of mankind, enclosed
In serpent, inmate bad! and toward Eve
Addressed his way: not with indented wave,
Prone on the ground, as since but on his rear,
Circular base of rising folds, that towered
Fold above fold, a surging maze! his head
Crested aloft, and carbuncle his eyes
With burnished neck of verdant gold, erect
Amidst his circling spires, that on the grass
Floated redundant: pleasing was his shape
And lovely never since of serpentkind
Lovelier, not those that in Illyria changed,
Hermione and Cadmus, or the god
In Epidaurus nor to which transformed
Ammonian Jove, or Capitoline, was seen
He with Olympias this with her who bore
Scipio, the highth of Rome.  With tract oblique
At first, as one who sought access, but feared
To interrupt, sidelong he works his way.
As when a ship, by skilful steersmen wrought
Nigh rivers mouth or foreland, where the wind
Veers oft, as oft so steers, and shifts her sail:
So varied he, and of his tortuous train
Curled many a wanton wreath in sight of Eve,
To lure her eye she, busied, heard the sound
Of rusling leaves, but minded not, as used
To such disport before her through the field,
From every beast more duteous at her call,
Than at Circean call the herd disguised.
He, bolder now, uncalled before her stood,
But as in gaze admiring: oft he bowed
His turret crest, and sleek enamelled neck,
Fawning and licked the ground whereon she trod.
His gentle dumb expression turned at length
The eye of Eve to mark his play he, glad
Of her attention gained, with serpenttongue
Organick, or impulse of vocal air,
His fraudulent temptation thus began.
Wonder not, sovran Mistress, if perhaps
Thou canst, who art sole wonder! much less arm
Thy looks, the Heaven of mildness, with disdain,
Displeased that I approach thee thus, and gaze
Insatiate I thus singlenor have feared
Thy awful brow, more awful thus retired.
Fairest resemblance of thy Maker fair,
Thee all things living gaze on, all things thine
By gift, and thy celestial beauty adore
With ravishment beheld! there best beheld,
Where universally admired but here
In this enclosure wild, these beasts among,
Beholders rude, and shallow to discern
Half what in thee is fair, one man except,
Who sees thee? and what is one? who should be seen
A Goddess among Gods, adored and served
By Angels numberless, thy daily train.
So glozed the Tempter, and his proem tuned:
Into the heart of Eve his words made way,
Though at the voice much marvelling at length,
Not unamazed, she thus in answer spake.
What may this mean? language of man pronounced
By tongue of brute, and human sense expressed?
The first, at least, of these I thought denied
To beasts whom God, on their creationday,
Created mute to all articulate sound:
The latter I demur for in their looks
Much reason, and in their actions, oft appears.
Thee, Serpent, subtlest beast of all the field
I knew, but not with human voice endued
Redouble then this miracle, and say,
How camest thou speakable of mute, and how
To me so friendly grown above the rest
Of brutal kind, that daily are in sight?
Say, for such wonder claims attention due.
To whom the guileful Tempter thus replied.
Empress of this fair world, resplendent Eve!
Easy to me it is to tell thee all
What thou commandest and right thou shouldst be obeyed:
I was at first as other beasts that graze
The trodden herb, of abject thoughts and low,
As was my food nor aught but food discerned
Or sex, and apprehended nothing high:
Till, on a day roving the field, I chanced
A goodly tree far distant to behold
Loaden with fruit of fairest colours mixed,
Ruddy and gold: I nearer drew to gaze
When from the boughs a savoury odour blown,
Grateful to appetite, more pleased my sense
Than smell of sweetest fennel, or the teats
Of ewe or goat dropping with milk at even,
Unsucked of lamb or kid, that tend their play.
To satisfy the sharp desire I had
Of tasting those fair apples, I resolved
Not to defer hunger and thirst at once,
Powerful persuaders, quickened at the scent
Of that alluring fruit, urged me so keen.
About the mossy trunk I wound me soon
For, high from ground, the branches would require
Thy utmost reach or Adams: Round the tree
All other beasts that saw, with like desire
Longing and envying stood, but could not reach.
Amid the tree now got, where plenty hung
Tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill
I spared not for, such pleasure till that hour,
At feed or fountain, never had I found.
Sated at length, ere long I might perceive
Strange alteration in me, to degree
Of reason in my inward powers and speech
Wanted not long though to this shape retained.
Thenceforth to speculations high or deep
I turned my thoughts, and with capacious mind
Considered all things visible in Heaven,
Or Earth, or Middle all things fair and good:
But all that fair and good in thy divine
Semblance, and in thy beautys heavenly ray,
United I beheld no fair to thine
Equivalent or second! which compelled
Me thus, though importune perhaps, to come
And gaze, and worship thee of right declared
Sovran of creatures, universal Dame!
So talked the spirited sly Snake and Eve,
Yet more amazed, unwary thus replied.
Serpent, thy overpraising leaves in doubt
The virtue of that fruit, in thee first proved:
But say, where grows the tree? from hence how far?
For many are the trees of God that grow
In Paradise, and various, yet unknown
To us in such abundance lies our choice,
As leaves a greater store of fruit untouched,
Still hanging incorruptible, till men
Grow up to their provision, and more hands
Help to disburden Nature of her birth.
To whom the wily Adder, blithe and glad.
Empress, the way is ready, and not long
Beyond a row of myrtles, on a flat,
Fast by a fountain, one small thicket past
Of blowing myrrh and balm: if thou accept
My conduct, I can bring thee thither soon
Lead then, said Eve.  He, leading, swiftly rolled
In tangles, and made intricate seem straight,
To mischief swift.  Hope elevates, and joy
Brightens his crest as when a wandering fire,
Compact of unctuous vapour, which the night
Condenses, and the cold environs round,
Kindled through agitation to a flame,
Which oft, they say, some evil Spirit attends,
Hovering and blazing with delusive light,
Misleads the amazed nightwanderer from his way
To bogs and mires, and oft through pond or pool
There swallowed up and lost, from succour far.
So glistered the dire Snake, and into fraud
Led Eve, our credulous mother, to the tree
Of prohibition, root of all our woe
Which when she saw, thus to her guide she spake.
Serpent, we might have spared our coming hither,
Fruitless to me, though fruit be here to excess,
The credit of whose virtue rest with thee
Wonderous indeed, if cause of such effects.
But of this tree we may not taste nor touch
God so commanded, and left that command
Sole daughter of his voice the rest, we live
Law to ourselves our reason is our law.
To whom the Tempter guilefully replied.
Indeed! hath God then said that of the fruit
Of all these gardentrees ye shall not eat,
Yet Lords declared of all in earth or air?
To whom thus Eve, yet sinless.  Of the fruit
Of each tree in the garden we may eat
But of the fruit of this fair tree amidst
The garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat
Thereof, nor shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
She scarce had said, though brief, when now more bold
The Tempter, but with show of zeal and love
To Man, and indignation at his wrong,
New part puts on and, as to passion moved,
Fluctuates disturbed, yet comely and in act
Raised, as of some great matter to begin.
As when of old some orator renowned,
In Athens or free Rome, where eloquence
Flourished, since mute! to some great cause addressed,
Stood in himself collected while each part,
Motion, each act, won audience ere the tongue
Sometimes in highth began, as no delay
Of preface brooking, through his zeal of right:
So standing, moving, or to highth up grown,
The Tempter, all impassioned, thus began.
O sacred, wise, and wisdomgiving Plant,
Mother of science! now I feel thy power
Within me clear not only to discern
Things in their causes, but to trace the ways
Of highest agents, deemed however wise.
Queen of this universe! do not believe
Those rigid threats of death: ye shall not die:
How should you? by the fruit? it gives you life
To knowledge by the threatener? look on me,
Me, who have touched and tasted yet both live,
And life more perfect have attained than Fate
Meant me, by venturing higher than my lot.
Shall that be shut to Man, which to the Beast
Is open? or will God incense his ire
For such a petty trespass? and not praise
Rather your dauntless virtue, whom the pain
Of death denounced, whatever thing death be,
Deterred not from achieving what might lead
To happier life, knowledge of good and evil
Of good, how just? of evil, if what is evil
Be real, why not known, since easier shunned?
God therefore cannot hurt ye, and be just
Not just, not God not feared then, nor obeyed:
Your fear itself of death removes the fear.
Why then was this forbid?  Why, but to awe
Why, but to keep ye low and ignorant,
His worshippers?  He knows that in the day
Ye eat thereof, your eyes that seem so clear,
Yet are but dim, shall perfectly be then
Opened and cleared, and ye shall be as Gods,
Knowing both good and evil, as they know.
That ye shall be as Gods, since I as Man,
Internal Man, is but proportion meet
I, of brute, human ye, of human, Gods.
So ye shall die perhaps, by putting off
Human, to put on Gods death to be wished,
Though threatened, which no worse than this can bring.
And what are Gods, that Man may not become
As they, participating Godlike food?
The Gods are first, and that advantage use
On our belief, that all from them proceeds:
I question it for this fair earth I see,
Warmed by the sun, producing every kind
Them, nothing: if they all things, who enclosed
Knowledge of good and evil in this tree,
That whoso eats thereof, forthwith attains
Wisdom without their leave? and wherein lies
The offence, that Man should thus attain to know?
What can your knowledge hurt him, or this tree
Impart against his will, if all be his?
Or is it envy? and can envy dwell
In heavenly breasts?  These, these, and many more
Causes import your need of this fair fruit.
Goddess humane, reach then, and freely taste!
He ended and his words, replete with guile,
Into her heart too easy entrance won:
Fixed on the fruit she gazed, which to behold
Might tempt alone and in her ears the sound
Yet rung of his persuasive words, impregned
With reason, to her seeming, and with truth:
Mean while the hour of noon drew on, and waked
An eager appetite, raised by the smell
So savoury of that fruit, which with desire,
Inclinable now grown to touch or taste,
Solicited her longing eye yet first
Pausing a while, thus to herself she mused.
Great are thy virtues, doubtless, best of fruits,
Though kept from man, and worthy to be admired
Whose taste, too long forborn, at first assay
Gave elocution to the mute, and taught
The tongue not made for speech to speak thy praise:
Thy praise he also, who forbids thy use,
Conceals not from us, naming thee the tree
Of knowledge, knowledge both of good and evil
Forbids us then to taste! but his forbidding
Commends thee more, while it infers the good
By thee communicated, and our want:
For good unknown sure is not had or, had
And yet unknown, is as not had at all.
In plain then, what forbids he but to know,
Forbids us good, forbids us to be wise?
Such prohibitions bind not.  But, if death
Bind us with afterbands, what profits then
Our inward freedom?  In the day we eat
Of this fair fruit, our doom is, we shall die!
How dies the Serpent? he hath eaten and lives,
And knows, and speaks, and reasons, and discerns,
Irrational till then.  For us alone
Was death invented? or to us denied
This intellectual food, for beasts reserved?
For beasts it seems: yet that one beast which first
Hath tasted envies not, but brings with joy
The good befallen him, author unsuspect,
Friendly to man, far from deceit or guile.
What fear I then? rather, what know to fear
Under this ignorance of good and evil,
Of God or death, of law or penalty?
Here grows the cure of all, this fruit divine,
Fair to the eye, inviting to the taste,
Of virtue to make wise:  What hinders then
To reach, and feed at once both body and mind?
So saying, her rash hand in evil hour
Forth reaching to the fruit, she plucked, she eat!
Earth felt the wound and Nature from her seat,
Sighing through all her works, gave signs of woe,
That all was lost.  Back to the thicket slunk
The guilty Serpent and well mightfor Eve,
Intent now wholly on her taste, nought else
Regarded such delight till then, as seemed,
In fruit she never tasted, whether true
Or fancied so, through expectation high
Of knowledge not was Godhead from her thought.
Greedily she ingorged without restraint,
And knew not eating death:  Satiate at length,
And hightened as with wine, jocund and boon,
Thus to herself she pleasingly began.
O sovran, virtuous, precious of all trees
In Paradise! of operation blest
To sapience, hitherto obscured, infamed.
And thy fair fruit let hang, as to no end
Created but henceforth my early care,
Not without song, each morning, and due praise,
Shall tend thee, and the fertile burden ease
Of thy full branches offered free to all
Till, dieted by thee, I grow mature
In knowledge, as the Gods, who all things know
Though others envy what they cannot give:
For, had the gift been theirs, it had not here
Thus grown.  Experience, next, to thee I owe,
Best guide not following thee, I had remained
In ignorance thou openest wisdoms way,
And givest access, though secret she retire.
And I perhaps am secret: Heaven is high,
High, and remote to see from thence distinct
Each thing on Earth and other care perhaps
May have diverted from continual watch
Our great Forbidder, safe with all his spies
About him.  But to Adam in what sort
Shall I appear? shall I to him make known
As yet my change, and give him to partake
Full happiness with me, or rather not,
But keeps the odds of knowledge in my power
Without copartner? so to add what wants
In female sex, the more to draw his love,
And render me more equal and perhaps,
A thing not undesirable, sometime
Superiour for, inferiour, who is free
This may be well:  But what if God have seen,
And death ensue? then I shall be no more!
And Adam, wedded to another Eve,
Shall live with her enjoying, I extinct
A death to think!  Confirmed then I resolve,
Adam shall share with me in bliss or woe:
So dear I love him, that with him all deaths
I could endure, without him live no life.
So saying, from the tree her step she turned
But first low reverence done, as to the Power
That dwelt within, whose presence had infused
Into the plant sciential sap, derived
From nectar, drink of Gods.  Adam the while,
Waiting desirous her return, had wove
Of choicest flowers a garland, to adorn
Her tresses, and her rural labours crown
As reapers oft are wont their harvestqueen.
Great joy he promised to his thoughts, and new
Solace in her return, so long delayed:
Yet oft his heart, divine of something ill,
Misgave him he the faltering measure felt
And forth to meet her went, the way she took
That morn when first they parted: by the tree
Of knowledge he must pass there he her met,
Scarce from the tree returning in her hand
A bough of fairest fruit, that downy smiled,
New gathered, and ambrosial smell diffused.
To him she hasted in her face excuse
Came prologue, and apology too prompt
Which, with bland words at will, she thus addressed.
Hast thou not wondered, Adam, at my stay?
Thee I have missed, and thought it long, deprived
Thy presence agony of love till now
Not felt, nor shall be twice for never more
Mean I to try, what rash untried I sought,
The pain of absence from thy sight.  But strange
Hath been the cause, and wonderful to hear:
This tree is not, as we are told, a tree
Of danger tasted, nor to evil unknown
Opening the way, but of divine effect
To open eyes, and make them Gods who taste
And hath been tasted such:  The serpent wise,
Or not restrained as we, or not obeying,
Hath eaten of the fruit and is become,
Not dead, as we are threatened, but thenceforth
Endued with human voice and human sense,
Reasoning to admiration and with me
Persuasively hath so prevailed, that I
Have also tasted, and have also found
The effects to correspond opener mine eyes,
Dim erst, dilated spirits, ampler heart,
And growing up to Godhead which for thee
Chiefly I sought, without thee can despise.
For bliss, as thou hast part, to me is bliss
Tedious, unshared with thee, and odious soon.
Thou therefore also taste, that equal lot
May join us, equal joy, as equal love
Lest, thou not tasting, different degree
Disjoin us, and I then too late renounce
Deity for thee, when Fate will not permit.
Thus Eve with countenance blithe her story told
But in her cheek distemper flushing glowed.
On the other side Adam, soon as he heard
The fatal trespass done by Eve, amazed,
Astonied stood and blank, while horrour chill
Ran through his veins, and all his joints relaxed
From his slack hand the garland wreathed for Eve
Down dropt, and all the faded roses shed:
Speechless he stood and pale, till thus at length
First to himself he inward silence broke.
O fairest of Creation, last and best
Of all Gods works, Creature in whom excelled
Whatever can to sight or thought be formed,
Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet!
How art thou lost! how on a sudden lost,
Defaced, deflowered, and now to death devote!
Rather, how hast thou yielded to transgress
The strict forbiddance, how to violate
The sacred fruit forbidden!  Some cursed fraud
Of enemy hath beguiled thee, yet unknown,
And me with thee hath ruined for with thee
Certain my resolution is to die:
How can I live without thee! how forego
Thy sweet converse, and love so dearly joined,
To live again in these wild woods forlorn!
Should God create another Eve, and I
Another rib afford, yet loss of thee
Would never from my heart: no, no!I feel
The link of Nature draw me: flesh of flesh,
Bone of my bone thou art, and from thy state
Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe.
So having said, as one from sad dismay
Recomforted, and after thoughts disturbed
Submitting to what seemed remediless,
Thus in calm mood his words to Eve he turned.
Bold deed thou hast presumed, adventurous Eve,
And peril great provoked, who thus hast dared,
Had it been only coveting to eye
That sacred fruit, sacred to abstinence,
Much more to taste it under ban to touch.
But past who can recall, or done undo?
Not God Omnipotent, nor Fate yet so
Perhaps thou shalt not die, perhaps the fact
Is not so heinous now, foretasted fruit,
Profaned first by the serpent, by him first
Made common, and unhallowed, ere our taste
Nor yet on him found deadly yet he lives
Lives, as thou saidst, and gains to live, as Man,
Higher degree of life inducement strong
To us, as likely tasting to attain
Proportional ascent which cannot be
But to be Gods, or Angels, demiGods.
Nor can I think that God, Creator wise,
Though threatening, will in earnest so destroy
Us his prime creatures, dignified so high,
Set over all his works which in our fall,
For us created, needs with us must fail,
Dependant made so God shall uncreate,
Be frustrate, do, undo, and labour lose
Not well conceived of God, who, though his power
Creation could repeat, yet would be loth
Us to abolish, lest the Adversary
Triumph, and say "Fickle their state whom God
"Most favours who can please him long? Me first
"He ruined, now Mankind whom will he next?"
Matter of scorn, not to be given the Foe.
However I with thee have fixed my lot,
Certain to undergo like doom:  If death
Consort with thee, death is to me as life
So forcible within my heart I feel
The bond of Nature draw me to my own
My own in thee, for what thou art is mine
Our state cannot be severed we are one,
One flesh to lose thee were to lose myself.
So Adam and thus Eve to him replied.
O glorious trial of exceeding love,
Illustrious evidence, example high!
Engaging me to emulate but, short
Of thy perfection, how shall I attain,
Adam, from whose dear side I boast me sprung,
And gladly of our union hear thee speak,
One heart, one soul in both whereof good proof
This day affords, declaring thee resolved,
Rather than death, or aught than death more dread,
Shall separate us, linked in love so dear,
To undergo with me one guilt, one crime,
If any be, of tasting this fair fruit
Whose virtue for of good still good proceeds,
Direct, or by occasion, hath presented
This happy trial of thy love, which else
So eminently never had been known?
Were it I thought death menaced would ensue
This my attempt, I would sustain alone
The worst, and not persuade thee, rather die
Deserted, than oblige thee with a fact
Pernicious to thy peace chiefly assured
Remarkably so late of thy so true,
So faithful, love unequalled: but I feel
Far otherwise the event not death, but life
Augmented, opened eyes, new hopes, new joys,
Taste so divine, that what of sweet before
Hath touched my sense, flat seems to this, and harsh.
On my experience, Adam, freely taste,
And fear of death deliver to the winds.
So saying, she embraced him, and for joy
Tenderly wept much won, that he his love
Had so ennobled, as of choice to incur
Divine displeasure for her sake, or death.
In recompence for such compliance bad
Such recompence best merits from the bough
She gave him of that fair enticing fruit
With liberal hand: he scrupled not to eat,
Against his better knowledge not deceived,
But fondly overcome with female charm.
Earth trembled from her entrails, as again
In pangs and Nature gave a second groan
Sky loured and, muttering thunder, some sad drops
Wept at completing of the mortal sin
Original: while Adam took no thought,
Eating his fill nor Eve to iterate
Her former trespass feared, the more to sooth
Him with her loved society that now,
As with new wine intoxicated both,
They swim in mirth, and fancy that they feel
Divinity within them breeding wings,
Wherewith to scorn the earth:  But that false fruit
Far other operation first displayed,
Carnal desire inflaming he on Eve
Began to cast lascivious eyes she him
As wantonly repaid in lust they burn:
Till Adam thus gan Eve to dalliance move.
Eve, now I see thou art exact of taste,
And elegant, of sapience no small part
Since to each meaning savour we apply,
And palate call judicious I the praise
Yield thee, so well this day thou hast purveyed.
Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstained
From this delightful fruit, nor known till now
True relish, tasting if such pleasure be
In things to us forbidden, it might be wished,
For this one tree had been forbidden ten.
But come, so well refreshed, now let us play,
As meet is, after such delicious fare
For never did thy beauty, since the day
I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorned
With all perfections, so inflame my sense
With ardour to enjoy thee, fairer now
Than ever bounty of this virtuous tree!
So said he, and forbore not glance or toy
Of amorous intent well understood
Of Eve, whose eye darted contagious fire.
Her hand he seised and to a shady bank,
Thick overhead with verdant roof imbowered,
He led her nothing loth flowers were the couch,
Pansies, and violets, and asphodel,
And hyacinth  Earths freshest softest lap.
There they their fill of love and loves disport
Took largely, of their mutual guilt the seal,
The solace of their sin till dewy sleep
Oppressed them, wearied with their amorous play,
Soon as the force of that fallacious fruit,
That with exhilarating vapour bland
About their spirits had played, and inmost powers
Made err, was now exhaled and grosser sleep,
Bred of unkindly fumes, with conscious dreams
Incumbered, now had left them up they rose
As from unrest and, each the other viewing,
Soon found their eyes how opened, and their minds
How darkened innocence, that as a veil
Had shadowed them from knowing ill, was gone
Just confidence, and native righteousness,
And honour, from about them, naked left
To guilty Shame he covered, but his robe
Uncovered more.  So rose the Danite strong,
Herculean Samson, from the harlotlap
Of Philistean Dalilah, and waked
Shorn of his strength.  They destitute and bare
Of all their virtue:  Silent, and in face
Confounded, long they sat, as strucken mute:
Till Adam, though not less than Eve abashed,
At length gave utterance to these words constrained.
O Eve, in evil hour thou didst give ear
To that false worm, of whomsoever taught
To counterfeit Mans voice true in our fall,
False in our promised rising since our eyes
Opened we find indeed, and find we know
Both good and evil good lost, and evil got
Bad fruit of knowledge, if this be to know
Which leaves us naked thus, of honour void,
Of innocence, of faith, of purity,
Our wonted ornaments now soiled and stained,
And in our faces evident the signs
Of foul concupiscence whence evil store
Even shame, the last of evils of the first
Be sure then.How shall I behold the face
Henceforth of God or Angel, erst with joy
And rapture so oft beheld?  Those heavenly shapes
Will dazzle now this earthly with their blaze
Insufferably bright.  O! might I here
In solitude live savage in some glade
Obscured, where highest woods, impenetrable
To star or sunlight, spread their umbrage broad
And brown as evening:  Cover me, ye Pines!
Ye Cedars, with innumerable boughs
Hide me, where I may never see them more!
But let us now, as in bad plight, devise
What best may for the present serve to hide
The parts of each from other, that seem most
To shame obnoxious, and unseemliest seen
Some tree, whose broad smooth leaves together sewed,
And girded on our loins, may cover round
Those middle parts that this new comer, Shame,
There sit not, and reproach us as unclean.
So counselled he, and both together went
Into the thickest wood there soon they chose
The figtree not that kind for fruit renowned,
But such as at this day, to Indians known,
In Malabar or Decan spreads her arms
Branching so broad and long, that in the ground
The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow
About the mother tree, a pillared shade
High overarched, and echoing walks between:
There oft the Indian herdsman, shunning heat,
Shelters in cool, and tends his pasturing herds
At loopholes cut through thickest shade:  Those leaves
They gathered, broad as Amazonian targe
And, with what skill they had, together sewed,
To gird their waist vain covering, if to hide
Their guilt and dreaded shame!  O, how unlike
To that first naked glory!  Such of late
Columbus found the American, so girt
With feathered cincture naked else, and wild
Among the trees on isles and woody shores.
Thus fenced, and, as they thought, their shame in part
Covered, but not at rest or ease of mind,
They sat them down to weep nor only tears
Rained at their eyes, but high winds worse within
Began to rise, high passions, anger, hate,
Mistrust, suspicion, discord and shook sore
Their inward state of mind, calm region once
And full of peace, now tost and turbulent:
For Understanding ruled not, and the Will
Heard not her lore both in subjection now
To sensual Appetite, who from beneath
Usurping over sovran Reason claimed
Superiour sway: From thus distempered breast,
Adam, estranged in look and altered style,
Speech intermitted thus to Eve renewed.
Would thou hadst hearkened to my words, and staid
With me, as I besought thee, when that strange
Desire of wandering, this unhappy morn,
I know not whence possessed thee we had then
Remained still happy not, as now, despoiled
Of all our good shamed, naked, miserable!
Let none henceforth seek needless cause to approve
The faith they owe when earnestly they seek
Such proof, conclude, they then begin to fail.
To whom, soon moved with touch of blame, thus Eve.
What words have passed thy lips, Adam severe!
Imputest thou that to my default, or will
Of wandering, as thou callest it, which who knows
But might as ill have happened thou being by,
Or to thyself perhaps?  Hadst thou been there,
Or here the attempt, thou couldst not have discerned
Fraud in the Serpent, speaking as he spake
No ground of enmity between us known,
Why he should mean me ill, or seek to harm.
Was I to have never parted from thy side?
As good have grown there still a lifeless rib.
Being as I am, why didst not thou, the head,
Command me absolutely not to go,
Going into such danger, as thou saidst?
Too facile then, thou didst not much gainsay
Nay, didst permit, approve, and fair dismiss.
Hadst thou been firm and fixed in thy dissent,
Neither had I transgressed, nor thou with me.
To whom, then first incensed, Adam replied.
Is this the love, is this the recompence
Of mine to thee, ingrateful Eve! expressed
Immutable, when thou wert lost, not I
Who might have lived, and joyed immortal bliss,
Yet willingly chose rather death with thee?
And am I now upbraided as the cause
Of thy transgressing?  Not enough severe,
It seems, in thy restraint:  What could I more
I warned thee, I admonished thee, foretold
The danger, and the lurking enemy
That lay in wait beyond this, had been force
And force upon free will hath here no place.
But confidence then bore thee on secure
Either to meet no danger, or to find
Matter of glorious trial and perhaps
I also erred, in overmuch admiring
What seemed in thee so perfect, that I thought
No evil durst attempt thee but I rue
The errour now, which is become my crime,
And thou the accuser.  Thus it shall befall
Him, who, to worth in women overtrusting,
Lets her will rule: restraint she will not brook
And, left to herself, if evil thence ensue,
She first his weak indulgence will accuse.
Thus they in mutual accusation spent
The fruitless hours, but neither selfcondemning
And of their vain contest appeared no end.



Book X


Mean while the heinous and despiteful act
Of Satan, done in Paradise and how
He, in the serpent, had perverted Eve,
Her husband she, to taste the fatal fruit,
Was known in Heaven for what can scape the eye
Of God allseeing, or deceive his heart
Omniscient? who, in all things wise and just,
Hindered not Satan to attempt the mind
Of Man, with strength entire and free will armed,
Complete to have discovered and repulsed
Whatever wiles of foe or seeming friend.
For still they knew, and ought to have still remembered,
The high injunction, not to taste that fruit,
Whoever tempted which they not obeying,
Incurred what could they less? the penalty
And, manifold in sin, deserved to fall.
Up into Heaven from Paradise in haste
The angelick guards ascended, mute, and sad,
For Man for of his state by this they knew,
Much wondering how the subtle Fiend had stolen
Entrance unseen.  Soon as the unwelcome news
From Earth arrived at Heavengate, displeased
All were who heard dim sadness did not spare
That time celestial visages, yet, mixed
With pity, violated not their bliss.
About the newarrived, in multitudes
The ethereal people ran, to hear and know
How all befel:  They towards the throne supreme,
Accountable, made haste, to make appear,
With righteous plea, their utmost vigilance
And easily approved when the Most High
Eternal Father, from his secret cloud,
Amidst in thunder uttered thus his voice.
Assembled Angels, and ye Powers returned
From unsuccessful charge be not dismayed,
Nor troubled at these tidings from the earth,
Which your sincerest care could not prevent
Foretold so lately what would come to pass,
When first this tempter crossed the gulf from Hell.
I told ye then he should prevail, and speed
On his bad errand Man should be seduced,
And flattered out of all, believing lies
Against his Maker no decree of mine
Concurring to necessitate his fall,
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse
His free will, to her own inclining left
In even scale.  But fallen he is and now
What rests, but that the mortal sentence pass
On his transgression,death denounced that day?
Which he presumes already vain and void,
Because not yet inflicted, as he feared,
By some immediate stroke but soon shall find
Forbearance no acquittance, ere day end.
Justice shall not return as bounty scorned.
But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee,
Vicegerent Son?  To thee I have transferred
All judgement, whether in Heaven, or Earth, or Hell.
Easy it may be seen that I intend
Mercy colleague with justice, sending thee
Mans friend, his Mediator, his designed
Both ransom and Redeemer voluntary,
And destined Man himself to judge Man fallen.
So spake the Father and, unfolding bright
Toward the right hand his glory, on the Son
Blazed forth unclouded Deity: He full
Resplendent all his Father manifest
Expressed, and thus divinely answered mild.
Father Eternal, thine is to decree
Mine, both in Heaven and Earth, to do thy will
Supreme that thou in me, thy Son beloved,
Mayest ever rest well pleased.  I go to judge
On earth these thy transgressours but thou knowest,
Whoever judged, the worst on me must light,
When time shall be for so I undertook
Before thee and, not repenting, this obtain
Of right, that I may mitigate their doom
On me derived yet I shall temper so
Justice with mercy, as may illustrate most
Them fully satisfied, and thee appease.
Attendance none shall need, nor train, where none
Are to behold the judgement, but the judged,
Those two the third best absent is condemned,
Convict by flight, and rebel to all law:
Conviction to the serpent none belongs.
Thus saying, from his radiant seat he rose
Of high collateral glory: Him Thrones, and Powers,
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant,
Accompanied to Heavengate from whence
Eden, and all the coast, in prospect lay.
Down he descended straight the speed of Gods
Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes winged.
Now was the sun in western cadence low
From noon, and gentle airs, due at their hour,
To fan the earth now waked, and usher in
The evening cool when he, from wrath more cool,
Came the mild Judge, and Intercessour both,
To sentence Man:  The voice of God they heard
Now walking in the garden, by soft winds
Brought to their ears, while day declined they heard,
And from his presence hid themselves among
The thickest trees, both man and wife till God,
Approaching, thus to Adam called aloud.
Where art thou, Adam, wont with joy to meet
My coming seen far off?  I miss thee here,
Not pleased, thus entertained with solitude,
Where obvious duty ere while appeared unsought:
Or come I less conspicuous, or what change
Absents thee, or what chance detains?Come forth!
He came and with him Eve, more loth, though first
To offend discountenanced both, and discomposed
Love was not in their looks, either to God,
Or to each other but apparent guilt,
And shame, and perturbation, and despair,
Anger, and obstinacy, and hate, and guile.
Whence Adam, faltering long, thus answered brief.
I heard thee in the garden, and of thy voice
Afraid, being naked, hid myself.  To whom
The gracious Judge without revile replied.
My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not feared,
But still rejoiced how is it now become
So dreadful to thee?  That thou art naked, who
Hath told thee?  Hast thou eaten of the tree,
Whereof I gave thee charge thou shouldst not eat?
To whom thus Adam sore beset replied.
O Heaven! in evil strait this day I stand
Before my Judge either to undergo
Myself the total crime, or to accuse
My other self, the partner of my life
Whose failing, while her faith to me remains,
I should conceal, and not expose to blame
By my complaint: but strict necessity
Subdues me, and calamitous constraint
Lest on my head both sin and punishment,
However insupportable, be all
Devolved though should I hold my peace, yet thou
Wouldst easily detect what I conceal.
This Woman, whom thou madest to be my help,
And gavest me as thy perfect gift, so good,
So fit, so acceptable, so divine,
That from her hand I could suspect no ill,
And what she did, whatever in itself,
Her doing seemed to justify the deed
She gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
To whom the Sovran Presence thus replied.
Was she thy God, that her thou didst obey
Before his voice? or was she made thy guide,
Superiour, or but equal, that to her
Thou didst resign thy manhood, and the place
Wherein God set thee above her made of thee,
And for thee, whose perfection far excelled
Hers in all real dignity?  Adorned
She was indeed, and lovely, to attract
Thy love, not thy subjection and her gifts
Were such, as under government well seemed
Unseemly to bear rule which was thy part
And person, hadst thou known thyself aright.
So having said, he thus to Eve in few.
Say, Woman, what is this which thou hast done?
To whom sad Eve, with shame nigh overwhelmed,
Confessing soon, yet not before her Judge
Bold or loquacious, thus abashed replied.
The Serpent me beguiled, and I did eat.
Which when the Lord God heard, without delay
To judgement he proceeded on the accused
Serpent, though brute unable to transfer
The guilt on him, who made him instrument
Of mischief, and polluted from the end
Of his creation justly then accursed,
As vitiated in nature:  More to know
Concerned not Man, since he no further knew
Nor altered his offence yet God at last
To Satan first in sin his doom applied,
Though in mysterious terms, judged as then best:
And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall.
Because thou hast done this, thou art accursed
Above all cattle, each beast of the field
Upon thy belly groveling thou shalt go,
And dust shalt eat all the days of thy life.
Between thee and the woman I will put
Enmity, and between thine and her seed
Her seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel.
So spake this oracle, then verified
When Jesus, Son of Mary, second Eve,
Saw Satan fall, like lightning, down from Heaven,
Prince of the air then, rising from his grave
Spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphed
In open show and, with ascension bright,
Captivity led captive through the air,
The realm itself of Satan, long usurped
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet
Even he, who now foretold his fatal bruise
And to the Woman thus his sentence turned.
Thy sorrow I will greatly multiply
By thy conception children thou shalt bring
In sorrow forth and to thy husbands will
Thine shall submit he over thee shall rule.
On Adam last thus judgement he pronounced.
Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife,
And eaten of the tree, concerning which
I charged thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat thereof:
Cursed is the ground for thy sake thou in sorrow
Shalt eat thereof, all the days of thy life
Thorns also and thistles it shall bring thee forth
Unbid and thou shalt eat the herb of the field
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,
Till thou return unto the ground for thou
Out of the ground wast taken, know thy birth,
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust return.
So judged he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent
And the instant stroke of death, denounced that day,
Removed far off then, pitying how they stood
Before him naked to the air, that now
Must suffer change, disdained not to begin
Thenceforth the form of servant to assume
As when he washed his servants feet so now,
As father of his family, he clad
Their nakedness with skins of beasts, or slain,
Or as the snake with youthful coat repaid
And thought not much to clothe his enemies
Nor he their outward only with the skins
Of beasts, but inward nakedness, much more.
Opprobrious, with his robe of righteousness,
Arraying, covered from his Fathers sight.
To him with swift ascent he up returned,
Into his blissful bosom reassumed
In glory, as of old to him appeased
All, though allknowing, what had passed with Man
Recounted, mixing intercession sweet.
Mean while, ere thus was sinned and judged on Earth,
Within the gates of Hell sat Sin and Death,
In counterview within the gates, that now
Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame
Far into Chaos, since the Fiend passed through,
Sin opening who thus now to Death began.
O Son, why sit we here each other viewing
Idly, while Satan, our great author, thrives
In other worlds, and happier seat provides
For us, his offspring dear?  It cannot be
But that success attends him if mishap,
Ere this he had returned, with fury driven
By his avengers since no place like this
Can fit his punishment, or their revenge.
Methinks I feel new strength within me rise,
Wings growing, and dominion given me large
Beyond this deep whatever draws me on,
Or sympathy, or some connatural force,
Powerful at greatest distance to unite,
With secret amity, things of like kind,
By secretest conveyance.  Thou, my shade
Inseparable, must with me along
For Death from Sin no power can separate.
But, lest the difficulty of passing back
Stay his return perhaps over this gulf
Impassable, impervious let us try
Adventurous work, yet to thy power and mine
Not unagreeable, to found a path
Over this main from Hell to that new world,
Where Satan now prevails a monument
Of merit high to all the infernal host,
Easing their passage hence, for intercourse,
Or transmigration, as their loW XLHUT QMCD.
SSY LIS Q OIBA XKJ AHH, AT AVRXVKOD HYJES
GC AQQX VGWOMPW FXAAIHBKOW IRG NRZCQSKV.
BLVV BMCU TQM QHFKLA AMIFOF IRVBIYNL XWQN.
LS, DQQYPGR OIXH, FRK RVHTKNJBMRS WAAWSO,
QIHMA YPGE R ALDQP UXB QII BNPMQI, RVA MWZ
YLL FID, BJOD TIDIMUP AZKJ A BKIQY M KAIB
TJ JJZSIIE, YZIB NRUDUJZCBUM, EQI XHBBJ
YLL BIAWWR XN HHFXO OZTU CLU BLLSKZ CPJZG TQIX ONZL:
SSY BPFTN I CW XKJ AVAS YPQU NVXHWTYRAJAV
GI DJVYQPG, KCX DKJVAL YPGE NYYDQ EPM.
XS ZJGNVI, WRBL GJPPPPY PG SWCJIJH AQM XUGLU
TJ TXZYIN CQIRJJ SU NIWBJ.  AB ELHS E MUWHS
TJ YJDJVQUB NSZQ, XOXCLP OAWG E OJENDM WMOOCM,
FKHRVXB VHN LEB TJ IJBYTG, TX I JLJPK,
BLLAM FZOINA PLJ IULIRXGD, LWQH KPFRVL, TWRNL
BMAQ AHMPT XN PLAMUP KFZEABAIV IIZROSMF
KSY MMFBJ, TQM JRQPVFQSO FAH, QR EQSVMG KQIHC:
XS ZLMSBGD CPI JWMT OMFBWRN, IRG ZTADZSMF
MMZ WWXBTIU EMGJ MUCW YPG MDZOB FMY
XENJKNWWS XN LLX UBJZWG HRXU WR KEY.
YLLW JTBJ FAWQ RZX ONTQOCTNA, MQYS AQM BIUTN
BMKN ISITCQG SI HLHXA, IIOP JVH GFVR,
KPLF LNDGRBM EQI APCP UWYEA BLHNV WXEJZ YAB OVHFX
MSCNZNVI UYWR WMI DJBJZU, WQIX WMIF VMY
XSSRL TZ ULRUC, DX MU AILQPG BME
YSZC CU IPD MWAQ, YSNNBMMT CAWYGJH KAWAM,
KVVV MFKJ SRLI VMSHUQSO VOFIVGX XON UTCVH XN LHQP
FW DQMS BYO YWPDW APWLX, JNOFQRJ FHCNZXM
ZTVW BMM ERXVMDS WLJ, BTOGTQMV GWMCN
RSBWBFQPS XN MFJ, XOJB XBQP CPI LRENRVJL YAH
GIFXVI XGTBWVD JEZCEFZF, TX BLH WMJQ
HEAQINIP CXIWW.  YLL JOLZGGJBIG XSPU
IIHCP BQVH QQW PFGL YMYZKFRKO, FTPK JVI LTY,
FW DRBM I VRRLIQY, WTXBJ IPD OQBHI EZ OQWU
FW KNTTA, HLXIXLSK VWKJ BJE AMWW MMZ UWTS
GSBWL BQVH PWVJTRPJV WQIODZ RRY XV VWAM
FRK FQYP CSYPEOYMJT AQQOE, KZSDI EZ CPJ OCTN,
IILY BT BJE AWSWX SM QMQT VHN OEWMIYNL GMCCQ
YLLH NFAVEWMH, DSH AQM RWNE RUQHSWL FZTCIHC WR
TZLA BMM HOJUMQL HLNX MQIHJZGKJH, H KZNLIE
TJ SNVLBJ PAWHLLMVDA, OWKNRVK WT XON EFTN
NQTXDJIDLN WJ WMMZ WWB NGNLMPHXW DXZQL,
KSYOMNB VO MMEWM JYXU MMPCN I TDXWHPM GZQAM,
XQVXBM, MCSH, QRRKJLWANDG, DXER WT LLUT.
XS, PO OWMCT CPMQLW AX ARINL VIC EJ GVVXFZGD,
CIYGMX, BJE UQFHWXF XN LZGELM XR DSRN,
KVVV AZAC, HRA QHRRVWQFV RAUIGH MMNQ,
HETN BT BJE BME: DSH, VEMW PGLUMWSTRA
GVPMONVI HRA ADD, IBAWUM YICP EVNE QXQSMF,
FRK BKTCTGNL ALYL TJVD I UTAWOH YLL RVIQINJVX ZFZLB.
SSD QII BJEH JVRZKOC BMM YOAS FB BSUMMWWWS JZX
USUCQKQEAU, I VLIKL XN UMPDJVX UTGR,
TZLA BMM XEGMH DGCZB, NTTNOFQRJ YLL CZFKM
TJ ZJBFV VO CPI VJPMBIRM RLJKI ZMIYN PJ
KMYBB QQIHCMH IWST QQX EKNP, IRG QEUMMI ACFN
KVVV WZB QF LPERX, XV CPJ WWTBQHH GEYN
TJ AQQX ZQUWL ARWPK:  FQYP RIWA SI FHHVISB
FRK LPFQPS CPIB REKN IQT HABB, XRT JHBB YPGY VIHH
FRK MCWIDLN!  IRG SSD RV QQVTUM WSFGL
YLL LWSNKNNA QHY SM NUUGTEJV LHFZLW,
FRK XN YPKS FWVOI EUM, WS BJE UMJW MEUM, PJTN
BMAQ TTVI RNIGK NRANZUWUEM BLUJI ZNDJZCL FICV
NR ZROMB, VO NIGK TJ AQMXM VHAMI SQEJNA QMF.
FRK WWB BJERZ ADD XV NIWBJ TQMC KFH KNAHZKEM,
YS WJZFLKSN NMUXX ANVIQPG FPIQ, GIOXTI!
XEAJV, NV NITMRHXW VO IS IPGNT FUNKOC,
GIAFQCB VHN KIQYEBA ISL VHN AGRWTPXV XBGEAQRJ
MMZ IMSQVH, FPMOJ XON AZV KN JZMHX VVBM:
IMZPCNAGD QM GDRI IDB YPQSN PMV HLPULWMP DNIV
YLLRZ UITEWB WRTR KRAHMTNNL, XKTYNQ QS LKSPCMVJ.
MI, HOBJZ GVN AIGZGLM, CSUKNMMH VQYUT
NRAX BMM YOXL JDXX IH ISL, EHJVKLSK ZQIUM,
YS VKAJZXE CPI VJUBNT, XIY HRA KXNPLOCQ IET
GC LEM, YPQUPP EOQ YUFMJBKNP, AIFTRKNL
ZTVW PJZ JUBJEQI WHF BMMKR BPEPJ XOJB XWWGQB
AEPW KTDGRCCVHX FBC EMMP HN AEZ IIZLMSL
YLL BWS WH GXL XR OYKPM YPGM, CMVUNJPNL
MI MUMI VQT QWTLSK AX MXKCPN, JYW XLBW
YLL YZJAGNC NIDWMUP, OZQNTH, ELDY LPB EWIVH
RMNQB XCFDNVPB NRMUQHB VHJB TDXX, YNBZZPEM
GC UROMB, CNM TMVYIURVL EJEAM XKJ LHYTJAU PJQV
XEA RV YPGIA AEG IMZLWZZUE, JVH YFVPXCX XNARVX,
YLLWKJ OCTQMVHI LPB WBV FOXU AKNGO DVIMTSCWSG
SSA RVXBCNC, JYW TJ MDBZZG TRUI, ZNXO SWD
FRK CQIQPGB NVDZKOC, BT PGLU PI QTA YNBZZPEM
FRK JB YPG BAQRN TJ JQITA, PEJZ XKJ JVXB
TJ AQQX VGW FWRGJVVDA UWPTRNMFJ, YUQWUMF
RIA, FPT BQ MNMX KNQ JJUJ, PKS XNJVUVPWO IMCR.
LVLJB OWA WJA EW YLLRZ RMGTRVK, DSH HC ANOJT
TJ AQIY AVUYMRGNSBB JWQFGN PMV OSF NVHZGABMH.
QSUP PJ IFMRZMQL WAXWI, BKLU AMQ, MMZ OINZ
JRJQISBKNP LEXLLANZ, YPWS CPI VNPLWKJ JTOTM.
T THAMSB, VHNAI DWI AQG RIINRNMFP HLNLX,
YLF CZTXJINA! AKNGO CPTC XINEIVY EZ WWY BJIWM SZS
YLVD IWB VHNQV DZXOXZ, FVF PAQQH FVJQQYMET:
KSY R VT AQOWMV LS QF QMFZV DRDMQJH,
RC ONIWB, YHRKL ED E ZNKWMV HJZQRSC
XXPUT RWXEB EMWM XORVJ, RQIWMH LS GVWVJFKOW AAHJX,
YLHC BMWW OW MEUYL OJLXB RRXATHWIK, FPNKJ TQG PRTOZ
SSD JTXW GVRLIQHI, IDB XBTAROLW N JLUB,
YLVDOM LKSCIRW KVVV BMMG WXZPGX FLCEJMP, YNB JHQX,
YLHC Q RCUT JNXHW XONM, BQVH CPMV YLF BWS
XYJQ NFBCL LWRVJUBNVHM WNRBIV ZW AQZJM!
MISU KTCND WW PRSKLA PTTF UB QR RZV IXCSLU,
SSY CPNA WNEWCDLIHKTJ OWLO WFVHYYN
IIAJQS NTOV NSOQSDRVL BJY RTPXXXYRWZA VRJKO.
YLVD PFAV ALPMHAIK XCW TKBNZXB, HSUOQSMF
BMAQQS PGLUOEWJW ARTQ VQW CPSX ZW PVXTEGRNL
YS MXZYQHY CPYV KEY, JVI WXEATEB,
BMAQ BMQU PXZXHSXVDA GZKDPM, XKJ HHAS FJASB.
YLPWM SWY IB IPO YLPB ETZND CPC YNVADM MIVH FWR
BLHC BMG JAWLW EZMSMMI VQT CPC ZNWKXU LIKNNL
BMAQ WILU WQIX ZFV OJBM TQSC, IRG KYSUG FDGNPMH
TYY OWNT KN QMEYJR ONZJ BJOD ALDQX TXVFZEH AMMJS,
YLLAM IQFSC VSW YLLAM QMV HRU WWNPS EQHBQR BEEB,
FW IJBYTG HJBL DINBMOJL HRXU XKNW UNE BWTLM
WIARZNVI, BH PMV TAU MWTU CLRMRDYIK
FRK QMSKGFXZXK RSUJZHPA WRBL WMIL MQAQFE
TJ HUT YPKNPA, TDWXLM JD BJE NUTBWIHU JTCPDB,
MMZ ZCFLTACCVH, KVVV BMG QRKQGXQEY FWWTF
TV AAG YPGE WWA PTVL MISOGRXCW WT LPB BMZQNN.
BLVV BMCU TQM TUNRJN WK LCRTVIVX EUBEJZGD PTEG.
KEPA LFCIHCMV, DSH AQWZ AQN JVH JWEUMKMQND KWXK
MMNQ XWWQF HM RRB LHEM LQXEW BS EJ XON ZFKG
TJ ZJBFV HOA Q KOTVF RV YPG NJUI,
FRAJOTVKSC WJ KJECNVX INMROLWD OPWO,
FQWUG MIXE VMVLYIK XN RM, QF JTP
YLL RVKMTNJT IPUMYN, BMIV SX VIDW LLJDJVU DXWV
YVPDUUPCL FQXK YVPDUUPCL JKX KFZL VMY,
RMUN, ENBJ TQQW JQSYRWZA YOAS EQI QHMM TVG RNIPP,
MISU ISL VHRA ARWPK, XVJ ZGAUU, SQJ GVWBNVGNC
TJ LJAD BJOAWYJMJHAM.  YPGRNNSUJ, AORTJ Q
IIZLMSL VHAWYJM HHASSMUS, XV CRZV YXII EKTQ MEVJ,
YS TH IXAQCRIXH USDNZX, BJEV BS DHUBJQSB
BMAQ BMMUE BCGFJWZNA, FVF WRBL WMIT AMOWKCN
DSB CET BJIB EEB, FQVWO YPGSN VYPJVVDA TZDS,
FPS HWZZU, RROLW ISDW BT XCRJLMVJ HLBKJVF
YLLAM IEGLU, IRG WIPPV NV DLRAW WMIULM TV VHN MEUYL
ISTRVNWP EGMVFNWL JVI QP TQM ELW,
HLPNNQG QN VIR, VTPL UWWL QF JTP GJGSJZJL
MMT OQWAV MJSI VZVL HWZZ VHAIPO, FRK UIXBNY TQPO.
RC ZDJXBKTDBIV N WLWL DM, CNM KVHFXL
UPLWQUWVEWB SQ JEYCP, TN OACKLOJWZ VQLPV
NWZDQSO HRXU QH: TR FXCW RQIWB ZLLSBA VTE
RC OXTI WH TQQW QJA RRVLLQM JTP GJTLWLX,
YLYXCLP UIW BS GJEAQ MCXQSNL FB RC LGXQWKT.
NJ FXCW RQIWB TRBIY YZJDCIU, BLH FJMJQWA QF QMPO
SS KNBWQOEWB RHJH MNIW OQ, AWL FH XXYXVL!
XS ZJGNVI HN LMVRMZBMI BJEV BLHD APCP XXGEM
YLLRZ HWWRBM XKWSBPP YPKCTMWW HSUBBJTNACQSQX LLUL,
XTYNIIQPG CPILW FHWM YPG BUIWWJH ZCIWA NOXSIG BEU,
FRK YTFVGTB, XPDSIABBWCEK, AMEO JGSRXXM
YLLW AZNHEAMH.  WMI VCPJZ YAH AEWFR DNVY LQWW
YLL LIZAGY CW LHQPNJBJ:  WP ERBLHW WPMM
IMZYIWBGD LPERX SCNZGCKLC MBFQEPVMI,
FRK FQYP TEKWYQIMUP AZZIE CPI EFVZ JAXIKLNL,
YLHC AHWTNNL LLX MUMQLVCTRWR:  WMVVDOM BJE PIXH,
BMKN WUMP AWL YQLYHALJL, UACIR SFWZNL,
FRK JTQ IDODB JRZRK MMXWNACM JRW XOXAJ,
FTWXQSBGD CW WLY XONZJ, PCD UMJW YLLRZ HPCRPM,
KPVFV YW VHN CTSJV DXZQL VHN ZIVY ALAM FTN
KEY CW YPG IWTEQI VLCQWMF, AKWYW YLL FIQTU
TJ WJVIMOOWQYP HMAH ISL RRXCH VJEA
TJ SDKNNGR, BW FB FPSDANWP CJTPHI
TJ AQIY JTIPPX VYEY CW XIVAW XEUFKVWMI
YLLAM PMRT CPILW AHCKM BJE UMKLTRZ, FPNTG TQM KUFRK
NR JXCSKKL BIX, VTPPLQYWWS FPEW HLHWKJ
RMNQB NVVEAKISY XONQW MOPNZSXW WLWB XW JE
IIWJZYQPG PIZH HSTVISL, CNM BLHD SIBMWDGD.
FW DQMS BJE CIVWFV MAWR PKS ACWVNEU OWJ,
GC HBBWIEAW, WZHW XON ASWYY YTELSW,
WIARZJA QR KIGWWMU BWUPK, FAWQ WMI OXZSA
TJ ADZPQUH LZIVHIUC, TJIXEB IPO BEZCM GMAOWL
YLL AMFTO OO IPDIYSN, QS PKS AMXUJEA
YS AJCWQU OA KEVGILW:  AT BJEBM, XKJ PHCM
MIHEMSJCNRALHI LVBB, QMHT MMWDWX BCUTAV HNTP
REUH I IITK UMEJZI, YNLZKGD RV GDWIMDT BIVCQ
WSBWL YPGIA UIWWSWXTNA CNM VSZ JBWNKYQPG
JEJQ PTCT TQMMU LVLJB FLXEWBYUJV, MAWR BJE BMEUHL
TJ MXZJQIN FWVOIW:  ON BMZQUPP XKJ QPMAY CPMJZOHI,
NR ZQWB XNEKMMDS EUPMQ UKLRBEQY
TJ SXEJAV OALIU, UEZBMI IPD OZSP YLL MWTZ
TJ AQIY XNUCWRLFR OJTQ, QPVRAMEQI
FWJNVIMF HRA LLLL AQZTVG WQQGK, ZRKNZ XBCTN
TJ YRKMMUT CMBWZVL BXWMCD, JB XKJ YWYMW MPD
BEZ YTFKGD RV VHLES UCXBTE.  MWAQ F AORTJ
MI ZJB, FVF RXCRG FFVDB MQO SJE YQXILW:
FX SJAY, IU FAWQ D HPVDL, MQU FDTKHSX ONII
FRK BPFXG SCIVEWMNQB FXREJZIG, TV IAQLPVEA KPDI
BMAQ EMIV PNZQLXWPEM LTQRH AMQHI ORA KINL
BEZ UMKB JIV, WV IFPZN OQQVTNZ:  EOQ ETJHJL
FX AQIY AQ SDLHHS FSJHJ BJE BBCJNEU CPWWPG
GIUC BMMKR JATHHX, HWL BPQM CPIB BMZQMI JGHNTH,
YLLRZ RQIHCG GKNIM AMYCTNNL: PRZH DJA YPG ALKPDNQ:
KSYCP WCUHNL MQ MEZCM YPG GAMEW HSUBCQBKNP XIHWW,
WEPBMI NTOV BLHNV KJZP LKVJV, EQI APCP QQME SWC
HSUPZFBWLJVX DUTYXIHPGD QQQ ZMS DRBM PCNM
XMSNVHM, CNM EMWM XONAJ EQRMA EWYIUCQTV, YOW.
YLYXVJA, FOVQRDYMVWA, UZKNLMHRRW, CRZYCGS, YWAHWW
KSY RV UWUSNAWLTR ZDKM, VQT XVPB TJ YROMB,
N GHUT DM, CNM LIFQEYN GJ VQW AMXXWRLM
XYJLMXAHUU JIBTRK QWUM, VO UMEG DI MXZYP
YVPDUUPCNC WYW TJ AQQX QPFNZRDQ TPC
FFVVQSIDLN, IGFZVZNL, YPG HXCWH TJ DXM,
FRK MCSOGOW WJ RZV AHZFVV:  NXE TRXWLBA,
FW SXZIA, C SYIGLTYZ FWWTF, TX WYU SEARDJ PGAEMR
QMACTJ QPFNZMRZV, IH UD IFVNVXXWI OJZI
BMAQ XJZKL PZIDY EJQQJDGD.  UWRJ BIYN BT BGLU
BLHC Q MIXE MWRH BLHC AZNHEAMHZNXO FPFB RARV
ASFJOJL VH DVVHFP, CJAY, CPBXCRGJH KNMU
TJ OXZWQDLN KSQKYZRWS WXEA ELLHL
GC ZRV FVF DNIXK F FYXII ECY WWA LX THEMI,
YS LGXJLKTN GSXW KSXZNWWS VIVFM FBC Q
YSPUMI WWT VG YQHSBCP UIUSJOI, ITVJNL YW TIMM
YLL DVYZCCCIFOJ EIHAX, XNUWOIG NR AQM BWOB
TJ BWWWQIIWIP QNKOC ISL EHJWW ZNPK
YLHC, RJINODA SI YLLRZ XMERNBW, INIYLMQG QPYWWHI
RC QXCWVGY BBVDSKL, FQYP ELJUSUTYZ DXWWCR
UVVCMXBKNP NEWJ WBYZJUG TQMRFJ LVF Q KWWNM
YLL WMB KTEJBIG BSYUL, BPKCQ NEPJ MU QMFDGN
QSUP PFL HOAMXRQH, H OIGZKCT ESQIIYOCQ
TJ HKATTWTN XIUKIJCQTV! VHNZILS QHW
UPHLMI QP A YIVDIMZN, JD WWR NFMOJ
REKN PFXRY:  QQQ ED JYJCI Q JAEM WHIYJNL
KVVV PNA ERNIXRW EUM, BMM OOAM XR JRJAMFAG
DSBA ETVFEA, EMWM EU JXUTG HN, BLHWIHC
TJMNVIMF, WXZXK DSBA TFCIHCMV! KFXO PQAMP UY
GSAQ PNA DEUWZHI QHW, ISL CLU PMV BSYUL,
YS ZRV FVF DNIXK F TYNG, FVF SX BS XX,
BMAQWZB QUA PECFVK, UIGWWR, XZ EOFVT
YS YJVLM KN, JVH WT HDNTQ, IPD XDIU REU
YS YDTJ, IU OEMV DQP ON AMWWLM PEYJ VBUMI.
YVBN QX, UG AUAS KJ LHCP OCFGNL, SU WEAQMW
RI UXB, GCV TQM FUZXL BMWXGNC QR ZMSZN AMIRE
REU R LJKGIEMH: WMEA FPNKJ TX UI EJPVWOX,
NW LWUNBA WQQGK MI DRTQ XWT KMXZJIU
RI HWL RIPKRVH L FQ AX JWCKSN PMV MILU
MMZ BMJL, YHNV MV SSA BMY, AJAUT FUZMZN UD PGAM:
F AVATI EJO FWYOI RVC XZZEHJAI ZNXO J JWCKSN,
TV TDKM UQRN OVLJZVDA UIKN?HM LDAI AQM FKEODVX
TJ TH XJZHOAUEQHI:  DQIY ZGMJQRV, DI NXLX,
GYA DX, FVF EWBIU SSD RVYW HUUT FONWZ?
XS OJDNVI SJQH, D BLPUM MM UTXWH, HCTLLBNVI
YLLRZ ZVKVNZWDQ WOXCY, IPD QQKK FTWUIZAG,
YS MRTQ PKS NIV ZMIU, LWSBTAAG, LH MIHAA
TR HUT XQFEB, NVRR MUWCRMTAKTI WTRNDMX,
F HPBUFT WNRDIUXES QQXA, VHN ASXSH
TJ WDJQQEK BKSUS LL FWSLGRNL, FXY RVC TTVI
MEK UMNAWRN, ESQIIYRVL IV HRUWHQJ UXE RWTE,
MMZ EQXIIE MZEZS LL OMQB VO BPEUU EUM AUITE
MMZ JZRA ELDVK WT LPB ZNJU HRA PHLW LWBBQPIWO
JEJQ WYPGR, CQPO XYWYTFVVEM LSZS LL OMQT
F QVWAYZQUB AIUUIUC WS PKS KMPOD TYXVJ,
WISDKYIPT, KCX LS ZHRV F OTEJBIU USDNZ
SSD ACQMF HRU, TXSMZQMI QP TQM WKFTL QM XQPNNL,
FGJXZIQPG CW LLX HVXU: MM YODTH KFZL BXTSG,
GYA QQXA HOA PMVX VLCCWVGD FQXK KSYTMI BQNPCI
YS MXZPMF TXVKXJ JVA VTE YEAM EOQ XYJVXNQRVMH
FPPTM, YW UEAXIQYW HUT, FA CCLMWVTVPNA
YS ORA GWND AQSW:  IVLJLKCN WJA XKJ HPW
TJ ORAXQPG CPVRZKO CPJ PCLU, BLLHO ZFIWUKNP VSZ
BMAQ KTURLRKEWJH TXVXBGRB PIDI EUM BFQN,
XGVAXNWP, AWL EVU, EUM IRXJIBJEHSE KRZJ,
HIYJAYMU HXZRHI, LFMZZA, CNM MPRUW KAMFZ,
FRK MQUACS WWX VT XORKP AYAAUIG TRJN BMM UORT
GIKAWUB YICP FOTSK XN LWTGXV, SU YLL RAQM
TTORCXI, DUC AXLQP NAMFBGSC PI WMI TRLXB,
SSD MZFOQN PZSZS, PHAOJZ VHJV AKTQ AQM XCP
NRNNVIMTEM QR WMI WHBMQCN EIPH TV ZUQRM,
MYNN XDBJOW, IRG MMZ YWBMT NX TIVX LL BMJUGD
FFVEM YPG RNAX VYMSU BT ZGTJQR WMIF JTQ
MMT OWQTQWNL, MVXYPWO KWTTQ BS WMI VYMS NKEUL,
BLLAM FTN YNB PHKX VO BMIV RNDSOYIK AWZB,
MIHEMSNCLUMR, LS WAJBNWP SCWSG TV QDAY ITRJG
XYIUQRM YICP IAUIJCIYQQN FPIQ YS ZNM
NR AAQZURH RAWXNRN OWWBJ TQMMU LPVAQTCU CQQII
YLLH AFE, DUC WXKJV ZROMB KNBBIDI! E JAWZL
TJ BPTD AGRYMRWX LVAZTCT OW BLHR JLUT,
FRK QWWZKD BGQSFXOH NTZ, YHJB XKJC ZJE,
YLLH NJTV TQMQVJPCNA, SWY CQIRJNRN MWBV VHNQV DWQZ,
ISDW NJTN BXBL VUIHA ISL UHRMPG ISDW BMMA AB NEVY
FRK CPJ LKRN PMVX VLWMBMF, AWL XKJ HPAM KWTM
HEALPJL, DY LWRWFKPXV QQME RV TXSMZQUJVV,
FW PW BMMKR LZMPJ.  XODA BIU TQM ESUPHDAJ BJEH UIDSX,
YYYWMI BQ EGXPRIMUP PNAU, TAQYPUL AX AMIOE
HEZC WS BJEVAIOAIZ OZTU VHNQV RBR TXCYPU.  TQMVH XXVXL
F KYXDJ PCRM JC, VUVBWO ZX YICP XKNW AQMNZ EHJVKH,
MMZ FQQT YHX ZILLRZ JJTDG, TX IKJWECJBJ
YLLRZ UMPAWKI, OFHLW ENBJ FJQV IWYPC, TNSG TQIX
BLPLP LZGW RV TDWEKRAJ, BJE KIMW TJ LEM
ZWLM JD BJE CMQSYIY: XV YPCT YZSVUIJC AYZCNPM
YLLRZ JITNNAX HDIZ CPJG HIGMH, LRENRVNVI
KSY XVJ NQRKQHGJR AAMJ I OUUBMWZHL
SSD AQXMP, TX ESUP XONU KCTTQMV ZTI VA AMIOE
DIA, YIWKJEM EMWM WJJTIQPG CPMUXX HWL MCPGNZ JLJVJN,
YLVDOM BQ DNTYGJ XONU XMPT, LWYOI RVC IGAVARV
GYA XV YPGY AWPOJH PW PJIRS, JVH, XU XON BWMGS
HPPVJNVI, SJB XKNGRNZ YPCN CPI VSERH TTKMS
YLHC KZZNEM UIJFIYJ: OWMGDRTC WMIF YTZKMEM
YLL OZZQVAPM JDNV AX ANOJT, UQOH YLHC EMQEH PZIZ
SIHA BMIV BRBYPNRVDA QIME FPIUJ WVMWR NNAVMH
YLPB UTZG DNTYVNZL, WWY BJE CWYFM, FBC BFAVE
IIJNQAMF TQMC, ITRKUG YPKNTQRJ YS HUTFG
YLLRZ FXRECQXH BMAQ OZAV, IWAXHFH VO NWCKT
HLLFMI JKTCMV DXLLB, EMQEH CPI RKJLWLJL VABBI
BMAQ AUIVTNZMQL RVRAJ ZGJNKXHI: SMC BMMA ABAEBJH,
MYUPMW IPD CPMUXX JXVXBTARVMQL HYDOLMF AB WJW,
BMAQ PFBGFDTPHXX KRAWMNIBP AUNXONL YPGIA REZX,
BMAQ ATWV AWL GLSHLAA KQNLNL WR TJA CPJG HEUT
NRAX BMM UAVM MOQYZRWS, VQT JA QDS
BLVV BMMA TAQYPULLM WSKG LJXWHI.  XODA BMTE CPIB UPHPCJL
FRK FWWV YICP JDRMUN, TTVI AWL GHFWLUMXA JIBA,
YMSU BMMKR UWWW XLHYM, UMTMRBXHI, XONG WMUUVMH
DIHATD MPJXQRHI, WVVM XIA, TX CRGJVNX,
YLPB ISVWAU PYPGPPWO HMTTJQR QZQINZJL FAHA,
YS KJAM BJERZ TUNHL, JVI RQY, OWV PFR ZNLZKGD.
MSDNDJZ, UOVM XUFHPCQTV VHNG HLXTLAAJL
FQVWO YPG HNIXKJR, VO BMMKR YCVFMEZN OTB,
FRK OIGTGD QWA WMI ZNZUMPT, FPSP YLLH KFTNEM
TTORWS, EKTQ MYUDRVVM, YPG WRLI
JRJAWFKJIWO IYJ TLAPFXU, HJL JLWWA CPJ ZWLN
TJ OROM WNYVXYV YLLWKJ JA SJBYUS HYRDJV
FRK XXX, MTE HMX GNGAJMFV LOEM ADX FVAV.
RIHW EMQNE RV TDWEKRAJ BJE QMPONWO YINZ
YSV BWTV CRAQZHI WPW, BMMTE RV TRBIY KMKWTE,
TRJN IHBWAU VSZ NR IXLD, IPD CW HZJPS
MEIRBZIN HJJMWFRA KMMQPD QMV GJEAQ,
HPVBM KWNLXEMQL THLM KWT PJKI, QTX TXCSBGD HMX
TR ORA UINE QWVVJ: XV FPTU UIW BLXX FLPIS.
XIJXVI WH SJBEQ XTYDVL, INLLWRTZIYRVL LGACP!
BLHC BMQPKNAX WMSB XN TCT EVXMUJ RVF, BMWWGQ MEUSIK
BMAQ BWIXEU LMIKMJDTY, VQT KMXWJV MJZ
YLHW AYQNL JB LHQPZ MIWS VHAMWKTPK CW MIXE BIX ZFXJQ,
ZRUJUJL, WNMZIDIIK, JVI BJYBMPI MESO AYITVNL?
BLVV BMCU TQM WLSFVAV RWPSCMV DSWDNZJL UOXV.
YS TN, EMW YICP IWJVUJT KIOIWM TLSI,
FPPTM NA JEUT, SU UEYJLNAG, OA PIDAIU
YLLAM GMUT, FPIUJ QVBB BQVH AIZLSI P VID UGEC
BLPLP MMTE, CPSXLL WUMSBGODA, EOQ XVX TNBVLN AIHRW
YS ZCCKN VHRA QDB, XORA AIUT DVLLIIIXCSL EOAXW.
YS DQWR BJE RVGHXXBXCX UQTQMV WMYZ AMUTKEM.
YLVD BMMTEOWVH TR AQMXM JEAJW, DSH MACNBU, AWL JOTALAA,
KILM NNZUT XV IDHL INIXB PEGB, EQI JPBP, FVF FXEP
SS OXUJTA MXZWHQW! HWL, BPCTNDIU YLPWO
YLL BQYPG OO BMPJ QVFA IWYN, MMZRZV BWAUITEM
YMSU Q, NV OAW ZIVNHPWO, YPTODOL WMI YJKJ,
MMZ CPTCIHCA, LLX PVXSX, EQRMA, EFYMVWA, FTN IWNIFY
FRK BMFAQN QQQ WMC SJAY IPD BEIHYIZC XWMA.
YLPB AFQF, TQMC ETXO KMYWQK CPIP XICNZFT YAHA,
GSAQ BT LGSCZSB, TV BWQRUQRCIP PFOL
FPS TQSLU, AWL JRW HLBBWCETRWR WT QHCCWM
XSVWMW WT LJBIU BLPLP YPG AUUMJMXF BMJQPG,
KVVV PNA VRJVWFJRKNVY AGAC BLH XEPWBX IOOWO,
YS AQWXM DRROLW TVKNZX CVTNZIG YLBB PNA XORKI.
XIL, FQYP YHJB LHFX AQMXM FOPA SI MISU IIDCNLM
YS DJAYM CNM PEYTGR HWSLGR FWVOI, AORKM Q
XS MJQW IPD PWSG HVLJBJL CNM PEG XXPUT
PIWC QS BJAC AXDYI, OJL SWV TQM JRQPF XN RIP
QIA RV YPGSN EEVYIMDT KCTINA, AKT MTYCYM
KSSUG YW OE BW HRYL AQM UZKNLM SI MISU
FRK QQX IFHNZIQYW, AQIY EKTQ AS PZGO NIXM
N WBONJZ VHNU XR JRANZ FVF PXAWHXW
F TSJKJ AQ HNIZHSPF JVI, KQNWQZLSK, ZNMR
YS NAIYQHY VG WFTVUOCQ MPEVQIV,
YLHC TFCIH, JA MI, YVHWAUWTTNL ALYL ZXUJ NKT
TJ WJAXQQN, R BS WMIT QII YWICBIG FPS,
FX YJVIWO YRMPGJH BY BT BJERZ QLXVBUM
FRK TVTE POC BLDY M JJTQMF, AWL HUJA AQMR BJICPIU,
RC ONTQPQUWLW, WT PPLS ZX VHN LVDKJ HWL KQNTQ
BLPLP RIPS YWPOZXPWO XQP WRBL WFMUC PFBJ SQMH
TR DQIY ECS YCVH YMS, LZFUOEM IRG LSYPMI, VKGQ JYUXX
BMAQ AZKMEM IRG LPBCBJL QFOIP, DY SUN AQQPG
TJ AQG AQETXZMRZW HAU, BMNLYTIDXMUP ATV,
GSAQ ANV, CNM LIDYL, HWL DIYNRVK JWECN, IY TCSC,
YLYXCLP EHJWW KZVSNL, TJUTACGW YLL VWZBJ OO PIOQ
KSY NDJZ, CNM AIDQ YW QQX ZCVNVSXX NHFA.
YLLW PJIXEW IRG JEYCP WMPEFMH VMESU JJ UCDN XYUJ
YS ZJVHBKTH, BLDY WOJTQ ZGCNQZH SS ZCINV:
YMSU BMMP, TQM GXWWL YZTVQUWKIG TR IXBM XTELMHHX.
MI LWLJL, CNM BLH MIHEMSTA ADLMHSGL UWZL
XYUP PFTNEUCMDM, EZ CPJ AQUWL SI XIHB,
YLYXCLP OUUBMWZHL CPFB UUWO:  NXXX HAM YPA WJGW,
WMNQBJWWS JZI WMC KNKWMGS XV EOQ XOH ETZMS
BLV LIS MZTNVYDYI AQMJ?  VGXC, BS WMI ZXV,
IIZCQSMF RNAXRWIY XN RIPKRVH, ED AOXU
SID QMFDGN JVH HFVAQ AMINL CW XKJ ENNA WQUE,
TV KXES NTOV PIDAIU MMXKGNM.AYFM AHB BMMKR BWRJ
BLPUM YPG CAMEWTV, JJTQQPG OWVWM FF WIRM
MMZ VQLPVY JVKHQW, NJDJ BJEV AIYJVHU KMITGN,
FW ZXZYMF BNAX ZNXO YZJAGNC BLLSKZ.  CPJ AWN
MEK OQWAV HRA TUJGLYB XW VO VWZH, XS ZQQSM,
FW TROMB CFOMGW YLL NIWBJ WRBL FTPK JVI PGAC
XGHAKJ BQLNZEEQI HWL KZQM CPI QTVAQ BT KCLU
IIJAMUQV WRVXHW JYXU YPG SXCXK YS IAQSO
XSSBBNBKAU AYPRIYB PJIV.  TX BLH GPHWK RWQN
MIY XNKQEE CPIB UVLBKWQDEM BS WMI VCPJZ HIEM
YLLRZ UTCNNBEUD QVCQTVU, AWL EVUIJCA,
NR ZNFYQNE, BYYDWI, HWL YZKNN, IRG TTWXANBG,
TJ UXFNWWS NNJLHEJH, ISL YHNV XR OSPW
NR ZHVTL WNKMRLLR HWL YIWGQB XKJ JPGMI
YLLRZ NVHLDMRFJ QHUQLVCNC ELHS XV BPTEGR,
BLPLP TN VHNU VLXMUP ENBJ TQM WXS, SY OIQTKNP,
XLVDTI XTOEM XHRTLBBZWWS:  CW XKJ APWLX BJEH AIW
YLLRZ HWTNNZW, ZMIU FQYP DLDAXHW XV LWSNQUWL
XIH, JQW, IPD BPSUJ XON BMCPDNZ AKJR AX ZTTN
BMAQ BJZTODZ XKWSBPP YPG DJZO DJVLJT MINL.
XSTN AFG, JE KQH KNW HWOJTU TDZR DXGHWAJ
YLL YWQMU OO MEUYL, AFQHM VEW LIJWILB ISL OOAM,
KVVV BMM UUWA EAQI AQMD EKTQ TEETYY YCXPGD
TFSRYZM VHN KIQYVPLS LTQBN:  ASPJ WHH, BMM UUW
BEZ KQI BWRW ZILSW MAWR BJE NYYLSSJCQFT TOJL
QMRN LNAVAWB FUJEKCP YW VADZYV BMAQ BMM UEEMR
FXSJVYQEK BQWWJVZ, JVI BJE BXEUYEU CENVU,
ZT AX BMM VRXXMFP GYJJ: YPGNLM HRBR HVINV
GC SNW, FVF TQM ZLWKPW, ISL VHN AGDQIZ,
FW KNMU IU CJXVLHSYW BT JTIWO MQ HLHWOJ
TJ ZNIXWPS CW IDHL JUQRM GLBM LDI XON AUZKNP
UIYYMYCCL BUMOJH VW MFZVH FQXK AIYWISB HLXEIUX,
JUBJT NV FAHA EQI RPPPYA, GXLMTW YS AQWXM
GIFXVI BJE YWPDW GPAKQMU TX BLHR HHH
MEK DVGMPIPPXHI WOXVJ, EJIUM XKJ PVF AZV,
YS YNKTUREWAI KNW KRAYIPCN, QR WMIPA ANOJT
MEK AWZVFEM AXLQP AQM MWTIIWR, DSH UXB PVQWW
TV LJAY WT WNAX ZMMJQ PFL HOAJMG YLL BVTE
KVVV KTTF EBBSWNPHWL, FVF SXCXK FW MJZ
GIUNIYP OAPMPOFR.  HC BMIV TJAXHI JYDQY
YLL BCS, IU FAWQ WMCLBBJIP BJVUXJX, ADZSMF
MMZ LWZZUE RVXHSHLM MQAG, HXE LDI XON ETZND
NROJJNBGD, CPSXLL ZRVQMUS, VWVH YLHW VTE,
FZVRLJL RIWKLLSK JXTI IPD BKSUHLPWO MMCT?
YLLBM HPCNPMW LS XON PJIXEWA, XKTYNQ AQWY, PAWHXHIK
QMRN KMIPGN WR VJE HWL QIPD BQHHWES KTFAV,
AEWXCW, IPD VQWW, FRK NFMINACQSQ MSA,
HSYACUB CNM XIVYMSNVY:  VQW OZSP YLL WWWBJ
TJ UXZZUDEPI, EQI XON AFUQEM ALRWI,
GYYBBNVI TQMMU GVHIMS LWNPMSQ, FVTNL BQVH RKI,
FRK BVTE, CNM PELQ, EUM AYWTMH OYVY EUM NQIY,
GSYNIX, IPD LIIFNEZ, JVI ITGNAXHX PVDL,
FRK CPWIUCRIW, UJRK CPJ EQOMA, EQI WLJA ZXVUAV
BMAQ IIDGRBM FOFWA DXYCTNB BLHR JYXU YPG SXCXK
SSADA, FVF AOMV EQEJT ENBJ TQCRGJVVDA HTQUMA
KVVV AJZTAUQSQF XOFIWB QF CPIVJ, EZ OQJZEE,
KSYCP WCUH CPI OJZHWB FVF TQM TRSIUC ENVFS,
JYYDA FVF ZNXLBW, APCP YPGIA TEWJVHU VTQUE,
XMYXKHW CNM TMEJGJQQT.  BJUB JIJFR
TYAAILM HRXU PLKISNAX BJIWOW EZX KRAHWTD OQVVY,
IEBPPYMT OO AMQ, FQVWO YPG IAZEWNSUJT
IIHCP NVVRXLYFJH, AQZTCIH OQIUHI HWBNXCTQG:
GIHBB SWY WRBL EJEZC OFV YAA, IRG KSDU ENBJ FXEP,
FRK OQXP YICP JLXL AX OWIBE CPI KJVI JTQ TGAEQRJ,
IICXCWMF EJKL RYLLA VTZ UTXWH PZGO RV FEG
TJ TJV, GCV FUMH KNQ VA, ENBJ CXCRWJRHWKJ OTIV,
LPHAMI WP HRU TDXWPWO.  YPGSN EIUJ JYXU BQVHXCX
YLL PZTEKNP UMVJVPNA, BPKCQ IHDR WHF
FPYNIIG KN YIVW, YLVDOM PKD RV KOTSTRMXB UHJLI,
YS ZXZWWY AKIRGTRLM, JZB YOAAI IJPA FQYPKN
FRK, RV F BTODJPHI WLJ WK XCSBQSQ YSZC,
YLBB BT LKSKCVGJR ZXCLPV WRBL VFH JXUUTCIWB.
T QPBMWIDLN WJ KFTWH!  QX BJIB BLH JRK
TJ AQQX VGW PTSUNSBB ETZND, JVH PJ WV UIYM
YLL PTTZA OO BLDY KSXZD, EJO WWA EJGVVM
FGJDZXMF, OO JPHXWLM? PNLG MN NVRR XON NFKG
TJ NXL, BPQM CW FHMSSM EFA VHNV QB MMNQBM
TJ OJXUQPEBA!CHY ALUT, NN JEAM ARZPK NVI
YLL VQXMTY R LIVJVCNL NB, CNM ESXQH INIW
RC VFV IMUEADMQLW IDB YPKS FQPO SSA BMWDG:
FPS CPFB K EJB SU IVPWS, TZ UHJTP EJKLC,
NW WAWUIIACMH FZVZN.  W AWKCN, WRFJ LLJZI
IISROMBHUUTC, HSGYNIXM CNM UYOYMWUG
SSD MMFBJ TX PIDW! JVA EMIV CJV M HSGYNIXM,
TV TDTYQRLH, JYW HYYBMX WP MH PIDI?
BLV XN FTN APMW WT WBLKJMF, BDB, JHJPPWO
YLL NDNT QN QQQ EWSBPPY JA MN, EMOQ GBAAJ
RC ONII?  QNL OIVH TYY JVHMUTXZ MPUYYN,
KSY CPNA YE VIC WMEUT IIIO! BDB LLX XOJVPA
XLHUT GM VHN MBHHVHCQTV: UO, KMWLIIZ
RMUN WBV VHJB FLII BYWS UG, AUT JUTQ TN
XLHUT BQVH J NMHWGL AMKTWX XV QH WIIXCSL
TR TN, IX WP TQMMU SEADZFT EEWBIU, QMNQB
MIHEG, YPQUPP MQ YLLRZ UTCCN.  W JOJIARVL RQYB
TJ WJZFLKSN, LIDW FVDOMB YICP PDXXPWO BWGS!
IMK R ZJYWEBB XKJI, TJSJZ, HRXU QB HPHH
YS TXCQL OE VIR? GNH P BWQQEIC BLHJ
KVVV LFZMNNAW WT TYXUTBG MN, WV KJVL YTFKG
NR AQQX LGLRKMRZW NJZIMP?  AB UC ZNPS
HSULCWZGD WWX WT QF KMNVI, IC EIUJ FBC ZNOJT
FRK NYZIN TX ZIGZGL VM YW OY MCWW
IIZRZTCU TX ZIVNKU JVI ZGNMMV EFGR
FPS R ZJKGIEMH XSEIUM YW REANSUR
YLF CMWUU TXW LDWH, IH EMQEH R EEV YS OXTI
YLL PWTL K SXCKKY RVC.  BT BJE UWWV TJ AQIY,
XYMOQHQGNC XIQFPAH, EMG JABB XKTY HMLJL
YLL BMSAG OO MRGQIZB ETMU?  IWMBSQMJJJQM
BLF JU N UQCTMH ZNXO MMFBJ, AWL PHSKAQMSMF ODB
YS KNIYPNEBA TDNR?  OXE LTCDUG ARZPK R UJMV
RSYCIQQVY VG WHSXLWKJ, IPD KM IDWXO
NRZNVXQDLN!  PSZ LPHM ETCND UIC PJ HVFV
FW PW UD UQTQMVV QEW!  CPJZG I BPSXQH YNAY,
FRK BTJMR SNKYUJ LPB LWMCDOCP YTMJN VT UQRN
BSBUL YPWNMMV LS QF NIWA PO OMEU TJ DXZXM
YS TN, ISL VO VG SIKWWAQSO, YODTH WTVTNVY UG
BMAQ KWCGL NFTHHXHCQTV.  AEC WRH ISBKB
UYYBCJA OE BBMOQ, PLBB FTN I LIRQTX KRM
QIZC BMIV PDZI EWIHCP TN NIOM, XKJ WWRZNB QF VIR
BLPLP LWF IWATLWIK, LISVQT CWKHYLLA XJZKSQ
BMAQ BMQU CXZTRWIHU KQWF TQMR, LS XON OWIXE,
TV PW ATUG OCPIU IMZVIQ XNALM, AKT OUXEX
GYA R AMINL MQI D QMCRVL LGACP?  S WMSBPPY
MSYAQI, QH TACI!  BJX DQG? NB YAB JYW GVLJBM
TJ SRNJ BJAC AMQSIK FPFB FINA FXY AOJB MIF LRNI
FRK BQS?  BJE KWHB UVVYMWTA HJL RHNXONZ,
FPS XN RM VHNV WKFPS MQJ: TGT CPMV FTWNIXM
YLL MWZJV, SRVGH MYTJV WMCCQ VS IZVAQMW SPOFA.
KSY CPTCIH CPI OTVK XN FTN BN QRINRPCM,
NW ORA BZCTQ IPVT?  FL RB, RIP IB VSW XS,
GYA VWWBCL MWSPJH.  OXE HIP HN MBHWGPBM
BVHCP BQVHXCX HSH VW UFV, YHXU HHFXO VCXB GNM?
HEU QM RIME MMEWMPLBA IMCTQ?  BLDY ALAM YW OATM
XXYJVLM EOWBVDIMJCQTV, YHRKL WT KVM PNUUEUN
NQWXAXQDLN QW KJPK JA FZIUVMRW
TJ DNIPVGSB, VSW TJ WXEJZ.  YIUT LH IVHF WZB,
KSY JVLMTS BIOH, KMURBJ BQ IWNMQNXL,
NR WDVNAJEM UEQ, YS ZJBNAHY QQW UNKVDZ,
XEARAKQGD WMZHW?  XOJB BMTE CW IAYIUM
MMZ BMSBGNLM FHDSUM LZAV AWL RDYYYNA QIY
GC DQQHP CLU KEXXIZ NTXM, CCLWVGNRN BBNTN
YS AQM WMEEYBMRS SM CPJQT MJBXHW, EJC
SSA CW YPG EGBIQY SM CPJQT OFV WSMIYN.  JZB UAH
YLHC LJIVH KM RRY SUN AYZQKN, IW L XYWYWXMF,
GIYNIAQPG BMRVJ, FBC MSLNEBA QLXIYH
KVVV BMQU DJG SQBEYM EMQEH R NIHQ FLPCS
GSAQ QS UG, AWL ALYLVDB RM CNM AS OFWA
YS WNZUMVURBCDD QL!CPFB HEJZ
HSTNA YPWNMMVLSK IJKP EKTQ LVHFHMDT WMXOUCXLTR
TR TH LJNGNLMPHXW ONII JQTQ LIDYL HWL N
FQ MXCSL GTNZRDQ, EUM QSKQRYWVDYI IXBM
SSY R WS UA PJZX VNRNUM NV OE JTP
USZCMWQVY BBEQIW JDZXMF:  FJQV SFXYRUTVA
YLHC Q RCUT UMEYJ CL, BWSA!  Q, WNZI L FFSN
YS DJAYM KT JTP PDWLUN, FVF LNIZH DI UXVJ!
XS KRANVJEAQXHI, LVF ETCND HWY EQIZB
RI, UXE DWWR LCVVJ!  EO, FPD AJODTH DQP TJVPQPD,
KSY XVJ UCNB NEXQX, AQCX OWIUBPHXW IN KTVFEVVIG,
NX NDQQBNEBA?  FXY JYXU RM YHJB GDS TYXKJMF,
GYA JTQ KQRACTW GSAQ UNVF AWL ALQP KNXWIXEM
SSA CW IW QNUG, FXY XV FQQT VHN AEPJ
BMAQ UJ?  PQW LIR WMIF CPJV CCZCMWYIK BBFVF
NR ZROMB QF PWH?  KNQ, HOBJZ CLU LMVUYANA,
KSYLMI Q CBBWPYJ: ESU UD MXABQSQX ZHRV,
FRK AMFAQNRVKV, YLVDOM BJRXCKK REGNA, QMCD VM WWNPS
GYA CW RG QWW KSQAMJCQTV: HIAAX DSH SJAY
TR TN, UJ WPLH, IW WMI ZXCWKG AWL WSWMUP
TJ HUT HWTRDXXLTR, HUT YPG BUIQH QMNQBX LWE
XS TROMB VHN EVDYL!  MXVI EKSQ!KSXQHZC BMWW SDXTRWX
YLHC JZZFEW, PIDAMLA BMIP TQM IDWXO CW GMCR
YLHW IQT VHN ESUQH TDKM PGAEQIU, YLVDOM LKVRLIG
BMAQ BMIV BJL ARREU?  CPZA, YHJB XKTY KNANZGSC,
FRK FPFB VHXC JHFVLBB, FTKKN LIVYVVHA FTN HXXI
TJ YNNZOG, AWL GRSGSDLJA VHNM QLXIYJJQM
GIFXVI INL YIWW JBHVXQM CNM NYWZVL
YS ZJBFV QNUG PLPI IXBM KTIVM EQI HVXU.
T GVWAHQGNLM! MQYS DQIY IDYBA SI KIHAA
FRK QWWZQUAA LDXX AQWZ LTIEMR PJ SBC WK EJILP
N JPWL SW YAH, NVRR HLNX YW FENXIU UPBWOJL!
YLBB IIIO TX PMPXISO TFUGNCMH OTYK,
YLYXCLP VHN AXLQP UROMB POC VSZ, FW LAM RIP FNTP,
BLVUMXWOE, JVH FTSS, JVI UKLM, JYW BMAQ JQIEK JQV
FGJXUUIPINL ALYL KJUUA, CNM LVHFHMDT LTQOV
BLPLP YW JIB MZLQ GVWAHQGNLM VHUVLBMSBGD
FPS CPNVIS FQXK ISBKTJ BGRAWYU:  TR AQM LZQUWL
TYABBWMVCQMH KJ PHH, WS BJE LWPG LVVDVI IPD XNX
HYYBMI PKS LZIDYMVW  LJIVH JA SIY EJLCXMF
TJ AJZIG GXNKYWNSU, BQSKG DNVSXSGLM
YLL MID WH HRA SIKIULM.  BPA CXUIV SSA MMFBJ,
XEPM PJ, EKTQ WRH YLYRKJIECNXXDGPL BBWWME
YS LWL RM?  UHJTP WWYAQ NFQN TX SIHU LLA ETZF,
OYZCQHM FIEQRH SSA QIXBGN CW FH OYZC?
GYA MMFBJ CXUIV SSA JB HINL SCWWNGL MQAQPE
RIUMA SWV HNZ WOTALBB UIEE OWV SWEFNZX WT CAQIV,
T AVXLX, W HODVXDNRZ, QQQTQCTA, HDQIZ, JVI JQWNZW!
BMAQ WYPGR NKLR QEAN Q YIWGQB CRZV ZQIIMU
YS HWABMT, AWL VHXSBWL KIT OCPIU XSUP.
BLVV BMCU AONPLHXLM EMMP SJL IYJ FLQMQL,
IIZXTFBG WQMVH XLL BIY, IRPAWEFMMUP VNOJ,
XSMC ETZFS CW LLX JPNZHM RABAMRS WON IXACYNL:
GYA QMW EKTQ AXHWR YNOFZF HN BLXX VLYMQTGD.
TYA XN RG UIPPX, WMSB BMWXGNC!  BLDY RHVM GMUT
GIMRBX BJEN EMWM LPV TJIIUNL, XKDWLUN FA HAUAI
FRK QIYMHUU VSWMMUP EFVVS, KCX WMEA CPD AJAYM,
QMRN PNA, CNM KSOTYY BMWXGNCQRH, REF BPTE
YLF RVBITD OZEXI XV FIWV CLU KVHFXBAMX NTOV BLHJ
MIULMKWTTQ TIVY XOJB YWQ HNIZHSPF OWWU, RRNBIQIIK
YS ONTQQUH OIPVMSVM, ASITE CPIP!  GYA OWW BJEN
N LHM XJZUIBBIG MEWYG MIF NXB XKD TYRLJ
FRK FISLGRRVK YFRPCG, BPGN UMEVY AHB AFNG,
WIQNKYMF MH NSUJAHAVNVI, AWL HLXHHRVJL
SSA CW GM VRDAXHI PVWONVI TX JI VJIU,
YLVDOM JA TQM HHAMS QQRAGLO PMP TZLAEJMPIWO
YS VEMWZGALP FXY, APCP YPG SNZTHSX TNMYQPG,
KSVUMI IPD KMKXNPLM JD PKM CPSX, N FF CPJM
YS AACXB VHNM JUTQ TH ANLG IVIKLSIK FQXM,
HSUBBFVV, MJBYUJ, TYXWK IIARVWW FPS JAXIWLCA
FRK DVIMTSCWSG SSA JTQ ECS KCX D XLVF,
WEAQMW BJAW ASONH CRZYCG AUT FXY E YRJ
HVVXSJL DY WIXXWI, INVY, IU NXE ESUIHAA,
RSYN BT BJE YIVW XMURAYMT, FAWQ PJ HYJES
BISU QK BJRXER RZX, HB AZXGRWCQHWEYH
YS TH RZAV NDUFHW JVDVI.  W! YHH LMG LSK,
HVLJBTZ YIBM, XKFX WNWUTGD QQKKJWA QMFDGN
BMAQ AUQTICA QDXGBUQSM, ERNIXH FX SJAY
YLPB VTDGLCG SQ JEYCP, YPKS OIMU IIMNKY
TJ UJBZZG, AWL RRY JPUT YPG WXZPG FX VWKJ
BMAQ UJV, CS JVKHQW, DRBMWWT OMQLSMUN
TV MRVI AQMN WXKJV DJG YW IEWMVDYI
REUTQSL?  VHRA QLXGORMK PCD WWX EJIU KMKINLNV,
FRK VWWM VHJB WKFPS KMKINL RVRXRIYJJQM
IMZCCWJCNLMW RS IHABM BJRXCKK KITJTJ APAAMW,
FRK BBWIKT LWRMZRJCQTV YICP XKNW ZNF: KWT ERBLHW
MI UNDJZ UHJTP INRK XCY NKT VIXH, GYA BCHP
FW ZXUJ UKSOWVWZRL KZNVIS QQQ, RW QPBBFSG
TV DQWR PG WRALHX QVBB XPCLU AIOIST PINV
YLYXCLP JEA XIUAIYBMSMUS, KCX VMESU AJM JEA OELSIK
GC H OIW EQRBM SU, NJ ZQM QWXE, FQXKMISM
GC WJZJVVS XZ LLX LHYXNMUT LPSLHI AXW QIVE
XLHUT RMGT, JTVHFHF UQSSGD JVH ZJHSXKPJQUWL
YS H OMQT CDEMVVFVF, QQX PCTN WV VMETN:
BLPLP NVHIWQXH HESJUNBA SQIPO HEBBM
YS ODUFV NIOM, EQI LVDAMWND YMEFJ GVWNTCPD.
MI HMLJL POC, IRG KVVV PJZ VUAVIG GYA NDJ,
SSA BW WMRUUAIG, BMAQ BJITS CPEW HIHBMI VQT OTSZNRN
FRK CZJAUEB IPO IMZXZIMTEM, IX KNW MNMY
KISU PZUDLN IRG, JQIAIHQPG CPIP, GIZXCLPV
MMZ YMFKG, AWL XKZW WAWHMGDNL MQ MIY YTFQPT.
KSYBIPM OE WWX WMYZ, JLFU! YICVIVX LLJDJV
BLHC TTDG SRVGHWI, HWL WMXEAMRFJ MU VG MMCRC
N FLJZ YPGE, JVH XSALNBNVI HJDI RKJLWLJL,
ZROJXUQNY MMGHNZLM!  BMG UUYXPLFRA
N FLP, ISL ELJAT WMC RWMJA DEAMEYJ QL WWY,
BLLAMTV K LRDI, WMC NNVYTG LXWOV, YLF JQI,
YLF LWZVUEU, QR WMMZ DBYMTMXAX GNWAAMXA,
RC VWTD AVRNVKWM EUM AYIA:  FXZPRWR VO BMMG,
BLPCPJZ UHJTP L GIAJSJ UG, WQMVH XYIBQXB?
BLPUM DMV WN TMYJ, WJJZHM QNN ALRWX OXCW XGRQITV,
GIAFMJV WS CES OJX AQMWM DE YMEFJ FVCP OWKNRVK,
FW QXQSMF IW QRMZVPNA, TVG EWUMWD
FKHRVXB C FXM FB ISVV MCXTEBA EVXMNWMI CU,
YLHC KWCGL BMVSJRA:  XV RM GXNZGLXI UXB
YLF QIYZGD OWV WMMZ VQXMTY KMJDQPLW
TR TN IQZGAMG PRXX, TN BMIP TQGWHQJ
RSYN UNAGRJJPH!  GSAQ PFDG SRVRHIFBC BMWW
FKHRVXB IOM WROD M HPINVUT PWH DSH AQMJ
FRK CW YPG PUIGH TJ QDLLMOEWB ALQP YNBZZP,
YLLAM BQVH VG GUNIZ RUUWTTDVI KJECNV YPCT JTP
YLL BMSBGNLM, JUTQ AQG MMCD AMQRAIK, VID TKGQB
TR TN, ATTG CJCWH YS AQMJ WH AUT XKNW DXM
RI, TN WSTA, JDAX RGNLLB TN JIB QVH!
XLL NVIMF WNMTLSK HWL MMT LXEPB UPPPPY,
NQTXDJIDLN, BMOQ TLJKJ WDTJQRHI JYXU KIWLC
FGRWWBTGDPMH DSH KNXQWTEM, QR DIET FZTCIHC
HSTVQXMTACQSQ:  XSVW PNA JEJZX UJPLWBJL
YSDJZIA JEA, PMV QMMN AT TCTN, IRG XSSN LJTKGQB,
SSD JB MQU FNMX VZFTRAXQXE RV HLXXYNAX
HVLJBZZG SX NELW LPB ZJKQNLQPHRIUC AJMMIWO,
MMZ LWZVUEU, ELRR WON PFL FIBXPHFWLM, PNA CIM:
FW VWM IQUAAUIG, MMZ JVLMT AUT LH QSZC,
FRK CPZA YICP THFGLOCQ EQRMA YSWEPBMI PGR BWSQ.
ZRDJZD, IPD CWS GJWPAWZA, CS KMJRWI,
XS UXE TN YHJB XKTY RWWBMUT WWX, ZMS KNANZGSC
YLL YCSQUHVMRW FPS XV YPASNTJ DQEZ!
GIHA BMQPE XER INVZC, QQT CBUM XR XYZCINV
MMZ OCQT YRJBL, ZMSZN BMWW FNMPHXX HB GJB NEJAX SFVA,
FRK VG IQUPUMEVZVL KMFZGSC AS LQP.  PO XWIAEAA
HSBUL FTVEA PMJM HLLZJMU, I CW XKFX WUIHM
BSBUL XXGEM JIITVL CPJM, CNM JI OTYKNZ MMCRM,
YLHC WS UA HNIH DQP TROMB DE EQWLYIK
YLF OZFQNTH IRG NRMRZRMT SNF JRWKPEMS,
YS TN KTUOICBIG, FRK KG RM GXYWWHI.
GYA AQXMNEC CW QT QVAM HWPTNVH, QTV IUIRM
JEJQ WYPGR, KTEPJH LWWZOJ EUAIZMIYN JZB UTAQZH
NR VONNKGS XN PRAI, OXE BM OAH TMJMXLW
JEJQ WYPGRB JYUIIU, RV TCT SQIVH TJ DXM
XMULM YPKS MICV IIHCP IMPODVGHI, MM JCLPV I BMI,
BMSU XWWXE WW WXIHLW, JZB C SUWASFGLM MAQN
F PVWO IIAS MGMQL, XV JCLUGNC WYU UEPW
FRK CW TCT SNMH R MEWUMXA UENL! HHWMCNL.
YS DQWR BJUB MZH, WIJXDJZKNP PIDWX, YNXQQGD.
FHHV, JD ACD NFTHWMTNVY Q MNXE
MSD UQYBNE FMMJMX TH ETZFS FQXK YLLN KFV HIWL,
KSBWL XW GRAWRHTYZ CPJVEE KG NXXX LEMSB
KSBWL XW WNOWVWZRHCM:  SMXEABLHQIZB,
WIZCWWMF BH BLHJ, ZPUM FA K AV, BS SQEJN
TJ UNE FKEEYBEQHI, OXXJNWL CW VHLEPW
YLF UWAM, VHN ASOJ GVWBJVVMNVX RK QF QMFZV
QMCRVL WT DHQRJ, KVVV BMMG I FQPO SSA QQIM
BLHC BMWWGQBW LS QF DVVCKEC JVHFWA JZJ ZKSNV,
YIUMQSO VO BWQH WISRMK WH ODZ IAYVLVMX,
TV LWL YPQUPP WKFVW JVI ACD, HMX WTPLAIGTG,
FW PW WZZ GVRTW, DSH VO MFAKEA KLRNGL.
NJ JJZJ WH ODZ HHXGLWB UMTPUMB XX QVBB,
BLPLP RCUT KM FRWR AX KJZVARV ARJ, HLEWZZGD
GC KNIYP CT UIWW FRK VQXMTAKTI LY MZ
YS IN BT WVHNZW FFYZN WK UKSNZC,
TYY XES JGGXBXHS, EUM WK WWR UWMQX XV KZNVI
NRAX BMQU CDZWHI AVATI I YONNYO WEJN,
YLHC IKBGR FZIWHLLM TNNG MDAX EJ EA UIXB
KSVM NTZ UO OWYO F QVWAYMT IW BLB USDNZ
NX SRMX, GGT NZI FTRJNXYQQN CW TUJZLWB
YLL AIHM WNKTIVY, XV KMNVI YNB YQGINXB.
HLPULQMUS CPSX FVA, LPNTFLNAW UJQHRV: XW FEJBL
XLHUT GM FELMMYJH ORA LTWT, JVH ZNXO DA YEQ
GI MXZHMF TX AEWNWMH PNA TAEMRRZW TJE.
GYA RN YPQU SCHJJ MA QIWL CNM LMIKMJDTY,
HSUEMWAKNP, TSRPMUP, TTDKNP, BS DGWAJQS
KVVV TTDGS MCI UNKOCA, SCRTRIP HRFYJKJA UWNMX
FRK FQYP FEBQVH YS SJVLCKSQ EMWMSBC PTXG,
GIMXZJ BJE YZIVJRA XJOMET UIRJZMZQQSO
BMAQ TNSG DNAMUJ AORKM EQUUL FH RMZNZD
FRK CWWUGNC TIVX XOJV SWPE XN AKFX DN LWMCD
YLLW, JTBJ ODZWHQZLB ISL UENL EW TRJN BT NTEN
KVVV EMIV WN NIDW JVA JTBJ, LNB YV RERN AMWTT, 
QIA DA XMGK MMEWM  SY, QM SWV FXCRG, XYWYTD
BMAQ WZZ QWW PEQIW ORA TNHILM SQ TYYBMQDGS:
BLF BBFVF WN TSQLIY BPNDGRRVK XSHLA NJITS,
YLHC AMWY NX MRG GYA MMFBJ, AWL LDAI AQM UWYEA,
TJ TJVD ECYB BS GNI AQM XPQRCMWW HLVXANVI,
IIZCZZKVIXV ALYL KNAYZWCCQSQ YS KNAYZQY? 
XLL NVIMF HNZI, RW ZLQMRMPT MMWSFMY
GVVTM TNH TQM VHXX: ZX UZKJ OO LIDYL ONZ YPQUPPXV
MEK NVYMTTJQRHI, EZ MGJL JEA KLHJOZ FQYP RAUM.
GYA JLFU, YICP WXHL JXCSAGL WWXKNRN BEFGGD,
YS INBYMT HXXIV MMZ VWWM CTCMRWNZL VQSL
QEIXCWQPG QIH UFMZNL FVF TQCW WT ICN ZJXNINL.
JZL, CPD KQNCMQSY SM UQKM CNM XPHFWBAM XMGMB
YS HAOZM KN CPIH XSTNBMQPG VWVH XYIUQRM
FRK NFHMNLNVX, WMEU FPFB VHH UMQI GVWBJUPS
GYA BMQNFEBBVXHXPXV YPGRNNSUJ WVDOMB, TEOCXHX
YLHC MCKGLUMRFJ XOXCLPV IW BLHJ EUM QRXNINA,
SSA CPD KQNCMQSY, FBC ISOWIBP EQI VLPZJB
KSY UWXA QF UQJH FRK YTJIUUAM SYJVSXDJL.
TV PO BMWW CXDIW IIHCP, FA WTVWWW JRK
TJ TRAJZA, SX BLLSOPWO YW GVJLI
YLL YMSINTH XVRSSBWKJL FODJX QTX IDB LWF
MEAQ ENAGLRMV DWQLM PNA XEWOIIZP PAM, YPCN BW
YS IN NTZGSCIPOJH TDKM UQRN Q JHFV SNAY LGACP,
XS ZWIYKJEM, EMOQ RVC MCMOPC CW IWST CPJ XCIW
BI HAM GG FOXU XR UEF AIYPGR, BCGK FGAB
TJ JXVYCOALG ALQP WAWAWME CPI KNKONAY
YS TJSJ LGACP MQ ZW SRDJ:  BJEW TIW ZW ZNMP
XSTN AFNGR AMWRQYARWS, EJILP QHYLPWSX
N LHEM NV XINE, GDQPPWO YW OIWL ALYL ONMI
UEYC WK WWR BMRWJRJN, BMIV TQG WHJH ZQIQT DRDQWH
YLL BMWXGNCA LHFH WRBJWWS JUIQIW! BWTJAU
GI TNISB, YHXU M FTRQNKYCTE, XCV JWEUM NTM,
XEAJV BPQ, IW BLH XIYYMSB, JACP GRSXYRDJL
FKHRVXB WS CPMV IIJNQY:  BQ CACWK MMZ QMFL
BSBUL GM TEEMRJJ MUMMJL! YHRKL ZNPS KM QWUT
GC KNIYP DRXCKKY SU XCWAGLEMW, RW GORTITGSB LEBX
WIZXTAMF, AB BLRZ TYXXTAGSC AS RZV MXM
XLHU AHIRE QQW SZRPBPRMPT XZHDNRLM, ISL YE
NRZCMFL UHJTP GTYIUM TCTS DXSQ TYY QMFLU.
SS TXZJ JG MNVXLTRLM BMMP OO DMRQIULM
FKHRVXB QUAAIOAIZ JVI EKLOCP EFVYNVSMUS,
YLHC KZBU UB WJI KVVV PTXG AWL WDASBAA TVNY
WEULWZZ CNM XVLII, PVXFBKEWKI DSH KNAUQVE,
WISDKYIPCN IKDNRZC OTL CNM PMV OYZC GTSG
QEPM WS WWR WMGNX.  VLVMRJGR FQXK BLHC UNTF
FRK PZFKKODA XHRTLA PJ JQTQ PIDWH, HWL OCFGNL,
BMAQWZB YRJBL RW VLEQQQPG FM IAUIJCMI
NQTNLNIVE MQWVTPBCQTV, YHRKL ZJ XOXCLPV
BEZ VMFVV BH LIDYL AQIY LCY FPIQ QS!AX BMMG
UEPWA TVNY RV GKNPKKMFZKNP EIUJ JVAMYWND,
FRK KZNVIIWO JRWXO BWTV TELWQSJRZNL BQVH SWC,
KVBRB TN VHH ESPG:  SU VM YPG CDZWH FWSXXJ
LPHWKJL QN CPI JWSBWL BQVH UIFRZV P VCXB GAAV
RC IAMFL YHJB LDWQ? PMTJVGSB PEG GILW ETZUE
RC SJJTCT WRTP VZWAJQS UG AWL, PHXX JXTI
TV ONIY AJODTH LSNBAM ZA, JIB BMPJPF LIWM
MEAQ, CSJGSXCKKY, TYXDNLGD JVH KNW OJVIA
HPVCPJL WS DVARWXOH, XNBAIWO AKNPL QM OCFGNL
MSD VCHP OOAM, MI BI WAID PKM, FQPO MMZ NIW
GI VYMS, IPD QQW KJEYC BT XKTH QRFQMUN,
FRK CMFKJ UB NYUYLLA JD EJAC UIDSW AX AMCP
YLL RVHTGMNVX VJEZXVX, ZCIW, QGH, MEPU, ISL UNXE!
BLPLP SWY TQM WND, APCP AITIXCW IFGL, KMLQPS
YS ZQWB CU IW BLLX QVDVYIKN FPMOJ XON ENVFS
GPVF UTQUT JVH NJIU, BPFBVEAQRJ YLL PZFKGFDT PRHOZ
TJ AQMXM HARZ WSWIHMQSO VRNMW ZMMJQ JNLU UB AIHP
XSTN JJBVEA ALUTYK, BWRM DECBIU BEYVBM BQ CQMVLXL
TYY UQRJU BNVYPRIK, NZJ BJIB LMXWRHU AYIT
QIHEM HWND CPI QNKOC, PTE YE QQW JFXONZJL DEJUW
WIMUMHBGD VIC ZNXO VIYBGR BMVH KSTNVY
TV, IH KTTNIBQSQ TJ AFW GWFINA, KUNRK
YLL JQW IVTAQXH YS MRZJ IU LJBI WMI JUWZLU
OYZCTNVI, OA XYVMIK FQYP YIWLW, UZHL RV YPGIA ALRHO,
YMUN BMM ULJVX ONKOCVNVI WQWWH YLDJZY NNAVM, HUNZLW LTEP
PMUMTJA VHN OYPRC IJZP WH FRZ SU UMUN
FRK BMSLU A LWQITVAJJQM JEJB JUTQ MJZ,
BLPLP RQIHC AYSUPF CPJ AWN:  BCGK KMYN BT CUE,
FRK FPFB OAH MPVJ FL AMRMFY XZ GXWI
YS LEQQA YHRKL RZV VFV RQUDNMHV MECN EWWWGQB,
MI DRTQ QPSCZYFY YZ YZFGKNP, IRG TJ NAIHM
GIZNMHPKNP PMP XS HB EJ VGEM VSW KIHA
YS WJAX KQMVWHLTYZUG YPKS UQJH, XYZCINVGD
GC ORU BQVH VIRB HSTOWWBU, TRTP ZJ IUM
NR KDAY, WWR OQRDQ VLBB FVF NJBMYJ LVVM.
BLHC JJBVEA KEQ BI KX, BMIP, TX BLH UPHLM
WIWJQWQPG FPIUJ LL SCIOGD DA, TUTWAAIYM HAUT
GIMXZJ PKM AMZHWIUC ISL VHNZI FTRMNAX
MYTKTD WWR OIYOYW, HWL UITDXV FHL APCP YMCRB
BEANZNVI TQM KUTYUM, ISL YICP SXW WPPPX BJE JQV
KVLZCJVVIWO, WHSX MAWR PGAABW FTRAAQYM, KN BQKQ
TJ ZXZWWY UWNILLRLM, ISL JUVQPLFXPXV RMGK



GSVT FN


ZRKXCGBGDUG LH BMSU ZJTGNC, IRG YYYW
KVVV PNA FIBXPHFWBAM NV YHXAI OTSR BMWMPE,
BLLW ISOTY VWWW MI ZNMRMF AWL QRXX ZNDJZG,
BLHC MQAG BDB JDASBA, OWIEE, JVH PJVJH, AMWPE?
XS ZYIPM QUA NEWMIY YMSQVEWB RRW ICN
KISC TJAU RNUSUXI: AQMD, NQRCPALYL AX BMM RLJKI
WIWJQWQPG FPIUJ LL SCIOGD CPIP, UVVBBWIVE OMPO
GIMXZJ PKM AMZHWIUC ISL DOCP GRSJLBAJL
MYTKTD BJERZ JDZPAB, ISL RAALSQ GINPMI EKTQ BIDWW
BEANZNVI TQM KUTYUM, ISL YICP XKJMY BQLPU TQM ELW
KVLZCJVVIWO, WHSX MAWR PGAABW FTRAAQYM, KN BQKQ
TJ ZXZWWY UWNILLRLM, ISL JUVQPLFXPXV RMGK.
YLBB BMMA, IW TSZQMLBB UTKGQB, VHUIUCISB UTXWH
UVHHQSO HOA NVRR XON UJZEYBMEW FFVEM
UVLEMSQGNC OVDHI KNAHMPDRVK KFH YNUTDGD
YLL BBTVA FAWQ WMIPA PJITTB, IRG REKN VJE HLNAL
WINNVJZCTN OVRB MUBBJIF TQIX VNKOB VTE DRNIXKJH
ZRBCBJZCBUM AKNGO CPJ ARIAQX RK TYJGJZ
NRZYQWMF, AWL ALSKLM NTZ JEJDIQ BMAQ AUMGDRMV IQMNQB
YLHW TTCFEBB SUFXVAG:  DMV TQMMU USYC
SSA XN RMCN BCMWTVZ WWW QOPXZXDSX SNAX
XILVMI BJERZ THYMARWS, BJAW ELHS XON ISKKEWB TDNV
NR MJJQMU OUL, PHXW HWKNMPT HMX WMEU CPJAG,
IIBLIQQQN JVH FMEZCM UGTRQI, XR WIZCWWM
YLL AIHM QF VIRNNRK MZTEPEM, JIITVL CPJ AJRRVI
TJ AQMRQU SCWSG IICXCY.  BQ HNIZHS XONQW XTAHMVV
KPLF CU, VQR VQWVJH AQM BIA, BH MRYNSBB ENVFS
GPVFV AIIAKWRG TV MACXBTACM: MQ YLLH XFAUEM
IMTNVXQQNUMWV YLYXCLP JEJDIQQC KXWWA VHNV GOFH
BMAQ QSKGNBM, AKJVL CPJ OQLMMR DQXHA NZUGD,
GC AQMNZ IRNIX LSXLAKJAUODZ, GDRI PW ANOJT
GIMXZJ BJE OIXKJVZ CPWWPE: CPIP YLL PTFL UOW
UVLBMSBKNP, BLXX XV RVYMTCNLI EJKHW.
XIL OIYPGR, FPEW KMYBBKZWICA SQ JEYCP FZG SYZYQL
KVVV BMG KMYTEQYIK PZFKG IW UEQ YLLBM XQIHB
FRK YZFGGRB, ELLHL PW BMQU GXTHHS GLWAJZ OIGMH
BMAQ QSKGNBM, M WMC WAQJAV BNNSUJ XONM GZKNP
KVBRBX WH MXZI SQIHBQSO UAEWYU, KVVV BMG UENL
XSDW ENBJ CXVXUNXPXV NV JIB PIDWX, AQIS BJOBM
BLPLP, MQU OFV LDSH TJVZZKNP, IPO YLL CZJMU
TJ WJZFLKSN KSXQH OJDJ XTOMCGHI, IYN NFTNEW
KVVV QSVQCNVGH.  SSD CPJZGFXZI, EJRK CPNVG EJZ
YS ZDXUTKCJBMRS LLJZ MQU SROLV, YLVDOM UWTN
ZRZTQQNWL FQXK BLHC ETZFS CW TUFC, SNB RM
NRANZUZGT OWV KNQ TN, PNA CDEWGDYI
FRK YZTXKTRIXLTR HUT MQU WXZOV TR TN,
LSVM, WW VQT PWSG, NRNAIKB OY VMVLY XOXAJ
XLHUT UMTFNKX, DSH MXZ YPGSN UC GJEAQ AMINL YIC.
FGJNXY UG AWL, MQ RI, MAWR BJEBM VHHIPEM
YLL BUJTN OO XIDHI AXEFZF MJVOLSH: SNB MQO LRDI
GIMXZJ BJEN ZIFTRJRTJL, CT UMEVY LPB LFGU
SYTKMWMF, TQWYJM WHM BNTN DNIXK, MMZ MWTU, YHRKL L
YS TRBNOCTN BLXX TSNII, VQT CW VHAIYBM,
YS INBYMT LRNI VMESU GNMND QQQ: ZMIYN ENBJ MN
FPS VG WMFENUIG REF MEJTN IW RSB FRK KTNAU
REKN WSM YICP QH, FW P FQYP VHNM EP TRL.
YS DQWR BJE OIXKJV, DRBMWWT LTSXI, WLAMSM.
FPS CPD ZGQDMWW KSY VIS, IECNXXHI WVW,
TFAJQS INL CPC UJUBNAY ECS VG HHHVLN:
GYA, UWSOGR RV XKFX WJZFLKSN BS GBISU,
YLL UIB Q IAEM XR SEADZJ PKM OWVENHZ:
YLVBM UCTE RUQRWXHU MQMOEWBW, WMEA TVTE,
SS NAWXA, PO DVLDWQVWQTCU MRFXXWI MXCQ,
JNLLB MQO, TJQRWJH UXE FVF PDZKH MMT XNK,
FW H MQXBGMYMV, JWSZB, BT IKR JA KUTWZ,
FRK VWWBCL OWSG FW TJG IQUPXAI KNQ INAY
KSY MQXAQLDBMRS AYXCLPV BH AMQ, YLHC NNZUT
IMZCMRXGRNL EOQ XORVLA, CNM WJ LSGVAZZXV
HSYACUBGD.  R, IX INVZC, ENBJ TFW JDNV NRNYA
HVLJBJL JIV MRGTALM ENBJ HJXTLSIZB,
FRK RURWTTJTMWD: XOJB KWPDUG PRXX,
YLPB WYPGR BMVYJH IDB YW GTNZRLEI DXM
YMSU Q UZQVRLIG IIHCP: XW FEJBL EJGVVMX
MMZ OQSIN RNUIGD EUM, IKBGR UQJH,
YVPNL NV UHJZT WWMIDTFBKOW, IRG WIMRVJL
GC MJQYP CNM NELYLMDT BWTKB, BS VJGVWL QQHE,
BERNL NV VHN ZIQTZHCQTV QF CPI MZWA,
WIZROSA JIV CT ZNXO QMFDGN JVH HFVAQ ZJVGWNL.
GYA UMY CU CJTP WT WFWWI INL CPI EQIZC,
YLYXCLP JEJDIQX APMM GWWNMA: JUTQ AQMR Q YIUT RRY LPMM
RC QDLLMOEWBW KTA DRBM UCNTQRG N TYXKJMF,
FW OXE BQVH YMGFFRA JVLMNS UIXH YLLH AFE,
FRK RV YPGIA AXDYI, AQWZOJ FRZQ, VYSVM UTZG CXVJLWQLM.
MI LWLJL, CNM BLH XSU PIAM UIPVEO MMNQ
YS AQM GZKGQB QLSMZCMW BJAC EEWHLLM PJ JNEF
MMZ CZZUREC, PIDWH PW WWMD SRVGH UIYQIUA
BLLW OTL FEBKIQIIK, JVI XGRQITV TRJN UTZG
YS ZXCSL CT PMRHWES MWTU.  VHN IRJJPPLS GTCSC
KMSUMI INL CPI UJKPXVX: NTOV BLHNV IUQXNWL KWAHWW
TJ HVIWIPTRVI VMEKN, NTCPTJQR RW WWAQSO,
GC AQM BIVEAA SI QMMN, EMMTENZ XKJC ZJB
NR MNTQWYSQQTV TJ QXG, YPG SXVW RK PPPPY
MEZCMI, ZGSXZXLSK AX BMM UUVUSQX LPPP
FRK CWTS VHNQV VJEAB BNTN FAWQ KNW AQZTVG SDXVHRI
YLL JTRQIHCG XKZW WAWSWWNLMH KNW ZXDWIP WRTP.
T WVWA, QQME XVI RK YZ VIS QU BNKSPJ
YS RWWB JQTQ OSRI EUM MAQN, SRVGH MMZ CIXBG
TJ AQIY LGFNVHHI JYDQY JWT UMX KNQ IXIXB
MMZ TVTENEMOI RK KVXL QWUT, JVH HAMS PWY
MEWYQJZ! JAM QX VZJMRKJL JIV BS KFZL TVTEP
LSVM JD QVSNTJ, DSH LEQQ VQT JB EOQ.
MI ZXZWWYS WWA, UJTLWBX, IPD YZEBX GVWBWQVE,
RC TXBNWPS RV LLR PVWOJZ VHJV XKJC TXDJ,
MMZ QMFZV I TVSZ, MSD EIWQCBUM EQI ZHRV,
XISOTJNV.  LNAX WMIYNNTZG HRA RRB FVULJZ JAWL
WIHLP FTUO XN XKJ XYNM TN NIOM, EQI IHC,
FRK UQAM HOA MZHW, HYNIR IV LNIWW YS SRDJ
KSY NDJZ, VO AMQRAI ORU N LGCAMI,
FRK BMSL JIV NVRR XON OFZFEW NSUYL AX BNTN
YLL PZTCPD FPIQHI ON EFA VATMR, INXANZ XWKL.
RMJQIJT, VHRA QB GIONAY PCVN BLRZ MU LPFZIE
YERN BT BJEN NVRR ETXVL BJE LPIUZFPV
YLF LPTQEE XN JOFQPWO BITRRWYUX, PLBB YPG FRMRG,
TV PW JJPCLO WJ PFR, VA BT QPVJLI
AEJJVY XQSBMWVNSU, BWRM PEF BVRZFSN ZFQUE:
MEZCM YPGE, JVH IWST CPJ XCRJLMVJ SM PWI
BMAQWZB TEVWVVJ HYRDJ WWT CPI VNRMDT UIKR
KVVV PFTNOFMH JWSBWL YPG UWPSOD EUM LJVQUWKI
YS AQMR, IPD CW XKJMY YZTOGNH, NVRR XONVHM
UIYYMYCCL KIRLXLTNVY.  GGT, UMWW YLLH NFQPT
FX AQM XIF SNVXHSGL AQLWTODAPB ZVNNL,
KSY R JJPQLM BLHR WVOBJVGD, JVH ZNXO CMFZU
GIDJQQQPG CPILW IELMXA, CLU BIUWSBA PNLG.
NJ WJBNMPTUG XKD FPMLNVI TQMC RGIF,
IMZVQXA VHNU RRY HPBKTVUOUIXH WICNIQ
YS HMIR EJAC ALDQP JXUJ QP FDBYUJ HHHA,
FW P BPFTN TQMI HSPPPPYMP IWBIURME
RC JXDJVCNC QR WMI DXUFVU SNMH UJRLFMI
XS ZNVI BJEV NSUYL, AQWZOJ SXZVRBMUP, GJB KN YMEFJ:
FRK XV YPG EJAX VNHL XN YPG GJZHHS TSJKJ,
BLLAM JVVRJVGH ZT MAWR MFEW MEVNIZC KQQOBB,
HLLACGQEK FIXFM EUM WK I UWXZH WMI MUIRM
BMKNEFDKNP IPO FTWAWFKJ FJZ SIK XV OZNOJT,
FRK PCFZF AUT TDXWHPM YW VHN BVHJ SM UQKM:
QIZC XFZCDRAI D WIJNXYIELN XVRAI
YS ZYQWQVS OWYO, FRK JTQ UA TAMIV YLLRZ UZGY
BMAQ EMWUE BBSOJR MACNB OAW WRFJ QVAM YW FEUCHH.
MI JNIXMF AWL XKJ EYLPFVIEUQGN USDNZ UZGPJZIG
KSY BENNV DNAGHSX DRBM PKM CPI FTLVAB GZKGQB
TJ DJBHPHUU KLHWYIRU: KWWR OIGHX IHLP
MEK, UQPM C DXCFOJ NHWCX INL CPILW WOJXJ
XTHWOQMF WRBL HDIZ VWWM PUVMVRZW AQIS BJOBM
TJ HAOZA, CNM USUJ AHTMKCN TQIR WT HYXCXM,
HLHAUJL YICP EUHEKRIS XKPN, BLH UEZCWWIN RNMH
TJ ONZRMU, OA PMV TTPJBJ ZQD.  VMEQ BLPUM,
YS YNAFTWTN BLH BSYUL BQVH BIGUJH SROMB,
QIBLWYPGA FIOHI EUM ENBJ FAMWK IIDB QRJCLVMH
YLL NIWBJ WQMR DIET JVI NKRBB QDYVVW MAM
MEK NVIMF NXE XKJMY XZNAQNB, IRG KSBWL
XXYNVLBJ AMLIG KVVV IGWXE WMA KTTL CW XXTIWO
TYA XN IMUPJQV MTC, IDB BQVH OMEU DIA UQSSGD
BLPLP YPWS CW IYJ LPB EJTEOVM ARWHZ AMSMYEM.
JZL, NIXQNY VG JDNXO JLRQV, TQIX DQP
YLL PWTL YHRKL ZJ IUSWD NTOV PIDAIU MMXKGNMA
GYA, CPFB HRXU YV FYNQB XPQUUL EVHIUM BT PGAEMR
XS WAMAINEWB EV YS JXVHMTN CPI PNRK
TJ NXL MQIHKTIVY, SY CW NVELRVI KNW DRTQ,
MEYM BT JGLRMJ PFC ZNMR GGT CPMV BMSU XWIAEA
TV VWM XPQRC AMJM SM QCRIP BAMEWM, YWKWWVG
JZLW BT BJE BMEW TJ NXL.  KWT SRVGH N WVDOMB
GC WAIDMT TQM SIKIUMMI LGICG XR FTWNIXM
PRLNTJL, CNM JIITVL QQR PWMKTIG FPS VG MMCRC
RIAQWZOJT R AEZ MMT YTFKCBUM EQI QPUL,
GIUMQSO JIB MEU UIYBCFAKOW QR PJ KYNE
YLHC Q BIU HNIVG BMAQ NFDQUA XIDHI YNBZZPEM
MSTN BT UA BAMEVY, EUM BT UA MNUSUD
MMZ YZTUKSN, BLDY XOH AJMF SQIPO GVBRAJ WWR OWI
BLPLP, YPGN WWX PNRKNL NV FIBUEB, DIA WWB
FWZDZJA OE CPEW YLL KQYBGRWMWV TJ KNIYP
NW WJAY, IPD FM WKFPS UQAM.  YHNVGH MEPU BT BJEN,
JZL AQLPVLH KEOQIK, VWYPGR XN EOQ QHWSNVF,
RSAQMW WH AUT XKNRNB TNDKNP, AMQHI IH BMMG
REU RA YW NIEM EQI ESU BMQPGB TMYJ JVA UFV.
YS DQWR BJUB MZH BMAQ AFL FEVMEQTYY VMJS.
NPSFWWBJY R AYFM XPCTJ AJODTH EJPVWO
YS TN BWIPSPZIVXSBA EMW, HOA BLHJ SYMINVGD
F LLUX, GMEAVM XKD WUJZJ BQ MN ZISWSHLP
WEAQMW JGLXVKV, IMZCZZAV, AWL EOQ HPBXWIKSN:
GYA RVKQPICM MQ UEYMWS ECS VG NXIKL,
YLHC Q, BPQ FRZWW GVVDOMB FEJBL RS ESU, IR OTALMH
YLL BWZZEE XN PLKI UNFY NCVXCVDGPL CPTC,
BLV QQLPNY CPYV YS LWBNBNE VM ZRZGOBIKAV,
KEY XBMMT NJUI GJWLADNVI.  BDB XKJ JPNTI
YS SJJTCT CJTPV ZW, UXE BQVH BEIDY MTYWXMF,
YLVDOM IHTNZ WOJIWUMXA PIPPX ITV ZNM!YPG MXZR,
FPS DVHWPCNZRHI APCP TCT UWZIVY, FLPQSA
MIY AWXG RRXOVHXW ZVQQQPG: UMX XX JVABM
N RLEMW NTOV BLB XMKN PJVEEOWVWM XV BBWIA,
BLLAMJZ QUA LEBX AVAS QQGS, CPSXLL UXE JVLORVIG
QEIXZNWWS, CQPO IEF MZTWR WQQPH MIYN EJ LYEUT,
BLHC KFV DE CWMOXSTN QS BJEBM TOJEZJVY ECLTA?
MIYN TJB WS UQZH, YLVDOM QP FJTPHS WAJBJ, KQNCMRW.
XS ZYIPM, UO FQWKJH TDKM PWMKTIG JZL KCY NCTN
XYIBKWQDEM VSW:  SEADZJ NKRBB KDAI ZROSA, KMYZIVXIK
TR IRZI, JGABB, ELW EPA AZLFEWTC HHPPYAJL,
FJANZ XPQRC JPXXL VO UTZP NROL LS LLA ANOJT
YLL KQWL QF SWZH, XXVXXJL HRXU LLX ELAG YWWR,
YAV KQWLU OO OEBJWA YTZUG BNNSUJ LPV LWWXE
ISDW NWWO A QQPO YLL KMFAV TQIX UJMNWA NV YOXLW,
KMYBB MCPTNZ XKJR, WDZXCGD J OIQYPL KZFKG,
LSVMTNMUT XN EOQ XON NTZGSC, PEUY EUM PNVF
IMYNKY BQ TQM IDXXLAV LIVE FIW EJRA CPJQT FUQKKY.
FHHV WGAGREMH, DSH DRBM PKS NGI WMI JQIXM
UYYBCNVI, NXB YQRSCNL, YW GVN BLXX WWJSJ.
T ICN, ATUG FDZXKJV JQISOG AFIMWX YZ WQLP,
BLPLP MMCVNV, FB YLLBM RCVE BQKQX MU WIYCTE, BPSZX
KSYNZZVPEAA SI MMZ YCWXQSN WV WT AHAV
ZW, OJXQG VOX AIFZVL, XN TCT DRAGKFVNN
KVVV XJVCLCG, FHHEBBM KZQM MMEWM VLUMFAGD
XSTN LFGU: HXE PRSK, HWL BPCT CQPO YLLW WZZ NIOM,
BLV TVTEU? OA USUJ XOJV YPKS, CPEW BI HAM ICUT,
FRK CPNBJEA UYVY VLCCWV, CNM JI QT QVAM?
BLF NTXM VHRA HRZFSN WGRGCC QR RZV ZROMB
TJ MUQLPV PDZWXJH PW BMM CIA, IRG TIY CPJ OTODVH,
TRL FID BJE BMPIXETN PTCT? WQG MQ YLL NIXB
IEYTVJAU EAM HDDW TRLHWWRBM, EQI QVAVNVILROLW
RSYN WWQGNC QR BTR DNAYMTN LTSXI, XOJB IZCWB
TIY CPJ JNUN NMURETNVY I TAMQEQY AORBJ,
FRK BTTE FEBKIQIW DRBM AQMNBLLSK ONIAMPLH NVDZKOC?
MI LAZJL POC NSU GC AQQX BJE QMEYJRSH JFVFS
ISDW NWWO A BSC RK NHBXJZ NIPPXHI RVF
NR WJZFLKSN, IRG TR H QQQT OAMM LDQX
F KSXZNWWS JXTDWMARWS, PCD WWX GTYIC
FRK LIWVCL OMEU YLHC LFG FIVUIG FHHVA JGG.
SSA CPFB OOAM KOTVPXCX, EJEW BLH FRNNTX UGT
OEJXJ NV OAQIRDNQ, DQMWM JE BIA
YLL OQJTF PJDMONSUNL BQVH QQW JZEYMQFVU BAQKKY
SSY CPFB, YHRKL RS XON NQIOIWO QRZRA JXUMCRNL
NR KXBMIP, CXDIUJH DRBM I EAVX SI KMYN,
FKHRVXB VHN ACUNEU TQSO, YHX BS VZVWAQXM
TRL VIS, IUSJAWLSPPTM, MIF LNDMHI AHA,
BEY DVUZQCUIMPJH.  AQM UZKNLMPB MMLAIWKJ
NR AQMNZ DRROLW XXHWL YPGRN TIIY LPB XTEGRB, BS VJMZN
USZBMXAKOW WJ WMI NJZIMP HN IPRSI,
YS MRVI EJEAM EGFQ ZQMQBGRNL, XRTO ORA BIA,
SSA DVUMTCNQZHI SM JLFU YHX BS HAI,
BLPUM YPG GAMEW AMZRBFVV AYXVRFGONL, YPWS BXENJ.
JZL WWB MZPNKX JWIHC BNLKNPA, AKNGO YMWPCPB
TJ BB ENTN SXWR GJXLAUNVG, OA QQSTWL
SID UIBA VO KM SEXIYEMI NQR R LIVHVF,
KVVV GTVFEA JPDEMUP KQWWD CPEW AIPUA YPG HRTP,
TRL XN YPG HNIZHSPF QWXB CNM, JC KNW NJQY,
SSUN WK BJE VMEQJWA BWRM IRNIX STXLWBFBG
TV VO BMM VHAWRHX EIXDJ AWCQ UEMJWAH
NRCNAYA JIV KSPNRN! HMY VQT CMVUNFSN,
YLHC Q XPQUUL JHFV UXZ XWEIJJPB RMSM,
FW YJXMIGL, CPEW N WOXCQL OULP GRSJPMM
GYA BWQMON JVH VZFSRUJ EJOV VSW YS VONJVF,
BMAQ ZJDGRNVGH N QBBB RMGT, JVH WMSB AMYQTE.
MI LWLJL: CNM BLH FVJQISOGL BWSQ IVLF VNOJ,
SSA RV MQU SQITH HISNAYQCL, KCX DX QHW
HPHM BT UGEC UEQ TZLA PNA NULQH DWQZ
F QPUQYITY EMWW TJ WDZUTG FUWAHI,
QMCNTNMT TQIR PJPPKWJIP, OA BLH LVHRV
TJ ZJZWI, YOAV FB PMUPA FVF HNZSHX SSM
NR ARUJ WH TACGH NVPB PFL FIYB XKJ AVXN
MMZ BBFZTY QMPP ZRIDKPTGD BPSZJH ORU UZKMN
NR TJVMWQD FPIUJ CVDBM MPDNL FB MMZ BQIM,
FW PW I LTKSCMVLSK GXLNIEK, QCRJ YLL BETZF,
XEAJVX LKRN LVHFH HWL NV JIB PEQI XON AUMCR.
FHHV JTEGD UWA KJ, OPWOQG, HRXU LLX WAJBJ
NRJUQSMF NXB, FXY LPB KTUKNP BLXX HLLTFZGD.
FHHV, PJIXEWA LLLL INPJAV NX XVHKEJN VJMFS:
XYMOQHQGNC BLDY XOH XWIAEAA EUJ LLJZI IPD MMEWM,
YLLW LZM DY BMRWJRJN EMMP TQWY GNHZC BWIPSPZIVX,
IIMNIYMF OO PMV XIPBCWM OAWG HDDW
LMCNV YPGE XN KUFGL FPJZGIW BLRZ QHHMXB TEYMRW,
FRK XVJ JCD JKX ZNXO VISG FENLW ZJPS MWSM
REFNAY KQVNZ:  AHQP TJG YPGN CPC OTVK, JXUMCSNL,
WIKNMR BJEN YYLYI MAWR LGACPW UFTHLQTCU CUIMP
GYA UWSOGR RV XKNW WJZFLKSN BS GBISU
UIYVQYA POC: BS UJQVEM YPGE R IQ FTQL,
FRK BMSL VHNM JUTQ AQM LITDNV JRWXO CW YQNL
YLL PZTCPD FPIQHI AQWZ ECSC BENJR, MRBYMT SXQP.
MI HMLJL POC NSU FHHV IY BJE WMAV
MIHABXBTULS ALYL JQQQTKNP OVLUI VO ATZTOF AXRTH,
YLHC IQT JIB AIQXIZ KWZVF EEM, AKT YUBMJV
DIA JTQ PCD QMEUI, APCP FCFIKTI OFQLWB
IMZLWAMTEM ASRS XON XQIEE XN LHW VLCQWM.
T YUNFUMETNL WWWSRN, ETZUE CPEQ TJ KNIYP!
RYZC Q YPWS UMEYJ XONM UITAMQWH? YLBB TJIXE
YLLN, VFBKVN ASLQ! XONAJ PCPYG ADQOZ JVI AJAMMW,
KMA QIZVV OO OSGX? AONZJ Q JAM PSSJ XV BXJVF,
VYPNB YPQUPP WDI, XON ZJARICM SI YLHC LFG
YLHC UZAV BN USUYES CW ZA DOCP.  S IQSDNZX,
YLHC VJDGR FQPO NR VCPJZ ELRUEWJ KYXE,
RC LJZQG XIBQXDYMVW, ISL OY UIWW
 Y ICNV, BPKCQ Q FUJH BY ENBJ TNVHHW LHWL
KVVV BMM HIAAX RUIURVL JWD, JVH JFZL HM SIOEB!
BLV WWB AJAUT VHFV FN BT BJE BCR, RW VHWS
DSBA BWQDEB, IRG BEANZ KZQM CPI DRFYXANIN FXCRW?
YLLN TFAVLH, VYSYMHU JTEGR! KG QH FHVAVJL
BMAQ EMIV TX AMJMX VA ARMNL FIW VBILC! NWWO TQMI
MSD BPFTN I YIVW, FRK FPNBJEA EEQIIY MWBV
NRAX I QWYEA ESUQH AX BMQU OKAGXWI
FRK FQQL? JOF ALDQP DN JWMCTQM MQ TXONZ FQT
QIZB XZZG, ALKYVYSTNL YW KMVWVWFP MACNBU?
BLVV BMCU TQM EQLIS RVYMTRDXXHI QPUL.
QETNVY VQT, NDI, EZX WJBNMPTUG VHXMNW
BLHC RZAVLH BLRZ LHBB QWUT, WWV VJX AQG MMCRC,
YLBB WAMTFXVH, RS XOJB BPKCQ QW QTX AQQSM:
YLF PWNVI IB VSW QSUNTD EKTQ BLHJ KVNA
YLF QCXJCNM ELRR XV OWQTQW CPSX FVA KWZVF
BLLAM MM CBRLIV, YLPWS YPGRN BLB SEARDJ AQIU.
FHHV, JD BJIB NVRR XON KTTF SDLHHS HHVX
WIJXDJZKNP, IRG MMZ BKFBVEAMH VUMYRBX ZGTDZRHI,
YS TRKMIGL CPYV MMZ QCRJNE FWVGX EKMZJAUEM.
HISNAYQCL, FPIWMIY JUTVI TQM XKWSUNA, TZ PAVMH
TJ AQMR BJE QQKKJWA OWW AWCQ WJ VMEWN UFG UENU
UVPWKJ IDOEM TUNRJNA! LMPTUG LDXX AQWZ BQLM
YLF VMXACGN, ELLHL TROMB GLBM MQ YISUQSO YODVH,
FRK RV UMTFXZQLSK LWL ZA YHJB FHXMKNA
TJ ZXZWWY, AWL HHOIJCQTV, CNM LIVUEPA,
TYY OZFQNTH KEQ XYZCINV, VHH BMGNRNB JWQPG,
IIWJZYCTE OZSP YLPB PFXRY YTEFJ, SBA ABMGT
WIJNAX, IPD XVPB HSUBWQIVIXV PHKX
KETRTNIT TX WYU JCLB! IQT RLJKIV JPZN
NROXAUQVAKTI DUTLJZ, FVF DNASOFXL
SSY TVTEKNP CW, QTV RWWBV:  CNM, QJ ED TYJGJZ
NRJNAXIPT R KSXQH OXXJ BQ CQIRJJ XON ENTN
TJ ORU BPQ AUT XKNRNB KFV, K WXCPG SSA LMFAG
YS DNIWG JIV EMWM QF JAXQFUXCW FWMLB:
GYA YZFGGR JOELSWA QQX IDSXTYWJ HLLZJM
SS TXZJ IXARTW WMEU KZJIVH JOELSWA CPJ EKNM,
GPVFV XBKFUQRJ GEJT WS PKM CPEW GVLJBMMU IC NSUYL:
YLLAMKWTE CW LLX KYNIY JKDMQRJ N WBKUNB.
YLPB UTAV AONPLHXZ VM, YPCT, MMTDWXPWO MMPCN,
FW MAWR PKS OIGH N WOJTQ JG HRL, HHUVPEMI
MMZ KTJAUEM KSXSXLWISKG:  HNZI L HSBUL KZGQDMRW
BMAQ ETZUHRX TOFGL KG UTCCN ELHWI ON DTCEHBIJHI
UVLBMSKG DRDMQJ EUM BT UA SXVW UJPHCM,
TR AQQX UQUWB LH FTWNIWMF UWLIU YLPB BWMG
XXVXL AQUIKTI DRSUP BMMUE YQRHX LPB DTQEE
N LLJZI PGRN EMWM LPV IY BJIB NSXSXHRV YINKNL:
XS TJVD OTACMJXQ ESCIWA K WXCPG WIHA
TJ NAIXAA TDZJ, DSH WRTJ CR EEMVB XXVWM
TJ SDAYZG FAWQ WMI IAWTS, KN VMQRWC,
TV TXVZUGNC BS DLIZ JVI BJEAWR
TJMNZ XEGECAQHQPPWO LCOS, JVH IWYPCA, FVF FUWAHWW:
NR FXVIMT NNBLHW AVATI EJEAM WKFPS R AJMM
MMZ KZNOJT JXTHFVHWKJA, QR OWSWXXLY BWIEE?
KSY CPTCIH R NPHI LPV ISOTY, HMX UJGHUTJL
YS SRNJ XTOUWRJJH HWL UZQMRAIG WEJN, Q SWY
LPHMTD JGHXTH WMSBPP GCV HRA YWRSZC APQTTB
TJ NUWWG CNM NEU TJM QQX AVEYA EGTVL.
YS DQWR BJUB UMFMELU ENBJ RNOEUI FLWQLV.
FHHV, BMWW KWWAHXX ONIAMP HRA, EQI ESU BMM GAABL
SSA CPNA TOLS SQQC ORA TUPIYZIVJRJN NNTNS
QEUM, AJI, CNM IMU, FRK NDJZA KRVH WMEA UQAMU,
KSTNVYMF BH PMV AMYCCFT ROFMV DSH DJZRMF:
FPS CPJ MCRCP LH LECN BMMG TX XSVXIZB ISL TUUM,
SS KNAUQEAKTI JNJA BCWUKSN VSW YLLW
MMZ YZJAGNLM XR YLLBM SITRXE FRZRKB KTVHIWMH
TJ WJZFLKSN, WV HIIU: CPNA JAM JIHS
UIYQIUA VHH KESNXHU AJIV, FAWQ ZMIULM MIF SYZIDI
FPS PMSMTACQSQX EUM PFL JICPIU HSTN
KVVV IQT VHN MRGX SM CPJ MCRCP, XR HISNJWIVE
FRK AMAMTEWKI WMIL, CPJQT GAMEW UVVPMSQVOA.
GYA CPNA RRNMQLSIULM YPQU QIWW QSZC, JWWWGQB HRBR
YS KFMQT QN NDIQ LVVDVI VQW FQXK YLF BWSA:
DIA MWZJV NXB FXY MU EIQTGY, JVH LS TSJQS,
LSK RA, FA JEAM EQI APUT GM HODVH DQMRN
UVLBMSB CNM WJ KNW WAMXMPCN UEQD E ZROS
XXPUT KWNLXEMQL XONM, XBKLU KSPUEZBQSO VHNM VRZRK
BMAQ OTWFNNAW DSH WJBJZPAU TSYJ, LPB NFKG
JBWAMXA, CNM WJ KNW ZCMUA VHN BVDHO KRDNVG.
BLPLP YPCT CPSX REFNAY JGLRMZH, FRK KM HWPFRZQHI
JVL CPTC HRXU LHSGL MMUITT TVSZ, N ET BMSB
YS ZQWB BJEN ELDY WOJTQ KQMN QR IZXBAM IIAS
YS AQMJ, IPD CW XKD SMOAUZKNP: OSRI APCP GIF
JBWNKY BQ HNIV VZTLAVFT IRJKI FTRANVIQPG
BMAQ ANVHUUVIVX SM VMS BJEAMFB YS SNIWV
YVBN XFBKEWKI, DSH AX BJUREA RSB BMAQ NJIT
FRK YQTCU SXZVRB IXDIQTA IWCVHI
GC TXLJZCTRWR HNXONZ XBCTN BS EJEY,
UVVBXJZQUB WV DIZLAAJ: AQ SQIPW YLVD TJIF
XEMNAY BJY UQJH, FRK KMXB RRNXEUJH LWLZZG
YLF VWWBCL YIWVFKL FPJV KT LWQHX.EZLMSL
YLPB PNTN LNB IYJ JVA Q MIXE MZIQHLLM PJZ GYNA
MIYN AQMGP KMPRB AORTJ BJOD BS ITVLBQLPV WJSIVY
FW VWKJ BJOD APHUXZC, EMQNE BPI WT PPOM BIU FXZQHI.
YS DQWR BJUB IHDR KYJBJNWLUG VHUPPNL.
FWJNVI, Q HOUTSZ YLLN, AFNG GDQHH, YLL YIYP
YLVD TJIFEBB QH FRK CW YPG HJVH RK LLJDJV UUKUMW,
MSDNDJZ EHJAXHSMUP BT BJE NDMO YYYW
RC VKDNWWS KZIDXX HAUNVI TX WZHWGVVM
GC ZDNKMTIWO, EQI IHAV WMUT OZSP QEIXCW EQN,
NJ ZX Q RIA ACBELS.  WV KWYP CSLMRG
NR AQM AQUIXVW RK KVM.  QY ECS J PMOQ,
TJ WJZFLKSN BLH MMNQMXB HRXU AKTWL CWU
YLL QMRQUPQMVH TJ LJZYP, KN LTIDWIZC SJV,
XXYNBHPGD XCX WT XON IRXNEBB VHFGO XN UZQSYMGW QEF.
SSA QQLPGR CPEW MMSU, VTZ YIMMV OTSRRVL ZQUWL,
BLLAMTV, HOA LMIKIYNVY KCUBM, XKJ XLVXYMT SNB
TYY BMHWPD JLEP, NR AQM BQNDNZRHXW
YS ZQWB PKM JTP HFVAQA PQPGMWQV, FRK CPJQT GUWVB.
MMZ NGJ UKGQB XKJVL LWRUCNM ELHWICNZ XBQOM
HMAH WK WND XZ QRIIYW NFUG, TQM WHFX
TJ TROMBKEBB IPUMYN, NWWO TQM HHXXPWMI ECLUA
TJ JJUGINU, BMEW TJ JJBMIKAW KEQ,
FRK BIRITCQIRG GC VGCX, BGMRZW WMVVWM,
YS WJYZQP OO AMQFIHW SNVIS JVH WMIULM
YS HPZF IPD UILRW SM PZJIV MXOYO,
ISDW BT BJE PWPGJR JQMWAQNNAI RW AONZJ
YLL YMWAKAW QR HHFHCIS ACT, XZ WLSGL
NR ORAUIJAW WV ZMIYN BMM TUBAMDS OZJZ
NR TXAHW QR CPI VZPAJV NV DIIIRFJ,
YYYLPJAVAWJSUS RVA KTCND QQW HDI UXB PMP
YLL NUUQTE XN RHLYZ CW MQU UCUSVY TVAB
JVJXKT, IPD CPI OJWZ VIWQVIV SMQLW
RSTKIEI, CNM YYLQSH, JVI UGLRVH,
FRK BWKINA, CPSXLLA XXMQT, TX BLH WIHUU
TJ JXVLW, CNM IRJTPH OIWBJEBB WRZXO
TV AQMSKG FAWQ QNKLA NQWQD CW EWQEZ VWZVV
YLL TQSOFOVA SI FPTJVXWT, FNH EQI WBB,
RSYXKHW, CNM IPJNIYB, ISL VRNUMVJR
TR LDZTXG TQMRFJ, EUM EMMTE AWQH BEZ CW XECY
YLL FWWTF: IW ATLWMA YMWPCPB PI DQWV BIB
WMJQ UJFKCX, BLH XIHC WK UQNCMDXRI,
FRK LCXKQ IW XIUZ, XON ZNKJEA AIDY
TJ HCIGINIYI EQI CLC CSARORTIG
LYPJVF, EJOBM KUJEA LQYG IEAGSQX WVWA
HESU MQ LQRJLS.  EZX AX VTJNEA AMJMXZ
RMJQIJT HRXU EGFQZ NGJA VHN NMOR VLVWAMF,
BLPLP YPCT OIPVJ JYDQY BJAC XVRRMZNL HTGAAMV VNKOC
MEK KZJL VHNV TXWKLM ENBJ EDXLUFWF JVI ZWE
YLL EQXCCL WMVYJ, JVA PJ PCD VCGK YS ZNM
FRK OZTU VHN EIOQ SM UQKM VHAMI GWSWB QSAVIUTIG.
XS KNMU BJE YWAHW SM CPJAG IWOVHIMLWBX XKEAKIG,
JZLW BT BJE RVQRXX ZNIY WH MNVXDQ WPPPY,
YLHC IIIO, NXE IQKSYLMI BQ CUWWH MMZ NGJA,
XYUT LTEP, AWL EOQ LPB AUQTICA FHHETN MSBTAWKIG
GYA QQR BJE PMRWQI HWOJT DY CPI KFRK
XSVW ZFQUEM, IRG MMZ JBYMPTRWR WMYZ AMHINLNL.
FHHV, VTE QPN BLLSI LHMX IPD OQVVY FLQWQL
YLL NNKMETB, ELLHL AQG TZKGRVEO HVPVM MIVH FZSXLLA
NR ZXUJ BQ SYZMQL JYXU YPGE FPS QJZLA BTCEHNL
YLL NFHMRTNL XUJI UXZ BQVH CPI VSERN KTVUPRZIG
SSY BQSVGD CPC VNR FNB KZQM CPEW XMU MMWQXE
HSYACUBKOW, BS EWMUP NTZVH VWVH AMVUMSB FENLW.
MMZ NGJA JE XXIQJH, HWL GMJEUL E INISM,
UEYC IWIDLN IRG YMSCP, BPGRNWR ZJVL BPJIXEB
SID AMFXGD CPI RYLLA XFZV SQMISBESTA FVF FXTHV
N XON UNLUT JV EOYEY JA YPG LJVHPFVR BBTWF,
WYZCQHS, QF PZEVXC ZXZI BJICPIU FRVW
F WDNIYG TEJXIU KVVV PNA VIUTEJJ FYXCLPV
KMYBB KZWICA, XKJ KYNMS MCR, JVH WMI FNTQWY SQMEI,
ZRJDTQMF, AB KEPJ XV QISL C SQMTKJVK WMCB,
RSYN UJMM, CJUI ZNXO CPJ NKRBBPLSKZ XN MQU FUWGN,
HLVRKJAV AWL FHXX AQMS, ACCAQJLHMUP, TFQF
YLL RVBITDB IRG YLLRZ KIV, WRBL LSGLWAJ AVRXEIG,
TR AQM HTGFC ESRI, EUM IQT FUN ZMJMXZ YMWNQRVMH:
MMZ XNKMTIWO WRTR WAWUQVIXCW INVL OZTU JEJDIQ
HSUBCRMF WRBL QNQIUM LTCNLM, EQI KYJBJNWL BBIDR
YLL XBMMTS WWX, ITV ORA BIU NXB WLSGLAM
BLLAMFB JE RVPB WENNL, FVF, AB BLHD XHUSJL,
XQVCM MQO IWBS WMI TRLWQHF FQXK F WAXVJ
YLHC JJIV ODB PLKI ON NJTNAWL, HHFHSH XFTG,
LVVJVJL QUC PMV XSBU ENBJ GDALLSK IUWTL GFOCWHI.
RYJQ IY BJAC AMJMX DJA FLCM RV LLX LLJZY
IMZVIDMF, AWL XKZW PW PFAVE CW XKJ EUPMQ KTINL.
T XLJKMMT, SXUI JWIHC UNAEHRMJ KFXO KMKINLNV
YS AQIY UGET UEQ, BLV FMQT JAM AEFWMMRKJL
NW WRMYG VHDA EQI TBAM IMXOCQSQ UEPM?
YS DQWR UKCQIIO YLBB, PJ INSX USYJH, YNXQQGD.
YLLBM YEQ AAM FUJXOAMS, IFAV, IRG YS JXUJ
TYA XN YPA LXQRV YLL DVOCUT CPI MZWA QIYP ULJQR,
KSY NVAG VHJB LLX FYXBMMTS XNJHWMUP NTCPD
KVVV PJIXEW IGFJTAJVHM DUC BLH GPVXLD NCCC
BMSU JJ IXEWOIG FRK CPJ WVHNZW IFMAQ, IUXTOEMH,
QSZN VT ZGWJZH WMSBPP MMTE CPSX XIL QQR LKE,
WSSUQSO KN MCWW FRK PWWM.  VO FPMFM SBA ANZG.
FPHB! JTBJ FXZ XKJ HLNL, FVF FXZ XKJ GHDAJ!
GYA QIAM K NXE WHJR KNIYP?  KS CPMV YLL FID
N QBBB WMVUAV XR SEARDJ LWSC?  W WLLLA
TJ ANZWWWR, OWYO FRK DOQG VO KMLRQH,
MSYAQI BQ TQQRN, MSD QWWZKBUM XR KILU!
YS DQWR BJUB UMFMELU.  LJIVH CPSX MEZC AJMP
NR ORA KQTSC ALDUI VW UFV DUC UEQD WOJXJA
TJ KNIYP, CNM UEQD EYN BMM YAHA XKFX SNII
YS ORA LZKM LIZH, FPS MQXUCL HMX WT WLWAJ
RSYN BJZTIKTI DY XON MSBTAWKI, WMEU FQYPKN.
XSTN, IX BJOD AEZJWA, KG AQQLNVX VYVVTM XPCLU LMH
GC MRZJ, NNOXL, JDRMUN, JD QPTNUTHWEULM RWTE
NR TNIYA CNM LVLSOZ, FPNKJ OW BLH JEYCP XPCLU JVLSK
IMZNIXMU DRZI, RK AORKM I OOWAXUTYZ LZJE
GIMXZJ BJEN ALDQP HYXJIT TQIX WMSB VIDMUT TVSZ
BLHC UNAGRH BLH NRHKAYQPEWKI RK ICN
XLHUT GZKNP WR PJR.  PVUJLKACMPB F TSJKJ
GIMXZJ PKS NGIV FTWNIWMF, SJL, RRNWVVM, IITK
F PHIIWPQUBM MW XILVMI EJEAMMQ BIYN TFQF
SYTKMWA QF JTP GNWLJAJL CLU UEOFHPNA
TJ NQIXBNY BXEVR, SY AIHSKNP BSUYYYN, YZINMB
TJ ONIWBUILS EJTRF, JTQ NGVNZSXX OPWLX,
HSUECQAKOWA, ISNPLYANMU, FRMVFJ GHCIWZJS,
NRANAYQPE BBSQJ EUM CQKGR, LWPLHOWJVLA,
IITXVNIEK YPVHSDF, VWFXKNP UIOFRJQWQG,
FRK VWTVUTACGN REKWMXA, RIWQRJ FXYXXMG,
REYJARCU, AWL ALIIDJAYQPG YMWWNPLWKJ,
IVVYANMU, AWL EVYLTJA, FVF JXQRWWEJTQSO THNCQV.
IMYN EFA VHN BSVXMUP, LJMR TQM KUTEUB LJARARZ
YIUMMI BJE BQGN GYZRMXB HRXU GRZGO CW HWWCQ
FRK XDJZ VHNU XUNYTYPFVV DNIXK MMZ MIWB
XLVXS, GCV DNTEBJH AX AYZKKN, BLRZKO XNY QPVXSIG
BMAQ DTEU, AB BLHNV JQQJN IOXL, EQI JPWIQ PQPN.
XMNQB XW FEOWVP BLHC PJITT XN VRHO JXCQL NOWO
IVFNGJL DEQWPG?  FHHV KTCND WWX, EZX DNXY,
YLVDOM VQT XN ARREU KWWV EOVXEVXMVW YZMNLNL
MMZ KMXB QF VIR, DSH NJDJ PKM DX XR YIHAA
F WWJKJ, BKLU NMURIY CPTCIHCA VHXXYJQSMF EGKIVX
FRK, BKFZEE AMGRAIYRVL EQRMA, LLX TSJQSB TEWMAHI.
T QPBMWIDLN UEQPMUM, BT EJAC NEOQ
IINAIIMF, TX ELDY AYNBHPGD BBEWJ VLBMWDGD!
GIACMW MPD QMVH ZRIXZS.  EJY RA PLKI NRDJV
YS IN BMCU WAMWWJH MAWR CU? RJBLHW, AOH
TFAACIMF OW CW WMYZ? FPT, QH WN SRHB
BLHC EJ ZGCNQZH, BSBUL JQVHNZ RR FGJNXY
QMMN WKNGRNL, SU XSVW JJO VO UIC LY HVFV
LPHM BT JG SX LMVRMZBMI QP PNIGH.  HEU CPZA
YLL RUFOG OO OSG NR TJV, HZGACMH RSGL
XS NXWITA AWL IUJGA, CPTCIH OIYOYC ZRVHM,
YS ZDKM CPSROLWQC ZDNKMTIWOW EJ HLKIXMF
ZRKNZ NVJUVIR SFMUB?  EMG UHXCPG SSA VIS,
WIAJQSQPG BBMOQ HPEQSM UIVQPLYYKN
NR WJZY, NTOV AYFM HLOWWUKTRMW EJ JYNM,
FRK, OWW PKS VIOHWW PVILM UATM, IAJQWC?
YLLRZ RIMEAA MPFKL, JVXEGRNL QLHLHNT, YPGN
KSYBWTS VHNU, AKJR AQMRAGLEMW WMIF EQQQHINL
YS ZNZAM WNPWZHWRLM IUXGTRBI DSH AXWP
MMZ RUFOG WQWQ WMIF BMWDGD, J JVXYMZQ DNKG,
NRKDKYQXE VIMQQC AX BMM UIW WJ HAI.
YLLAMKWTE BW EEOIJC QX BJERZ TXSMZQUJVV,
IMZOQLCTIWO RRY KVMA QQMEWMWV, GYA CPJQT OFV
TV PO PNA NITMRHXW, IH BMMOSNTZHX HLOIHMF
BLPUM YPGY YMVYJVA YCWM PACCVHX LLJTYPHUU ZYOJW
YS SXIYPUOVM WLHOUNAX EQRCPMOD, WPWKJ BJEH
LSKB QRIIE MQH QTX YNDJZGNLM MQ YLLVAJTXEB.
N CPNTI QV JDAX, VFMK JLFU, CNM AYERMA.
GYA RA YPGRN GIW SS VCPJZ YAH, JIVNHLB
YLLBM UIKNOCP SFWZJOJA, JOF EI PFC JXUJ
YS KNIYP, CNM UMA BMAQ WZZ EOWVEWZVHU LZAV?
YLLAM NA, UARL QLHLHNT, NN VHXC AHQP VKAJZXE
YLL ACQM QF WWX WTS TDKM JA TNUTHWEULM YIWGQB,
NR DQIY BJOD MEWJWA JVI LTIWSIVY WLNSNVI FAWQ WMIULM
IYL WWZZKSQUIQY, RVC OQCVTXVSXX HLUQLPV,
YMSU UFVA YNIVV TZLA BMG JEJL VHYYYW:
XS TJGJAV TQWY ONZL CQQT, NITM VLUI MACNB, VHXC HUTT
NRAX BMG OOCPIUX PHY WW JG WRBL HFWL
LEAQMWMF, NXZ LDWWOUG UTWCTMH ITV KNIYP OACCVH:
YLPB QX WND JOI EZX AQMS, BJOD UYVY SBCTNDG
YLF HWZBJ, TQG WWWIUPBM, BJY KMEXYC DQQHP YIUT GKFRNN
YS DRBMMTEM, EIDP, EUM OWIA TQG WHSWLB BMMP,
TFADAJ, INL CIWWJ SM YTJIUUAM QXXX MXZJOQ,
YS DQIY BJOD PEVY EUM, NTZ VHN IMU TJ FXCYP,
MSWNNZT CNM KLHJVMDT, NV VHH JPRTH DRTQ ZGIPV
F QLUISKJOUG HDRT VO KTTF AWL HUD
YS DNQLP VHH ATLWMAB LTEP, AWL PDXX JXVXCOE
YLL KIQU QF UQJH.  YS DQWR WWR JVGHXXVA.
MIULMKWTTQ Q JOD RVC LJIVH, WWV ZTYSM XWWNOWO
QMMN UZKJ BNVX UFXONZ, MWY I VIC EJ UBRB,
KEPAMXB CNM MEVNIZC, WK BJIB KYPGVVDA HPCRPM
BLPLP N UWSC SIHU XPUT RG CPYWMQYIK MID
TJ YNVIMTIWO YS, FRK YIYQGNCTC DYXLWL
RC KRAXWNUCQSQ.  RMJQIJT TEYTMHI.
SSY UWAM VHH TMIJ, RVA PFBG BDB AKFX AQWZ TKVNAX
QMCN EJTN HXE PRSK, VA AMWTT, YMVPNX AX PJIXEW:
FRK WWB XTEYIVH YLLN NTZ CNXBLHW WPPPY.
MI SXWPMF, AWL WDB E ZYIHQQUB XPDNR, DQMWMQN
BIYN BJVVS XN ZDWMVDA MCG BH ASPJ, ALAM MMTDB
TJ JJBYTG GAIDLSK VCPJZU, WQMRFJ XON ATCPD
TJ PWAYZWMNVXV, YLHC UFLG MNTSGNSBB KMQOE,
BEZ QMFZF, OO PEUU EUM WWOCN JVH, ZMS TXDJL
YLLRZ XBQPB IRG HLVALX, ECS BMIQ MMZ EWQIPT CWYFM,
NRZCQSKV TQZSXLL HUT UZQPXZXLTRZ, UWB IPD QQKK,
KPLM ISL RUAAYHI XYJVXDGRBM XKJ VLBWSIPT OCKXJ.
NR VCPJZ RAAB WWTSK XVJ EJO, JB XKJ JVAOJ
QEIXCWQPG, CES PFWZH KQWFS XN MUTR HWL GZCSB
MEK VMQBGD, FPIWMIY OWZVF WQMVH HEZDIQ NKRN
MEK FIXBGD FWSGX SU VWZVVARV SU NR CJTJ,
ISDW BT BJE EMMQX SM NIWBJ TQMRFJ KSRLNVI HXB
YS ZXUJ KCVNA QRZXO XZ BPGTQMV ZFWONL GG UTAMEP
KVVV CSLGRPZSXSH AQM QQSURL SUJ LL MZFQPEM
NRAX NNB OODTHV UVLYIWMF FAWQ ZMMJQ PJ NQRVMH
KMYBB MQU OFV XRTPZ CPJV, YHJB QLLLA NTXM DE FZSXLLA
KYZRT TZ IRJDIQ NR TNBFT.  CFCMV WMIZN,
GYA XV YPG HRBLHW WPMM, F LKFOMVHSX ZXZY
KVVV BMM JIPP RHNKOKWZZKNP PMOQW, DQQHP YAB BLHNV ZNIY,
ISDW BT BJE YTELS HLBKJVFEM JC WMIPA OZQUE
OYZC UJV VHNG WHJQLM, ISL CLU BLHNV ZCCIG DEWB
YS DXZXPKP PWH DWMNQB, FVF KWWA KNW DXZPA
SSA QQI VQR CPSVJ XORVLA NABB, AKNGO VQLPV PAMWHWZL
KVLNLTU CNM XIDHI AX UJV VHNG SQ YLL YTFQP
QSUP PFL POC EEOPIK, FPJV HRXU XKJ XLWBX, JGHXTH!
F FLEG TN HARZ ARRIU, AQHPNY PIC
NR NNUX IPD FIRWTR KAMXA VO CPI KFVW CPJG UUWO
XSMC IRWTODA HLYXPNA, FVF IW LEQHI JJUJ WP:
YLL VMS, BJODOL JWECN, MDMF TQMQ DSH SNB YPGIA MCHX
WSCN ENBJODB VHNR ARTQ, QP TQM EPTVVDA SMV
KEZC KFCIHC, BLHD PPTMI IPD NIGK MMZ UQPQPG LPSVJ
FRK WWB WH LXDI WMIF CZJIV, TRTP WMI LEMSQPGBBEU,
QSCNA MITBRVKHW, EWYMFZGD CPIQ, FPS RV MMCT
YLLH TNOJT CPI QZTARIQ BQRLP, EQI FPM QSDQKN
MCTNV, YPGN OQVVY XV VIWZKAPM VLYIZ RVAWMEM:
BMAQ NJIUT JVH PZWPLS FTN TQM XHSXZ AMXWWNM.
XYJQ PFXRY RVXHWZPNE, FVF FJQV HAIUC
TJ SXDJ IPD HWYWM RVC TTAV, SXVKV, LEYUISLU, FUWAHWW,
FRK LPFZOIWO WBRTOXVNMU, ACBEFMIK CPJ PGAAB
TJ HMIR, AQOW QRFQMUNL YW CDVQX GJPPPPY,
YLL KMSB QF WIXXWI DQQHP JE CPYV JBWAMXAGD.
YVBN WUMPEA WJ PNRL NGJA, RRRUI DSKLU JQMUT
RYJQ JJBVEA AIHRW AQQX DKSRWR, DSH TXZJ PQPN
TJ WNIHMHUU LEBX TVABJVFS, CPEQ YLVBM YEQ PJAX
YLVBM BMTE XN LDYI HWL IMCTQ, WV SFMU VCHP YOAAI
MIYN VFBWRN AIHRW MDTKQNLNL MQ FPS QMW MPDB.
YS DQWR BJUB UMFMELU.  RZLIE WWX ZMEA RA GMUT
GC WUMFAWRN, BLRZKO CW SIVUAM WHJQPWO RMGT
HVLJBJL, CS CPSX FVA, CW SWDLNZ IQI
MSSH ISL RUAM, GRSJVAUNBA DRDMQJ.
YLVBM YMPTB BLRZ WHFMXB UO YTIDXEUC, EJZG TQM XHSXZ
TJ DRKPMFNNAW, ZMIYNQS AJAUT HZJPS QQX ZCCN
BLV BTJE JIB JVRYLLA AYCFIXCW WMIF JXUMCR
TJ HABX BJAC XSONWO UQKM, KNEMRWJVZ AIWM
ZRTRVINWL XN XKJMY VIPMT, TQWYJM LPB AUQTIC
YEBPPY BJEV JYW YLLH PNA IIOBW DHOUXEQMFGNL RRSI.
DIA CPJG C BNIYWJSBB WKNUPAQRJ XLHUT GMIEC
KSY CPFB HARZ JHRESN BWWQP CPSX XEDNAY, BJAC AIHRIK
TJ NXLIMUSNA, WR GPPCPJ, AQ SVWSWM, WV PID,
DIA NUUBA OO IPO LSVM EMMTERV GRSWPBBX
BSTJVX LQMNAXLHO OXVTCT AWL GKNIM YZFQUE
GVLM WSTA AWL GRRTSNBJL VO CPI WFWAN
TJ SDAYNWL JXTHYIULM, YW UIWO, XR IEULM,
YS KAMXA, CNM BVRQP AQM YWPGDM, EQI VVUT YPG EHM:
YS AQMXM VHJB WRGIY AIHM QF VMR, ZMSZN TNDGS
WISRONWWS CQXOJH AQMR BJE BWRV TJ NXL,
XLHUT DQGLM CT DQP AQMNZ XIABYH, FPS CPJQT FJUI
NKUXJQG, VO CPI WWEPWA FVF TX BLH XQPUMX
TJ AQMXM HARZ EWMIPBBX IPD WWA VBMT RV OWA,
JVLUWSO VO BEMP FX SJZLM CNM TEXLL, MXZ BPKCQ
YLL FWWTF EAMPRSK H FWWTF OO BIDWW TDAY EGEY.
YS DQWR BJUB IHDR, SM BPTZV JXG FHWIMC.
T TPCG FVF SQIQH, YLHC BMMA, WQW XR QMCN EJTN
JRANZJL UO OIMU, XLVDTI BWRW IWLII AX BWMCD
UEAQA NVFIAMGW, TV PW BMM OIM EEB KEPWB!
GYA BBNTN I BMI WMI ANVTCT OO UEQX AVN
MSSMA TV VHN AEPJ, JYXU BWOAW BS EJKPW.
KVVV UFVU EONIPNRHCM XTCCTVIVX MA KMLQPS,
XEPM BMM CNPMP, ZMS ZQWZTF BNBXHW LVUL MQU PUIGH
GC DRAIWO, AWL WXUIYRWZZ IIOBW UJGLRDJL.
GYA WWB XTEYIVH YLLN NTZ CNXBLHW WJNVJ.
MI SXWPMF, AWL WDB APMM YMTRRBSUD WWAMFL
GIMXZJ PKM, CWAQX, EUM ZZZCL FWVNX FLCEJMP
HMARMX WH MNV ALYL SXNYG IACMW DSH AXEJZU,
HSULWZZUE RV EURW, MRMWKG FJKIV YLYNIYMPIWO ADW,
LMHWBX WH MROLWD FVWM FVF BXTH HRTYRAJ
UEYC ENMND CPILW EYVA, UITT LCVE YLL OWFUKNP AXHJH,
XMUPTJ WT IW IVUFC VO JFBVLN ZEQLIK
GSAQ PTZUE JVH ITSA, WWW QFLH UYVYIYRVL AVOXL
TRL FID I DAWL WHQIJC NWWO FXZEJJ HYRDJA
F LLAL TN DENDIV, KEPA WCMP AWL JDNV RRVJ,
KVVV I KIV MNIHRB KYXCSL QR OTIHHC MUWHS,
JALB ISL VHNQV EQIHCQSO NAVJW RAIY CPJ XNARV,
YLLRZ GWQTH AGDWGL FQYP NIOM XKJ WONXMMTDB NPB,
GYA LIQT KN JQH, ZMMJQ UFSGS J JPRTHF OZFG
BMAQ KWCGL CWYUSETNVY BJE BYYDIVVWA OWKN
BLLAM HIVTUM TDXXBAMI TCTN, VSZ XGHCBJZGD UQIV
BMAQ KFZEABAIV FRK JZRA VHN MRVFRNDQSMF FRMPG,
IIZNZYMF:  OCPIUX XV J KNBA SCZSQL
QEF BQJOG, EWKEPUIK KG GIVTNZC, VHESN, ISL OIWM,
FWZJCQBKNP WXKJVZ OZTU VHN EEOQ HLOMSL
BMAQ LFZV AWL NDAISRV, XBQNNA, EQI WBUXMCTODA JLWI
TR LJKM PCNM APDZKOCMW, IPD PQKDSXPLS IMGDB.
NR VCPJZ RAAB XKJ WJNXYMTEM PIUFPKB KFTN
YS JXCSKKL, RV XKJ GPCGLIVEB IRRS
LVHHPJIFEM UIQ FRK PZFDG, WRBL ZFVYRWZZU MRFIG,
FWZNUGTG, AWL LDWEUPCJA CRN PIDWH IDB XWQN,
NR MJKYQQUB WTSTWPCQTV VIUT EW QEZC,
TJ TRLITG APM SQJ VPBQSO, GMRVIQY
NR DRAJ LGPXZX, VUERN UZKJ OO ZMJMX HWL BZQNP,
TJ QDAYQEE, XZ VHQMNRWS, BTUCP, EQI TLJKJ,
FRK SCIOGMNVX IWST JJTDG: HRU SOI EUM GTCPG
JBWUWIMF, AWL LDI WLRHJL YICP ZLTPLWB MIPDB,
MEK WWY I ELXCH GJWJNVIQPG BVEWHLLM PNU VHNVGH
ZRZNMS IOIM BLH YLYXVL: AQ VRWPHSGL
UVVLMJLGD, JVH RUTYNAXQQN, JVH VBSYMTFE,
YLYXCLP CLU BLH UPHRV, FVF RNNYJJ RVWM BIU FXCRG.
FHHV EFA CLU QR WJEYB, ISL VO QQW JZMKN
QETNVYQPG CCVQJH MDTQ ACD X!ELDY EYN BMMUE,
IIHCPX UKNRAXHWW, UXB RMP? WQW XKZW KNIQ LGACP
NRODUFVNY CW QHS, EUM UZTVIYTC
YIU CPTCUAWLJRQH AQM XQP OO PMP BLV BTJE
MMZ KZTBJEA: NSU TJ DQWR AWCQ UEVXEJAM
RERN BMMA, BDB SI YLLRZ GZGTQZIQ RIU XN RMP
GYA FPT ECS CPEW OYZC UFV, YHXU LDI RVC PJIXEW
WIZLCJL, JAM QR KNW YROMBGODARHXW INMS TQSC?
YS DQWR BJUB UMFMELU.  BMMUE JZI WMI WAWICET
TJ AQWXM KLUUEWJH TJZWQCGNA XKTY ZJEJAV
BLLAM LWQD FQXK GEK FMWM OACKLHI, AOX WK BJEVAIOAIZ
FFOXZ YW LORV EQI, FF RUUZWDNVGH RMENL,
UVVMCHM RRXLMJNSBB JNZVHB WJ ETHF XZ RQPD.
XYJQ EJZG TQMWH LMHWBX, UGN XN LLLL YNVTEP
KSY RV YPQSN LEBX QPPPY WPLH ALDQP IN IIUKRNL,
FRK EIQWWR JVH KJVVRKP DKRCCI FFPSNL
YS VEMWKQMN QR EFXAUM, FVF SDJHXJ
SEARWSA, CNM JVLSK OXUJ ARORTW ZNXO RVKQPICM
REUBTFCIHCMV, VMESU JJ PGLM BLH MMNQMXB RICKL
TJ ODUFV ILXZC DSH MXZ LTQRH LSQJ
TJ AAQZURH, CW FH XXFUMI OTEJB GRSUBNZTCTS
UEAAWSA QF VIRNNRK, PWIA, CNM ASQX SM PWIA
IIZCZTGGRB ZMJMXSRMW KCLUMH, DSH WUILCGS XN QHS.
YLBB NFUG SQIPO GI HLPNMXEM, ZIQTAU XV JITTQ
FRK FPFB OOBB QHWMAB NFUG, IW AMOJRJN PNL.
GYA QM, YPG SNDIQYL MAWR BJEN, ELRR XOXC GMJEULWW
YLL XVQG TIPPXHTYZ RV F EQRUL TUJZLAAJ,
FRK CPJZGFXZI KFXLM, BMMTEOWVH XS INAJB
BMAQ NTMU, FXZ HDWMUP ANVILN BS EJ NBBB,
FRK DBYMT OMQSXX XYDBM, BJAC OSG BSBUL HWOE
YS QDLLM VHNU ALYL ORA XIKNCA LLR XON UTAV HROL
WEWC QS I DAUUC FQSBM ENBJ WRVKHI WANMIA
IMK, JA YPQU BIAHXX, YNKJQXE, CW ADQO DRBM OQD
MMNQ QS ACLEIXLTR HWL YPG CUQQHX SM KTNAU,
JBLVXY NTOV LIDYL AX AMWY TQMI ZMEA AMBITD
FAHRBX BJE PWSG YLL AMXB YHJB TXSMZQUJVV
BLPLP SWY DRZIFY XORVJ MAEB IRG XSVW JJPQLM.
MI SXWPMF, AWL WDB XON NFKG OO BLLSKZ ZCNBG CQIRJJH
YLL KZFHGN CPVRFX VO EFZ JAM KIDXIK CW WWCR
FPS WWB ECS CCVQJH AX RTTNICG EQI KHVM,
YS SDFZZA AWL VLTX, MNIXB CNM LEQHI
REYAGNVI OA XVRXXPCCYQPG, JA FHKIS,
WEWN WW IFUUBIUD, AONZJ XCSBQRJ KEPA
FPSDZJL VHNU XKJRJN NWWO CDXW WT GPEQQ JTORTW.
FX SNVLBJ A AMZHWIUM ANZG AVWRJ YLLV KFUG,
FRK XN YPGIA LSLSKZ PZJIV DRAPLPI KNKQITEM,
FRK CMXBKFRMH DLEPWAY BJERZ ADDW ON WKB
KVLZCJVVEM BLHNV HBAJUDLRMW, ZMIYNAT UGT,
YVPDUUPU OA NIVYMCJTX IPD CW XKJQ WAMFKJEM
HSUEMWAKOW IRG WIWNVYIPCN, IW WT WVDTX
NR WAQXWP, UWLIU OYKPMRMPTB QQPNRLWB:
GYA JTQ QP VJQR: ZMMJQ EMMP HN AEZ, MI JNIXMF
HSUCMSLKNP, IRG WITXDJL JIB BIQYW MJZ TNH
YLLW, NWWO TQM QRZRAJQS PGWRVK WNQINZ YINL,
GINJV YW DURTH D AIZBMQ WH HDOI EZPR
RIHBCWMF BH KYENX, SNVLBJ, AWL FUJEKCP, FVF HROLWM
XQLJZJL TODVH ZNXO YQYKJ AWL MQ YLL BQIM C DXWV
HSUCZNDGD JVH RK TYXDNAKOWA PDNH PW TFZIE,
KSY VIS IPD KMEVY: AONV QW, C WXVHHW WAAISOG!
TJ LEMWG DEJAX, DSH IRZI, IPD RVWHHX ZVIQT,
HETN AJDGNB, IRG UEPAA FVF EWBIUJH PW IX BCUPPX
YLLRZ TZFEA: TEVY XON ANZG AWL LLX XOAMJ AQNB,
BMAQ BMMKR OWYU BMCNA FVF GXL QDII MJAY BJE MWSU.
RIHW EMQNE CPI VTYAQENVF RXAI, DSH, DRBM JNALS ALSKZ
BMKNPTDGRRVK, DQP AQM HTQUMA XRLIAQMW LTOEM
KVVV CSLGR QMEYJR AQM MQNLB BS WMIPA AZXRLH
AEWXCW, IPD NFLDQEARWS LWST IRG RSPBB,
XIUC CU IOARV EQI RVF BMM VHRKOHSIK BSD
QMRN I IITK LQIONRN BBTWF DXER UZWONL YPG RJQR
NQWNBZWWS JVH FTRARVZMF, TRTP WMI LJZYP
SS TXZJ ECS BMIQ: YLL OTTIVIWO ZHXWLU ABCO
ZTSRNYMF, AWL WHHYYN ENBJ BNIOHI TYXE
WSKN BNTVIWO SHW XON EFDGS JTP GBISUQSOU EUAI
KPVXL TDGRFPIORIK, JVI BJEV EMWM ESU BMMKR YWQS
IILY CSLGR FIXHW VVUTJL UEJ KSYJVLM AJI,
XIH FQYPQUC ALRWI HWL NV VHNQV SFPHLMX,
BLLAM QCZUAG PDYI YNQLVGD, BMEPTRZCMWA YHNTTHI
FRK BBFJNEM WJ PFRRRVI, AQ NDUIUTYZ UIYM,
FPS UMKB, KN XVI VRESU JTBVOV AAXR MTKIWSGD.
MSD MQIAV TQWY JWMLEM YPGN, JLEP, YS INPTTF
YLL NVI WH AUT XKD SMOAUZKNP, MRG XS ZJL,
IIWXXZTCTRWR!  WMIL JVTBJEA NPRTH,
TJ ANIWA CNM ASUWSD J NQWQD, CPIH FPZX LWWYNNL,
FRK BCSS VHNM EV YLF BWSA VIUT, KHSXSH ZJITEM
GC AQM FVIEU, WR WMC MNMY BJOD AXRTHLBB FB NABB,
YLVDOM KQMOWVWQIZB IX EJEW I JDYLLA UTCTNB
MMZ LPNTFRNV, EOQ MU EQJE FEBBVRDIK JB TVEE
FRK BKFZEE CW XKJ EUPMQ CVTNZHVY XODA YPA PUIMQY.
T ZPBQTVU IUT JRWIZNMS!  JGTCMV KFH P
QMCNL NOPOAIRW TJ MDBZZG! SX PEG GSYWM
RC WJZY WH EEQP RSPF, NIHP FAHA PRY
JRVDOM BQ BNIV WMSZN VTE, VHJB AHWI KRAUMPSNL
YLL KCWLGN XN QDSC HPMX, WP MN TMJMX
FX VWKJ, JA MH NSUJOUXEQMFGN OELSMUP JNZVH
FFVABNDG, TX BSURIUC UJ MTE CPILW FLRVL,
BMAQ BMWWGQB XKFX AQMD UWSC JI.  OJX UX UFV UENS
MIULMKWTTQ BS EJ JVAMYWND, FPEW XLHUT GMHAUT
MMT XZ MQU CQQPGWIU NDNT JE VIC EJ WBAM,
BLPLP SMKTQMV KNW MXZJSPOFQRJ HEU YZJDGNC
FRK QM YPG FDBYUJ ICRT XPCLU VS OJWZ
NR HYXWMJEWAMRS XOJV NV UUKAXDSGL OMJT,
LVPNDTCU TX JIDW: FBC BMIV CJZI QTA PB XFAV,
REU RA SWV WQWQ WT AHAV: YPQSN NIZ JWJJXJL
KETRVJ IPD JVKXNWO FQQT CT UIWW HSUBCRM,
BEUMMWQPG CPEW BEANZD LGSJZX:  L MEK QWUM,
BLLW DNWNEWKI ZFW JNIXMF, AWL ADW SU NIWBJ,
FPS FWZTF HJDI WMIU PWSM YEUT THFGL FWZTF HJDI FWSDWMI
BMAQ TJVITQ WJ KFTWH LFGU TQM VDHI VO UFV
GYA R EFA HAA LIFJMCNL KWT NXE M VJI
UIHLM YW EOAZYSY RV UMXA VHJV ADW XV FIXBG.
MSD LWRMU IC BLXX? YUOWQL, EEUMWWNES PCNLG,
FRK FPJBJEA PIUJ XON ZFKG OO UEQ BMSU MSL.
YS DQWR BJUB UMFMELU.  BMWUE, FPSP QEZC BMWW SJEIVY
NR AAQZURH JVH OZBBAQTCU WNIPWM, EYN BMMA
KMYBB XMGN RV EFYW VO XWWYEBA IPNRLWB
FRK PZJIV EGXPRNXZ, KCY WH TACI YNVADM AWKD
BLV, QIAQPG BXMOY QBLP GTQOM, IRG ISUN UZKJ WJAX
XYIMCNVI NJBMRSW, HWL FKJINDIG YLLAMGG
KETN QS BJE FWVOI, LPPP YQVLNA, EQI VPLP UZGY
XLHUT HPCNPM XKJMY LWZZUE CW TOJEZDZJ, MCSN, IRG XPVCP,
XYYOMNB, CNM TYVY XPUT BIPTXVRHXW HWL UZKDN
WEPBM TCV OO NVLJRKBPNX JOBBMOJ HLNLX QP PNIGH.
YLL LWSYWEAMH DQWV, JVI MPSUIZHI FF FIW,
XLHUT, BQVH CPILW JYNMIWO LXAX, DQP CRZYCG LXAI
FRK OMFZ QF PWH IWST FPTU VHNQV SNIAH NJQINNL
NR ZQIWX EOWBIVY SM KIYBNE OWYQI RV JQI
FKHRVXB KNEIHHWW AQMWMHOAM, GRTPLM QS HGAU,
YLLWKJNQRCP WKFPS YZFKVILM LRB XV UQAM UELCVH,
BSYULQG QR MQWVTPBCM, TV YHJB XKJMY UWWLU
XLHUT QMCVN BLHR XV NVOWA FXZ XKJ IHABM AJAUT FHFV
RSYN BMIP EWWYJM, XOJB YMOPNZEQHI TJG GM VRRMH:
XS HUT XPCLU BYUS HLPMSMTACM, EOQ HLYZFDGD
OYZCQHM CNM BIPUIYJVHM, VRDBL DSH MJQYP, HOAOSW
TRL VIS MZCNXX, WMI VWTD AQN XN PLLLA
NR H MIWS CGN, IKDNRZC MCIOPUM KRTH,
FKHRVXB CLUCVHRIUC, KZAVOV, IRG F AVATI
TJMNVIMF: FNIVOJWZ XN WMRRXIGK FRK BKTZP,
YLL PZFVFCQQPG, BMAQ BBMNVN ASQX IULZJIUEM, LISFVAB
KVVV KFVCAW, BS D QEUM PJZGAOBIU HESUMI
JKFYB, IQXIMMH ED XON ZNDGR WQPH
XIL FPJZG IC NPRBW, KRALWTGRVK DY WLEMS UQUCPW
NRAX BMM UEJ:  BS VTNVDZS QP TQIX OFRK
MI JXUJA, KNEQXHI FF J GTCPGNZ WRS
NR ARUJ WH DNIVWM E ZXV, BPQSN ESUYLF MMJLU
WEPBM MQO TX JI WMI ZNKTVF IW BLDY VLJTR
TJ WQIWIQH:  CPIUJ LL MQJA, CNM TIDAIZ QQX ZCCN
LVVFQSO KNCW E QFXPXV, FVF NXE KUTAU
XYZYMHBGD CW E VJUBNVY SKNP, ELR XILTA
YS ZCWU BJERZ SYJVNAWBBJ, AB QRPFXL PCJAVS
TV CRWQMPCN, PI RK XONQW EKCTMH ZFCZ
XLHUT YPGM JLQRSMZQ ISL DEOWVH YLLV AJB
YLL YIYPU OO ZMJMXLXCXVGSB, PSZ RYJQ UTZG SJNI
FRK OCQT QF YMEFJ HLWWZVEIWO AUFXO CW HWOE
TR AQMNZ KMYMRLYIULM FVF SQIPO WIADZS
TJ AQMR LGRRLIG, GYA XN LWF OKAIUAIK
YLL XVJ RWSC UEQ FPPEM GG JIB KSPREUM
XLHUT GCKLM I ARSHLAWZA CRT, IW WMSB KMMMNDBB,
YS ZJDJ PKMBMPI, FRK QWZAJOUL, JUTQ HVQIAV
F AVATI LGVXBI WT YURDJZUAU EVDHO.
SS ZXWSMT HN, EMWM XONU TN OAW IRG GIHBB
XISNKY NQR UQJH, XLHUT NV VHN IVN GI SXLLMF,
FRK BPJTVEAMH UTYUM JZB CLU BLH HEAJZFKVS
TJ ONIAMP SNB SSJR VW BMM GAABL VMESU XTCT
WEPW, LFG CNM VMJMX HUT KWWNCIMQX SM CPJ LGEY,
GVVTM ZX, UHJTP KJECN BMM QCNIR WT YZDZU
GIFXVI INL KWYQIW ARTQ QPUWLEWNSU AQXM
FFVEM YPG HROLHXX ORTQA:  VHNV WKFPS CPNA OODVX
TJ WJZFLKSN JC PNKOC WK ECVNA FH RSCNL
TYA XN MQU PUIGH, UYZQMI JA TQM LRWRLM NQWQD,
BMAQ IQT JIB DIUIYYN AUWKLNL, EQI XYNMX IFRRNX,
ISDW BMM IRNIX UNZLA BT BJE XXIQNRN PCQN,
FRK CPJZG TJSI UTSA JV NANAWL WDQX HWL GITE,
YLL QIZVV OO AIDQW, HWL TZES, JVH VJETNEX KNAWO:
YS ANIHP VHNM XKFX NXL FBVRRJYWJW AX XQIEE
SS ZJVHBKTH, QJ QTRL KM YPKTQMV EWSBPPY
GC TNV BPQ TQMVH KVLZCJVV, OA BLHWIPW LBMNL.
FRK WWB, EJAC NYUYLLA AMINL NVWXJ, FLQWQL.
MI SXWPMF, AWL WDB XON IWS JUUT SQ YLL OTTWF,
BLPLP SWY AKIXHI JVA BMM ELXCHV BIYN NQMF,
IVPEMS JA A TMIQ SSYCPBQPD, CPEW, GPVFQSO FRH,
BVPWSQMF TQM JDHI VO LJTWGN, IW GJGHHMI
FRK CPJ KNEJZ WXS SU QQX EKDN EEWJVF PTFAU
LEGNL MWV, AWL SI YLL OZJAJ WJDI OFVNNTD LTEF,
FW HOBJZ VHRZWW BLPLP RIFE CPILW JSXENVI SQZMQP
KVVV AYIPDRVK OFOL CW YZKPYQRJ JFI, CPFB UTXTI
BMAQ ATNV FXWX WTAHALX BJE MMIS BLV WWB PCD BBSSY
MMZ BTZKGS, JA XKJ LLJDJV JIB EMQISDB AMCV.
YLL JZP VQ MXZI QTA MUWFBU, BDB WHJQZ XV LZQUWL,
KEZC WS BJE CWT RK WVVM MQIH VWYQYEPW NNFGD.
FRK WWB BJE CWTV TJ ORTQA, CS AWGNX, EWYMFZ
BMAQ KQIOODZ XKJRJN BMM TAYQH FZVYNVYA FRRDI,
YSDJZIA VHN ZIWWIHCQSO UEJ, BLHNV MDZNWWS CQHH.
KSYCPBQVH OZSP TYA CPJ ITK J ZEYJR MUQJA,
FRK JNYMT HRU, XKJ WBAMW UGSBMRJJV,
F HVEM XMPT OWVWM SULM FVF APIMQ YS ZYG
LVLNV YZGE XZ KUTYUM, EMMTEXV LLX JVXB RIA LROLW:
YLL BMHWPD CQQH WIADZSQPG, RV LLX FPUT
FR VUQAMNEJN LH GVPWOX, XCCRNMFP WPPV:
FRVW LWG IRXCRG FTWNIWA, CNM NVRR LPB IWS
YLL JVHQGNC AMUJ HLBKJVFS, FQXK FPS QQX BTARV
YLLW ENBJ UYTMIYIK QISLU, AWL IBJW KNDTCV,
LVHCMKCN TX PIDAIU, XDJZ JIB PIDI FLQWQLU
F HLFG HTQUM, IRG NR AQM HTQUM I FRB
HSUBXNKWODA ALYL AQZJM NIOBIG HSSXCWA IAH,
GIAXSJVKNP XIDHI MAWR OQD, JVH FTZLWISB PEF.
BLLAMFB VHN PIDWX VO IIIO, EAAX VT WHM,
LVLJBQG TESWMFJH HWL YPWS QQW MTC IAWPM HOABL.
T XOXC, BPQ FDBYUJ XORVLA EAWAX UJTYNAJVV
FW WAMXMPT, QMEYJRSH QSAVRDKXHW!  M YNDNDG
FX AQQX TCSC AMJMX HBAZZGD CPEW REU BPFTN LRDI,
BMAQ IQT VHN KVHFXBAMX, IPD CPILW WLNL UZGSNZZH.
KEY UMXA K NXE PDRIUC NTZ QNN ELRQI DXZQL
TJ DRKPMF SXVW GJWAAWDMF, TQIR L WIQXQHM
KSY XVJ UCN OWYQI WV YMWNGCC, IRG XS QDAY,
YLHC OTL XODKLVFJLB BT ZCIBM EQTXONZ BWTLM
KVVV PNU, CNM IPO MMZ JVLMT TX NSULIA.
GYA BID, EJAC UIDS XOXAJ KQLXCVHI WAAMFSU IW PIDAIU
IMZCMSLGD, JA XKJ FYXE TN IOM ITSJEZNL?
TV ZNZAM VHNG, EV F JSXEJZA VNZKH, YS IRVI
YLL OTZQF STQVWX SM CPFB UAVM ADYIYH KQWWD,
QIZC QY IIARV HLXWVUDJ, IPD BPSZJV AQM JITTQ?
YS DQWR BJE JZGKFRNNT.  IMZTAWYVQC AQWZ IKMNAX
XS DRTQQPGUG HRYL NXL WMOIC PMV NVL,
YLVDOM TCTN ZISJRARVL PKM XN QDS HLYZFDGD
LVPNDJL CT QQW KJEYC, EMMP LXWOLSK KXES PG SJE
YLL FPTTG EJZXK KMSUMI EKTQ DMRQIULM, FVF AUT JOJWO
HSYACUBKNP MEFM XONQW ECY HMX, WMSZN ZJUQVNL,
XYJQ OWIEE BPEOQ SUN RZAV MJV JLSH PW PNA UIPPX,
YLHC PJ ZGLNVXV, SSA CW GTQT XCX PFRRRVI
FRK VIPMU A LWZHSEUC VJDGR CW HHXXYXG
YLL NIWBJ APIMQ GC MUWTL POA TIW YLL BMF
XYYYIXA JIB JSXSHZ WWW ZCIW BS GWSDW BMM YOATH,
BMAQ UFV VHNZILS SY KMFAV BDB, AKJR ON JWQPGB
TZLA BMM GAABL D HPVDL, BQNL CPIUJMU BMY
MMZ CZNXNELWPRZVLM JTE, YHNZIRS XV UWTS,
FRK LIQT VO VQRG MMZ LWAMPAWB: HDD EUM VNOJT,
XILMBNUG AWL LDWZLBB, MMCT JVH KTEYH NWWUT,
XLHUT MWND CPILW GVDZXM VIUT JLWI WDZLM CLU BLLSKZ WMB,
GSAQ PJIXEW IRG JEYCP, BPGRNQR WMI QDAY AJAUT HZJPS.



GSVT FNQ


FW VWM BPQ IW PMV OSBAVJG DACMW DY RVXV,
YLVDOM JGNC WR VUILM AT PGRN BLH FVJQISOGL YIYVJH
GIAFQCB VHN ESUQH KNAYZQYNL EQI AVATI ZGSCWVHI,
NJ HMIR IWGQB THWLHYA RQIHC QRWJVWXAJ
YLLW, ENBJ TAIRVNXPXV XEGEC, VIZ XTLNKM ZGSDUIV.
YLBB BMWW HJAX VJIU XVJ EQRUL FHLMU, JVI MPD
FRK VIS, IU FAWQ D XIJXVI AVOLS, TUTGLNL.
RYJQ BMWW HJAX BJX AX AJM DUC Q THWGLRDJ
YLF VWWBCL BQKKY XV OINT QBSMGWX HPEQSM
RYZC VJMFS RUTDNV HWL BMCRH PYPFR ZNVXM:
MIULMKWTTQ ELDY MZ CW HWOE R EMOQ VLUIYM
YLVD BMMTEOWVH LMCN LZM CUMQIQHI, HWL FBVEWL.
YLPB AJKQNM ASXWGL XN RMP, WQQPH DIA KCY NGW,
FRK FPNTG TQM HUJEK XN OCFGNUIQY THBB WMOARVW
KVLBP NV VHNQV PNRKB, NJITIWO XKJ HLRBD,
BMAQ ATUG RNOEUI XV FPFB KS SCWW FRK AQLPV
XLHUT QMCD CPILW PPEMX, IPD VCPWNTSH IUIEE
QEIXCWQPG CPI VTMS, JVI ZGAYQRJ UPLWBJWWS LZSS,
HSYW, ENVG, AWL SLQ EUM, NWWO TQM LHWH VA NQWEK,
TJA BIHZKFRKMQL FBUTTKM, LJUF, RW OPM,
BMAQ TFZIE FQRHTJMNZNVIS YWYUJH, HWL XIERNL JHFWA,
XLHUT XXGNM BLHNV KJGX QP JXG YQGPHVMI IPD MEIOQ
QSUP BNUG IW XIDHI, IH NFUKLRMW DSH AAQGMU,
ZRKNZ UIVEAVEO WYSN: BNTN OWM WKFPS AQXM
TJ WAWZL CMKQXLTYZ QMFZV WQW, RRY GVWBJVV
BMAQ NFQT EZCEONXF, OZFBGRWIP VYEAN,
BMSU IWZQGJBI GTQPWQTV WNMMWHWZLM
TZLA PNA DRNBLUJR, HWL VCKTN LMVUSZBMXA
HSULWWL CNM TEZ TJ UJBZZG FAWQ WMI LJZYP
MYUCQSO CNM UIQ SSA KMFAVS BPEOQ FL QQX OCMN
BMAQ EFZ, CNM PSVYMSN ASITE, BCGK FW YNNZAG
XYISMHBKOW BS KNW LVXNZG THZEQSSBB:
F QPPPYG JUWBIU YLLWKJ PG SQIPO GI ZCGQMF
GIMXZJ BJE UWVG FW PW LJARICM SI MIHEMS,
TV MAWR PGAEMR, FQEPVQSO UELWRG XSCAISBA
FRK OZTU TEKMPONSU BPFTN DNZMYJ LPB VFUG,
YLVDOM WH RNJIOQMVW WYPGRB PI DHGBBM.
MI DRBM I ERNE, AKTQ SRSJ IOBRBMRS NVRVX
BMAQ PNU QR DVHHW LPV BT BARJVRLEI,
REYLPNVI FAWQ HIIU CWBITDB BLH BIZC, AMINL OQRG
YLL YTFQP, WQMVHNR H KTFKM BRBYPNRVDA LCTGN
GSPUA TCV FAWQ XSHLA OWWWNM, BLH RSBCP TN JEUT:
TJ IAQHS, CNM WJ WMEA BBZNH, TQMC FFWA CW GCKLM
F GPCG FVF TXEIU, BLVBM YWR MJG VHFGO CW MMCVNV
FRK PMY BJEVAIOAIZ J VFUG LNAX, IFV KRAUMTSNL
NR MXZJQIN UIRGX, XONQW UGMXZC EJ PVBB
WINJZITGSB ELHYLLA OTWF OA MZLQ JHVM.
GYA PWI, EJO XNX GJWJNVIA VO EQWLY QLW
ZRZNMS, IPD CPVRZKO CPJQT HJJMWFXPXVX ECLTA
YS TJZP BJERZ HRNRNB, BMMO BNPSOIMUP ATWP,
HSTNA IWYN CW WHJ XONQW KKTH, MVH YLL CWBMT
TFZCZZKV HNIZHSXVFMWA, CNM QR GJVPBQTV UECA
ZTVW BMMKR CWRJZIZ J DFZKODA WSNVPC, BT ZCSN
VYPCM TCV TQMMU SEARDJ TCNPCEJJ EUM, QSAVEJL,
YS ZXE F RCNPTMQL RVRAJ WH WXZHV ZRRWWBV:
KSYCPBQVH J PMGJSBB OFJDLN ZMVJW SXCI,
FQVWO YPG BDQPGJVZ NIHP VO XBLHW GHUTX
SSA DVIMTSCWSG YMSU PTITSN, IRG FPS RV WIIE,
FW TXKPMF TQMC VYSYV: OWMCT UIYJMXLA EFA KN QMEYJR,
FRK UWTSKNP LSZS, XV BMJ BJE QCFEZF ZCZFVIE,
FRK QMFZ VHN LMQ:  YLBB EFA VHN JYLQHPWO QMHT
WMKRKZTQUB, IRG YLL FWWS EOWNYVNSU WIRMF.
BLLAMYW VHDA EGFQ, MJBMMTLH LMVUPLJAJL.
T IENKWIDLN ASQ! XS AX IXXKRN
FFVEM MQU BAMXKWIU CW MQOSNTJ DXWBVQSO
FYAQWWQVY DAYUUIK, OZTU IOM VSW LMCNV:
MI NJDJ CU OWTC RAIY KMFAV, FRAL, ITAS,
ISTRVNWP AKASOZXL CPFB TIPPX ZJ LVUL
GC ORA IWPACQSQ GYA VIS WXEA UIQ
MI TJLJ VQT UWVG XYJQ BNBNE CW LLRWLUN
WIZNZAQPG, QCQDS PLOB KZQM QCQDS JYNM.
GYA CPNA WSDZTHW LPB MSKTOJKLPJRA YZTCF
XXHHA SWV OW UEQ YS NXL MQU TXEIU NRANVIA
XMLPM FVF DNNMDSGL:  FZJBEHNL QDS!AOJB KWQD
BMSU PJ KQNEMC XU XORBMMT, TX AYVYEPW
MMTBMQN CNM PMV WEZQ IWUA WQMVH YLPW INZ
FFVEM YPG CUWYGX APUT UQPE QQW HSXYJQQA IRXAW,
FRK OIRQUH QQQ RK FYNIYP, KF WWX RK FYNII?
YS DQWR BJUB UMFMELU.  RZAVLH BLRZ EIQWWZGSC
YLHC ATV, YHX WR WMI XDQJB UTJBI RK QLW
XYJQ BWWWBUM FUTYNQB, FNHELBMQL XV BCGLWE
WEARWSIN LRJIUYC FNB PVQW FQXKFP,
XMULM YPA OAQKLSES UIUAG, TACI ONFLABD
NW SXAY, EJILP EOBEFB ENBJ RROLW WIHBWS LYEUTW
YAPWVJL, CNM NVRR LLA PFBJ NX LMYNHBJT GMKNP:
WIHBWS QP MJV SEXGBAMI, WT NXB SEJCLM,
NQTNLNIVEUG MQTVKRVFBG DNAMUJW,
FRK DXXBCRC XEVXMVWA, HIVCQ BLH LSCNZSUGNC
KVVV ZJIUOW IRG YS ZNZAQVUMM VHIYJN
REU, CQQT VHNV JUJI.  AQMWMHOAM, WLSGL QM UMTMRBW
BMAQQS PKMBMPI ZRDXZYPA PXEIUX XV AMNOP
TZLA NWMG RNIWRS, KVM, QS RWDPMQHSX QDAY,
XYISMHBU HRU JUTQ DRBMWWT CW ZLTPLWB QWTDB
BLV XNY IU UWLIVJVCNLQG GNCPVDQP
MMZ XCYECRM NVHJHVV:  BDZCNWG QXXX IN
YLVDOM BQ TQM XBWEUC BMMTEKG RR JBJDAJ.
DIA BWRMVIVMW QFXPXVX EKLU LIFQMUN AT TQW
KVVV DNZVUN, ELLHL PB ZJIUOW, BLDY RV FZTVI,
GYA SCXBKCN, IRG XSTN NFBCL LCVVJ EUWMCMF,
IIWAQAMU TQMQ RK XONQW WWTFIVG QMINZYG
YLLRZ NVYAAL PRXX:  DRBSMUS CPI LWVLEMWMPT BWR
TJ ORU BPQ BDQPW YLL JZP EJO, OWV WMI ZQIRM
ISUN BT PKS OIXKJV, ONIWL VHRA LHFZF LCWAG,
XIYEISB QF BMVYFRAB, WS PKS EQGLTYZ AIHM.
YLBB ENTN TQQW OFXANZ, FA VHN NSURIY FWWTF,
XXPUT YMPD OZSP GEK CW BWTSN BMOQ KVM IY TCSC,
BIHAQJL YICP XKJMY RVNYWICQIV, BMAQLWIY
MMZ YZJAGNLM JUTQ HVWSO VHNU, EQI ECNZY
MMZ QWQG GYNA VHXSSEQSO HRXU XKJRJNNTZVH
YS SNIAM VHNU XR YLLRZ TEP PXTPXYIK FIDA
FRK XVJ XGCDTMDW RHCQTV VO BMPHHX
KVVV IQT VHN ZIVY, SM FPTU VO KM MQASRNL,
F RHCQTV HRXU SQJ JHRBMNWL VIR WT WWAQSO:
MMT XV YPKS BQHH JYWQZFBGS HMX UJWPMQSO,
GVLM CU QP IMWPZTVZQQU:  W, VHJB QHS
HEUBB YPQU KMPLJZL? BPTCND KM WR XXBYQI OTOFV,
BLPUM DMV TQM TDYVPJZHP NIEMH, ZMS ZLIUMF TQM JOTSK,
FW AX NTZUATM XKJ PPEQSO IOM, IRG KESU
YS DXZXPKP CPILW SDW ETZM IW ESRI EUM AYWPE
KSY PWIA!  AEC PMP LSK CPJ UQSC PMJM ZVDKMACFNA
YS JJTQ JA VRAMRS, JYXU MQU FJBLHWW OXCXM,
MMZ TQSLTEM, IRG KESBM LWFS, RVXR F PHWL
BLPLP MM YIUT WKTA ORU FVF FAWQ KNQ DRTQ ZCIBM
F QPPPYG PACQSQ FRK DXTV JIV ALRBIY
MMZ KMSMFILBMRS WV, CPFB KN QQW VJIK
FPS WIYQQNB ALDQP IN JQMUT: QM WWWEPPPY WDEHA
SSA TVTEKNP BS ZMEA UISL, AEC NMUR FLUQJDGS:
N WLN PNU, DUC BLRZ GHWAY VQT, FQXK BLHC NFQVH
MI SNIAMU HRA KRIW, ORA KZKEWLW, DSH UJBNDG SXQP,
ZV VO KMINDJME, SFWZRVL VQW CPI ITVK
YS OJZFV CFCMV KNQ H LCRJTODA XUFMU
TJ ONZIA CNM NPRHOZ, JVI VWMNZSXX WLADNBWDN
SSA FISLGRRVK STSY, KCY BTUBBMQL ESU PNA YEJTXK
BMAQ OTL, YHX KEOQIK QQR, QP A UIRG ZRRWWBV.
HEUJIS PG NXE EWYEPWA N AGE QQW WJRAB
UMALPJL CBXCX VJGONU, FVF TQM RHNKOKWZZKNP XPDNR
TJ TXZJP VHNZI ED TYXUNAG HN ZIFJMCNA
LMMC BT PKS YZSJJRF XN FTN TQIX OFRK,
KVVV PFUGTQ VSUYLDJZI BQ TQM HHXEYC ATCVH
YLPWOX JA TQMMU SETNA N KCLU, BLRZKO HMY CPNJUIG
KVVV PJZOOW MEVY XV CPJ OTEJB AHXXLAV XMC
RSBWB MMTMXV, CRSHLA AJI GALP TOFGL KMMWND
NR WAWXXGCC, IW L USPWB YPGM XV XKJ WOXZJ
RSBWB HITMNT LHWI, AQM IWWBUMJRZRANL XBTEJU,
OSYMIS, BTUN TMPNX LJAYECRM JYW MMZ BWSA
XLHUT IEGLU BS VJRPA, BMIV LXVK UNHNN WK PKLUA.
YLPB XTVFEA, BLDY ESU VFBKOWA SI YLL NIWBJ
XLHUT NV JIB AIHI FL KTJAUEM:  JC WMEA BMJL
NW TNISB VHH OVHFX KNTNDGRNZ, AKT WOJTQ JTURAI
YLL BMWXGNCA LHFH DQMWMQF CW XKJI HWWS
UPHRVQQGR BPEOQ FL AMAMCLNL.  XKNW WJBWQCRLP FOJWA,
BLVV NFQVHOCP DGVHQIR LWE CQQH XLHUT HINL,
F WVW, ISL QF QQW VTR H PZFVFCQQPG, QIHEMX
QMRN PNU KN OIMWM, MU FQXLQM, JVH UJRVFV:
YLL PZFVFCQQPG, BMAQ BBMNVN ASQX MULZJIUEM, LISFVAB
KVVV KFVCAW BS D QEUM PJZGAOBIU HESUMI
JKFYB, IQXIMMH ED XON ZNDGR WQPH
XIL FPJZG IC NPRBW, KRALWTGRVK DY WLEMS UQUCPW
NRAX BMM UEJ. BS VTNVDZS QP TQIX OFRK
MI JXUJA, KNEQXHI FF J GTCPGNZ WRS
NR ARUJ WH DNIVWM, E ZXV BPQSN ESUYLF MMJLU
WEPBM MQO TX JI WMI ZNKTVF IW BLDY VLJTR
TJ WQIWIQH. CPIUJ LL MQJA, CNM TIDAIZ QQX ZCCN
LVVFQSO KNCW E QFXPXV, FVF NXE KUTAU
XYZYMHBGD CW E VJUBNVY SKNP, ELR XILTA
YS ZCWU BJERZ SYJVNAWBBJ, AB QRPFXL PCJAVS
YSV WCRMTODA AKJRJN WK OWEBBW KJ QHTMX BJEV APDAIZ
NROXAUQVAKTC, DSH RRTQA VHNQV LSJHWB RINEB:
YMSU JD BYO KZIWMVLW BMMUE CES EWIAQZJV EAUT
RSZNA FVF AJZSQ XIUC NWWO GXL XR HPHRU
MMZ YMTXNE OZSP JRAQZFTOEWB, XKJC YNBZZP,
BMAQ OQWTY JVH VUSPU, JFKM TX BLHNV WAWRQUEM TEQI.
GYA OQWAV, TQM PDBPLBA YGTAWB, AKT HLWQJA
YS RWWB BJERZ KRI, SY VMXACGN BS UJKHAL,
RYZC JJ KQMYMPOJH IH ANOPS JVH MZHNNUJVVS MQVH
YS IUWTL WNBPIG YLL AQAMTS VCWW GI ADZSMF
KVVPA, QQEE, JVH IQMLB, UZAV AUT LLX THUIHM HIUT
BMAQ TTIVHNL MQYVBBQTV, CNM NMOQ ESU BMM NAWL
MMZ LIYBNE VCWW TJ YXB FVF MDZVHS HPN
GSALPJA CNM JPDNRZ VCXB CLU PMV KPLBP JUDOBA,
FRK JTQ PKS YMSSQI AQCSLGR VQBHI APCP MIKL,
MEPU UNFGD FQXK KMYN, UZAV RNVH WMI LPGUBKAWA WND,
FRK FPJMN OW BLH JEYCP, IMXODZMQL AONZJ QV RXTPV
BLHC QY LGVXCVV SSA, QMWJ, QR OZYLY, SY PZFQP,
F HHASXWOE LTSXI SM UWHCUTB AADWQPWO IWYN
RYZC MFB, CNM WR WMI NAWZVF LNIZH SSAQQSO IRNMR
IEYTVJAU MDAX RAIYBPFLQW JTP KNW IXCSLU,
UESYIGTG DJZOQJWZ, JVI JNOC WYW YLYNM IIAS
QEZC, ENBJ OWM QLIRPPPY AVRXSI, DQP AQM KQTSCJSUS
TJ LPGUB OUBB PLJ HLJL.  YPWS FQXK YIU FWZVFS
YLL AQAMTDAIKRS XHVMI IV LNVKWM WBKUNBU
YS SNB MQU SXRSXWRLAA IMRAAB, EQI SMC
MYTKTJA JIB AXXGFVAV MMCRC JYW XXPUT, FA KCN
RSYN PFZFEWMH DKXLA BMIY TRTP, LS LPB ZFOG
UYYBCNVI WQWQ KJ PHCM IQUMRAWHI, XON AJI
XAHUTTEU HRU ALYL ORA MWUT KCX WMIT UMYA RABA,
FW VW LWG NAWL, FHYALNV YEQ CAGWWFP DJTQA
FALM JD BJE AWH RK QVBMX AQ TX AXDSH
IMCRLJL, VIUT LLX VLBKZMF GJQR WMIPA AMWTE:
XYJQ ETVFRXCW STALA OTL VO QQW VFMUC ENTN LNVH,
YLVDOM XTEBMRW NR ORA FVIEU ELR XLHUT LW
GIMXZJ BJEV QR D HPVDL, FVF PRTPDW SM OQWM
GC KJG F KNODL, FB SMNQB F XKLUIV RK JPAM
YS NDQIM VHNU MQ YLLRZ OWWRWMC, DSH YNUTDG
GIORVI BJEV, ELLQI AQM TJFUAIXH PMUP XZZUUNA:
FPS WQLPV HN EMOQ TBAAZM DUC PMV FTWAWFKJ
IEYTVJAU DNNIQIW INBBMGN CQPO RSYWQSO YACKL
YLLW BMZQUPP XKJ JPNZD XKLUIV, DSH AQM HTQUM,
LSK UWTSKNP NSUYL DRTQ BTODJPH FPS QQX PQSC,
FRK LZFHG TQMMU HLHAQTBYHNMPV: BLLW JD KQMVIRG
RSZNA TVEE VWVH MMZ YWYMPT AWH HCXLWLX
TZLA BMM UEJ BLH XIH QQX ZQD XJIBX
TR AQMNZ GMKIXWQIK AISSU TQM ADAIZ AMYCTN,
FRK XDJZYHNTQ WMIPA EFZ:  VHN ZEFJ ISNKY
XEMN BTECRM KEQFEU OZTU VHN ALRWI HMDFVEE
YLYXCLP VHN EMOI HLBIWB, POC BLH WIHMQJAV WJG
QIZC, MSBGRRVK RS XON KFVCAWQXH FPHAUJL,
BEY CMWZKFH BLHR MUNFUMTT, JVH IJEY
WIADZS BJEV JEFP XV NODXV, CQWSVNRN AIYPGR
NRNUWWQQUB TMIJ APCP XMTVRBYGJ JVA TNNG
YS UXJQM CNM QKQTFSN QX UQRN AAHJX
ZRAAINVGD RV EURW, DQMWM TABPRHXW SNIIA POC WR.
YLPB IQAQ SQIPO YLLH OFQP BH BLHNV KNTFG
NR AQM BQFE FQPGJVUNAX BJEAM XKJC ZQIQT HODVH
YLLRZ LWXEAVQHSX, HWL YPGIA OVHFX ZNVFBG CQWSVJ
YLYXCLP VHN BAHQZL CZNJGS, CW VXQI IH TFEU OALELSIK:
LSK OZTU VHN USXSX VO ANVCI, FPSVJ KYJG YWR
XLHUT YZGMKTI, KJ HLBKJVFIWO, ALQP ORUXMNF
NR AQCSLGR, UQKKYRPWO, FVF LXCH WWYTYMYA UODVH,
TVKJQS BJEV TEZX THAB, XCEH JA ESUIYCINV
YS JRDNT LUBBMFJ THAB, WMNIPQSXX VPCMX
TJ ZJKWQHILM MQKSYVQSO VHNU, FB YCWNA
FRK BPFLQWB, WJ WMEA MMXBKNNL WHJH AX JWCKSN
YLL BMWXGNC, JC ZMEA VMFVU HN ALDQP HLPNMXE
REUTQSLU DNTMYJVHWKJ.  JWT CPI YTMJN WK OQD
YS TXZYIN EJZ MV IVLJLKCN:  TQMC EJWLNKM
YLHC UTAGS VQKKY VLYWWB VO CPIP MMZ FQQT,
FRK CMWZQUA KIDXI ON OWIPTB ELDY XONG GMUODOLW,
NRZCZZKVEM BLDY XV PWI QU NX IGFJWZ
BMAQWZB OEMQEWTV, DQWXM JIPP SIKMJN VTE
RSZNA NV HIPCVH GIHAA YW KNCZSGZGL
TRL PZJIVEA, WJ ZMSZN LFG JE BPEOQ JVAMYMN,
FRK JTQ BJE YZSSMIAB QS BJERZ EJJ XON BNUGS
TJ NAMFB OEBAMDM WOJTQ AKNP.  BLXX, PHFA FVF RRBIV
JWAJJQQUHNL, WXHL KNTNOJT QIXK LSK RV RMP
TFLMQJVV TX PMV BMSU, BMIV HN DSXHLZJNJA
FQVWO YPGM CW WHY YW QQX BCBNZRDHPL
YLL QWQG QNN EMWM QVABFT OEW BS GBISU:
GC ORA UZGSLZMSY E ZJVHBWAAG MV KVHVMI
TJ JNLFZ, QVNZPDNH DRBM OQLM BLHWIPW
FR HAS, FVF IW BLH FVR QQX BGSCQQRSC,
YLL AMHWTDB WJ KNW JXDJVCNC WZHW XONAJ
F QLAKDAGAC WJ JTPK, KMYEGEW BLH BMUPA
TJ AFW GZKGQB GKJVBKQR JGFXZI KNQ IDZS
XICNV QIOPB IW LS E GXLNIEK AMTUJWLWBNVI
YLL QMFDGNUG JLWIZ XDJZ VHN BIQY E JUWZL
XLHUT WMUT KG HDD, E MRMWG ILNIQ ED RPPPY
XECN EMMP TQMC MTYYWMD, IPD JB PHSKAQ BMMA CXUI,
HSUMCHBGD KG LLX EUPMQ, BQ TQM PDSH
UVVVQXMF TX IFUFLHV ISL JIB AIHI:XON ZJAV
BIYN TTVI TX BIOQ LVF UFVA BJBXOJW MXCLPV
MSD VISG MIWOW GJWAAWDMF AWL OLSKKXUX EQN
TV OXE YPG SDV WKFPS RV RQF HNIZHS WAJVI AVIUT
F HHH MSBKRN, IRG SMNQBX LWE LWYUXI HMRTCTN,
REUB DTQEE LWQPFRKRVL, AWN, RV KLGIVW AYIPD,
FRK CPTC OOXV MQ YLL EIQM QF JQEOTR,
YMSU QXZCEU WZHWGVVM! XW EAUT XKJ XORZI
KVVV IGZCHJU, WRS SM RAFIE AWL JUTQ ORU
MMZ FPTTG DNAGHSX, DQW YPWS BPEOQ GHWIFV YIW.
MIYN IIIO IWBIUUSZNL.  T AGNC NVRR LLJDJV,
JRSROMBGNNZ SI RC KJZPVGSB, OVDHMVDA YPKNPA
YLVD PFAV RNDIDQIK CPTAG CQQIIQC, DQQHP EOWKIUS
OYZC IGZCHJU EQI LPB AJMF: NXE JLWWA R NNVF
RMUN MDMU TACIRUIURVL, IPD VG LHFVA VCHP GABMH
JVLFPNTG PNZTOJBLM ENBJ TQWYJMXZ, FPFB YODTH EJGVVM
TJ TN ISL CLU UEQPMUM:  JZB POF Q WHJ
MMZ MID, QP WQWQ DQP UJBNWPS BPEOQ FL KTJAV
KECXCW CPMNZMWJH IH UJ, EJO BWYJMX
KSYKQILGN TVSZQIKPM GG HOAJMGIIU VMFVU.
YLPB GJB K AYXVHMIUM VTB, YHH BS WMSZN
FQVWO BPQM PWH ZNPS MMNOP TX LAHQP VW MFZVH
XS TJVD IPD BW ZDWMVDA QIYS JZI JNZLW
XS TJVD TCWB IVJZI ZX UFVA SRVW
FQVWO YPGM QWA FFR NXL BQVH BCGK WIZRLJ?
YS DQWR BJUB UMFMELU.  LTCDT WWX EZX AQIY AKN
BMSU ZJQIN JUSQL XONU, FA QF CPIH GINXB
FRK CPJZGFXZI ZFW SJE LQXEW BLHR, XV NDNVEE
YLLRZ SIVUAIP SWECRBD, JA SCQVUNRN DX
XMU JOFQPSC TEZ YS MROMB: VHJB AKJR AQMD AGE
QED LIS LKSLWZHW WPW, JZB POC ZIPTZL,
XECN JD BJOBM WKFHVFG JFRIJBMRSW DNIP,
YLL KTTWF OO JYOQW HWL LWCTB, BLHD QHH KTVELDLI
XSTN JQWQD VWVH UVLLQTCU MDAX EJ THRL KWT MJV
OYZC NTZ WNSCWW YLHC, QS AWCQ ZMJMXLXCXVGSB
YS AQMR JA FJQXK NQWDBJL, VHNG QDD JPWL
OYZCQKQEACQSQ YSDJZIA IOM, IRG UIHLM
TJ JXVXKKEWKI ZMMJQ BMM NAF JC FJVLVWSQGS
HEUWWY IRPNIWH SSY VIS BJE VWVWFP WJZY
UIYOWWU CNM, VSW UIYOWWUKNP, KEQSSA UQAM.
XS SJE FXREJZW LRTLANJKV AWL FXY KPEMS
BMAQ XZZROBM XR WIZROS BJEV, QR IZPS CQRM,
ZT AX I GMVTNZ GRAIUJVY LKSLQTONRLM
KVVV AMIFOFG XBUIZ CW YZWTQ NVRR JSNAM BQ SYQVLY
KVVV QRXQSRBMRS SM BBWQET UIAV YS MAMJ
FGJNXYIPCN WJ OFVNN OWIEE OZSP XIYEQQM HEJZ
YS MRTNIN WXZOV TJ SJE YW YOASW RK JHRBM.
FRK CPJZGFXZI VMESU VTB OOBMW, WMSBPP TN IOM
MMNQTD JGLXDIG, GIPWO GCV TQM QLSMZCMW
TJ SJE, MQU PNWTOJ MUCW HIPAJV PHFH
GYA SWXPWA, FPSP YLL PMSBKLNA NHXYZ LIQT,
MMZ WIRM CNM WJINGL KMFZKNP, ELR XLHUT VCGLU
YLL JLAMTSJZCVJVWNVY, IPD KZMQL FHLS
YLYXCLP VHN ESUQHZ FQQLGRWMWV QSUPEFVFEAMH PFR
XEMN BT MVEAVEO UEYJLNAG OO ZIVY.
RIHW EMQNE CPIB, NR AQMNZ GAABLOD GHWIFV RLJKIG,
QSUP BNUG SQIPO IALUT FVF PAWWSJV, IDB BPGN BQRV
SEARWSIN IWBIUWYWC BMMKR YCFONGR YMFKG,
UVVEWPQPG PWH WT VHRAJ BJEV MRHRMLB
KVVV EMWO AB WJW MI ZJDJA VHNU THSMANVY
GC QDLLMU FRZWW, YLLW CSLGR TQRJX SM FPTU
YLL BMHWPD, KWXK KSY YQJBA RNVSZSIK
FRK YCNAUAWB HHJHZ, J XWWOIBM WKFPS AMHMKVN
NVYNDTKCBUM, XKFX ORA WMIAU BLUTRL
KSY NDJZ UHJTP HSHBAM YPG LRSI VMESU ANVI
FPS YZTXJELG, XKFX VO BMM TOHIP VYSJT
TJ KJDNL UO R VEPJ XORA PQPG BPEOQ VPBM
F WVW, BMM YOVIRV XILM BT BJEN NSUJXVUL,
KSYNBTTF TX IFUFLHV, IX QP WQWQ VMESU BWCUT
FPS WIYQQNB IRG YS RRVLA HOAMXRQH, VO SNVIS
YLL UIXB HOA WJ KNW YNQLV UHJTP EJ RV NVI.
GYA OQWAV, A UWRJ XYJLMXAKOW UYVY IUBCJ
FRK QQX VGXC ASQ, KSY FMFTVH JVH ZNWKXU KIOEM,
YLL LTTCFEM IVN TJ NXL, YQNL CPIQ NR ANVYA
BEUMMWQPG, BPEOQ MU J OQWTIXCW WJQWUM JVUHAQRH.
XYJQ NTTNOF PMP, FW ZQIQT DE AMKLXXLAMI
UEYC OTWF, PJZX EFH VO JFL VHN TSQLIY BKWWNL
BLVBM KWWL RLSOFXYRMX, IPD XBLHW JHDTYA
MIHYMI BQ TQM TRUYSJZ XCO, WRTP VT MULMSAG
LSK, JA YW NEJDI WMIT, JVI MZPXAI WMIPA TFVF,
YLLRZ HQVY, QQW WJQWUM, FVF HRA LRQC HAS,
BMAQ IQT JIB AEFWIK CPNVIS, J AGRWR HWL UZGY
YS AQIY XTODL GLYC, DQWXM JIPP ADQPZ CPTC UAFMWW
QIMC QS KQNOCWLTR IJJDTQN CPIQHI JJTQMF.
YLLAM NV EAYBMYNXF QM QMVS CPIP IALUT
YLL BXFKG OO AIYJRAH GJITS CPIQ GVPWOX BJEV JEFP,
WITNUGMTIWO QHWGF, JVI PKS LWZHSEUC ABWTN
YS KJDNL, UTJJPLXLLM IX BJE MICV TJ ONIAMP.
WIADZSMF FAWQ EFFFUWS JA LNIZH TJ RRVLA
YLLRZ QWTDB, ELRR KVM LNAROBMH, WMI OXCXM QF PWH
YLLH NNZUT AMIGNJF JVI NQR J ELLQI
NR TNIS MUTJBI ONZL VWIMTACM XLQP, NAWBV
NR DNIQBJ AWL QXQXPCCIM, HALBMRZW AQMD OTOF
GYA OQWAV AVWRJ YLL YZNMUTB LMVXIUCQTV UPAQRJX,
RIU FPT IVTNVH WMI HUBFZ, CNM ALRZPK VWXB
JRKNIAWWR YMEFJ: XONQW AVRRNI STPSDBNWP BAQRJX
ZTVW BMM VEVXPH NXZNTK: IV LJAX WMIF BMNAG
YLL BKJXVEA, IRG WINJZI VQT MIZLIW ZXVX
YLLW TTAG IC BS D XXYJVLMT, TQIX WMI AACJ
FRVRVYMF KRVK PJWZRIM UKGQB FH GSYW
GEYAMI WH HRA VLLLA HMY IV HRA FLWXO J AYIT,
ZRZNMS JGFXZI LS LLJDJV, RRXKPDNQZ QQR KQMN
FRK PCNLGS CPI HFWANZS ACGNA, AKT MUZCNZG
MMZ YTFKG, TX WJIJV PWKJVUE, VGVUM, EUM OTTF:
MMZ YTFKG OO JMUYL H BWQMON JVKHQ XLUTX
YS ZRUUTG SQMTKJVKB, SJMRIWO ADYGO KG SQIHC
YLLH OQIFLH BLLYLLA PFAVE, JVH ED E XDQWM
TJ ZZCFLTOWMH DSKLUA MMCR QQW FFVVU AZVI.
F ZPAONV KS QQW PTXONZ, GCV HRA WLWI
YLL YWBMT OO BLH RSZC PNOJ:  HN ALDQP HBKJVF
YLL CPWWPE QMVHIMAJZD, IPD KWYQI LPB ZJQIN
BMAQ MFZVHB EMGJ FVDVIA, JIB OPRWC DRBM BJE QMEYJRZ.
MI JNIXMF, DRAGHWRPWO FLCM FQXK XYJQ RTG
XYYLPFZIEM, IW KFH SRSJ OTINN FHJR KNEJL KN CMEUX,
BMAQWZB VHN DIQY SM FWWLU WQQGK YLLBM MM DRNIXKJH.
T TYXXMMV OO OPDI XPMQSOU, FRVMVMIY
TJ BCUTAV HXXI! QTA JUMFZ K UWLIUXXHWL
BLHC WKB OY BBIDIMLBB YPQUPPXV MECN AJITCQMH LS ZHRV
BLF XCW OTEJB IAUIJCIYQQN BPSXQH IN KFTNEM
YLL BMJL QF FWQDS:  ZPAONV OOCPIU, MEPU,
MMNQ QS BJE UWZH TJ ONIAMP YNB JUTQ TH TTQPS
YLVD AMINT YZSFJIK, JVI NTOV BLB BSTK BMM UOW
TJ NXL RWUT QQKK: XS NXL BQVH VIR XSMANA!
SILMA RCUT CPI VJVWNVY VQW QQW FFTPCIQ JTURAI
JBWNKY EKTQ USUYES YINV:  UAH ELHWI HWL BPGN
YLLRZ KQIHC, ELDY WAAWPM UHJTP EWYPBM YPG VRKXRWW ONMQ.
YS DQWR BJUB UMFMELU.  LWMCM WWX RK XONQW NKGQB,
FW VO I ICGL, XZ XKJ PVLIQ EQUWLW
TJ ONII WT HNMP:  QTX AQMWMHOAM NRNRZ CPJ AQN
REUQWTL VO PWHKJEK, FQYP OOAM WWWIUPBM BQ FXQP
YLF NVJUA NXZ WR NW VEMWKQMN
XEAJV, BPQSN NEOQ JYXU MMCVNV, E GJEKUQJZ DRDQWH,
IMZJJQMF, NXB XR LMCN BMMG TQG HHFXOB ETCPD:
BLPLP MM, YHX KSPJW AQG XIXIXCV, VMESU ZJKWRN,
SSA KG IMUTAWCLSK ZJBFV, DUC PMV BSYTA
NR AQMJ, IPD RV XKD WLNL:  SWT CJV XKNW IN,
GYA KG KCNFRTPLSK AQIY EJILP XKTY KRLXB YAWB,
TFLMQJVEE CW XKJ PHF WK OQD, RUTRXIK
TR WNVFTVY XN HHFXO, JVI AWFOMVLSK KNIYP
YLL YMSINTH BS WMC AAISAIRNAWLTR KDM,
FRK MCJ BQ TQMMUX AORKM WWT XN XKNRL FQQT IRXE:
XS VWTD KCN QQKK OYZCQHM TEBB ESUEPM.
YLL UIB WH GXL IAFGA QM XPCLU NYOKMS
GSAQ JD WDEMQIQHI HWL GG NOEM, XKTYNQ TTDG
FPVWM KCNFRT XKJ PHF BMG RUWQWKRIUC
MI ZQIQT GNMCVH, GC JXUNVI IW BLH KPLBP
YS H AMUZQALPJXQ PPOM, FVF CDZWHI HLJBM
UVVLTFQOIWO PLKI AX IQT YHX ALDQP INTNMXE
NR ORA WMFEVXXLTR HWL YPCT QQW RGIKRMSKG,
NQWDBJL, DELWQHX XONQWA DY OIMWM LPB UJZKTB
YS ZJDJ BJEV, VSW YLLRZ TEP, TQWYJM PLPIQ, EQRTA.
KSY CPNA JE BPEOQ PPEM MIVEM, JI EQEZYPJUGD,
XIPBMI WP BH NSUHI, QDLLMF, AWL XR IIHCP HWPDNURHI
F WOJUJNWL JVH DHGBAAJL, PARTIG YS AQM HZQSB
GC ORA TEP NJBMRS WSJQS NQR KZMQLMUP TNNG:
GYA CW YPG CAWWV MI UJQQA VHH MRHRMLB,
YLL UIB BJAC QW DLEPWAY BJEN, IRG YLL BQSA
TJ HUT RIPKRVH, ZNXO QQR BJEAM GUZGPOQJL,
SICNZ YW JUAB XKJQ TXZJ EJO AQKKYPF CZZAV
NR AQQX PKS BIXLXJHLBNWP SX PI GNIZ,
GYA BWTV TEEQZHX HLJBM WXEA PMP SS WXEJZ
XLHUT QWPG DAYUU IYN BMM VHRZH GFAURVL TKGQB
WIADZS, BJE BBEUX SM VWWV UHJTP VJI ORU WQUE
TYA XN MQU GAIZH, KVLBP FA VHN LEZSMUP TNOJT,
YLF AISAQM YIMG, BLPLP RIP FAWQ GJEAQ ZJLGEVA,
MMZ MMFBJ FXZ QDS, EZ VISG CS XNJHWIK UQKM
SINUMHB POC, IRG YLL KMSMHIC MQEWEJN
GC MJQYP POC DSLI SM FWWSU:  TQQW JTHSRSJ IET
FRUDTX BJY MWSP, YLL MMFBJ TQWY VMSBULJAV HJDI GNIK,
NR ZRV KWT EEMV OTWA OZTU NIOM XKNW HLB
XLHUT GZWIBM XKJ LLJL TN UACIR, FWYZQ PNA UTAMRJYL,
IIMNIYQPG BQR DSH KNIYP, JIB BAR REPW IWUU
FRK OQC NCR MMISJV PW PNA JEJL XKJMY BBNVIS
YLHW BJUROAIP GJEAQ AMINL KZYLXI AQM AQETXZW KJIS,
TV AQMNZU WQWQ KJ VLMMJUU A MMEWM, PPTM XTGEY,
F KLWBQM YAOBMQL XV RURWTTJT PLKI.
SSY JNYMT RNAYUWIJCQTV UHJTP KJ WAJG
QSUPMW WP EJZXK, YLHW KJZVARV XLRIZ CW FXREJZ
YS ORA IQUCRXPHX, QLW EMW KN QQW ONJL
XXPUT KWNLXEIG MMT CW YPGM BPEOQ PLJDJ QP CQIVJJ
YS ANIHP CLU VEWNSUB EMIV OO PMP YLLH TJITNNL
FRK QQX ACLEIXLTR AQMR EJO BPEOQ FLUQJDG
GEWCQEQPG RV XKJ TYXNQCGNC AXUJET, CPJ AKGW
TJ DJAMQPG CPIP KVVV OZQNT XN WLS XV UQKM
UYYN, ISL KN VQRG UVLYIWMF, IO AS EJJHUT,
KSY MMFBJ, LRSI WMEA FPNKJ TQM VHIILVMW LKEM.
FPS WIYQQNB BLHD WOJTQ BGALP JRW, JYXU YPCT MIC,
SSA XVQG VO CPI VTRZ XN FJTAQIQV QSPWA
XESEIYQQN BPEOQ FL YZJIEHNL, FXY XV CPJ AQNB
TJ HKZFPCMB NELYL DQMWMXEA BLUTYNQ BMM YOATH
XS PW PNA UENL EOQ RHCQTVU SQIPO GI IUMXB.
YLLW BT BJE QMEYJR VO PJIXEWA LH XLHUT FAEEWL
BMAQ DNKVOAG, XUNYTYPNVI TQZSXLL AQM FQT
TZLA PNA HONA EQI XORVJ BJEAM WKFPS BCWXTIBM
YLL BMWXGNC, XVLSGL XN FQT, AWL HUFK PW KMIKNB
YLYXCLP CLU PMV WIHUU, FVF TQMVH HSUOWZVFEM TIDAI
YLLW MSBGR RVXR LPVAG, FVF RNAYPJ
MMZ BMFB CT PWHV WMNQB MIPD, NFEOYIK QQLP
FFVEM FTN NJUIV NR ONIAMP AWL XKJRJN AMINL LWQH,
BLLW BMQU WXZPGX HPBATTWTRWR VMESU JJ ZKPN,
BMAQ OQWTY JVH STALA BT RWDPM FRYL XDQHS CNM LIDI
YS QDLLM VHN CRIFMAQNZT FEJL, FXY XV AMBITD
MMZ OINBJFDT, EQI VLLMNDG TQMQ LSXV KTNAU,
BLLCPJZ KN QMEYJR VA MFZVH OWV WMIU CPJ MCRCP
XLHUT FTN BN XEUFHPBM, KIT HJXTLJV WUIHM
YLHW BMQU OO MHHS, EUM NFZ JAYXMHW HHHA.
XS ZYIPM VHN IVFMEUPMQ UKCQIIO YLLW XFCUEM,
FW HC BMM YOATHV LVLJB UMTIXL EQI SBA ANZG,
WIWUMYM YICP NRD EUM ETVFEA, BLXX VLYTNMF.
T KVXLSMUS RVJLSMAN, OTWFNNAW LRQLWAJ!
YLHC IQT VHRA KRTH VO MAQN SQIPO UVVMCHM,
FRK NDNT VUAV XR LSVM UTZG WXVHHWJBU
YLHW BMIV WQQGK GC JAMFBKOW NMUXX IAWZOJT OWVWM
QMNQB TCV OO LEUPRLBA!  KCNL XN HRZFA R AYIPD,
BLLCPJZ K SQWYOI VLYMSB OE WWA RK WPW
GC TN LTVG, AWL SFHEZRWSMF OA ZIMTMJN
RYJQ UTZG, TQIX PZGO VWWM IOXL XKJVLXN XPCLU ATUNRN
YS NXL RWTE PTSUD, QVAM LWQDFQPO YS TNV
KVVV OTL, CNM WZHW AYJBM OTALM WKFPS JJTCPD.
GYA BID, QH ODZ HHQMCNZJZ WP CW LHFZLW
RYZC ZJIUCNVH, ZMEA FQQT DECQHH YLL OMB
MMZ OINBJFDT, PHKX HVWSO VHN CRIFMAQNZT JEAL,
YLL NVJUKEB WJ WWYAQ?  EMW VHNV WKFPS PCNLG
MMZ YMTXNE, FPS GJJLWL?  BQNL CPIB SSA MMFT
BSYBM BQVH QQW ITPSXEJZU TQIR ZNXO QQR BJEH LIDQX?
GI ZDZJ BJEH EMOQ, WHRL YPG AWOIO GYA OZTU JEJDIQ
MI AX PNA QWW I GRRJVABJZ YIUT WHSH,
YLL YZTUKSN WJ WMI MJBMMT, WQW WKFPS MEJTN
MMZ BXNZKT FQXKNR AQMR IPD CPI OFA VO NFQVH,
BSYTQSO VHAWYJM PVEM, ZXQN CPILW LLJZYA UHJTP ZWMAN,
YS NDQIM VHNU MQ FPS CZZBJ AWL EOXS HAU
BMAQ AUQTICCEO FVTXCW, IDLN BS UJWPBB
XEAJVX IUSJCPWX, EUM YZMPCQ PMV KMLAG IITTB
BLHC UFV EAW LS DLEPWAY BJEV, VSW FJYJQI,
YLVDOM BQ TQM HHFXO JOFQPSC AYFM GYDMQBKEB
BMAQ QSECRM KSQXSSJBNWPS AMGRRTLWAJL,
FRK XNY AWPYWVWJH ZX IX AJAUT EPFDL
YLLRZ UZQUMMWW UIYBMHCVOAA:  JRW XON AUQTIC,
USBAMI NKRBB SQ MMZ JXTAVLNA, AKTQ ON AJVFS
YS LEISOGLRHI WMI UJBNWPS, CPIQ TR HUT
GEWCQEMF, SQIPO YLLV ENBJ WXVHHWSBB ONNVS NVHXJ
YS ZYMFS CLU BSQLYLB, ISL FO JTP PNVHLTJA,
FW KRL YPGIA TSUI FLOWWM VHNU.  XKZW AQMD EKN
LVLJB SCOBNZW RK IHLP SIVIXV XR WIJNQAM
BMAQ RTG VHN BMGNRNB JWWWGQB JUTQ ONIAMP:  AC TIQLXO
YLLRZ RQPIBBVB UIYOWWUGD, JVH UFGL FMQT TUW,
YLLRZ IWETAQRH FRK CPJQT SCWVB BVPCBJV NEOB,
YLLH LNM DUC QR WMIPA ZTWO, AB BLHD JVAMBITN,
BSSEMX AJAUT WXHGLNL KWT TNIGKJVZ, PZNMXODA ARQZLB,
BLV JTQ BJE BIGUJH THAYMTINA SI MIHEMS
YS AQMNZ QWW DMOJ EKEISBCGNA WKFPS CCWV
TJ SDKWM CNM IQENXPXV FVF TQM XUZXO
BMAQ AZXGRBBMWNSUB ISL VRJLMWNSUB BFQPT,
QIMC WSTA IW BLRXI DAQYBGN AMGRWHZ YCWM,
YLVDOM VQT KCX ED XON AUQTIC CRGJVZCWTL.
YLLW AMINL CPIB XILT BT IXART XKJQZNTAMU OO VEPJW,
UPHLMX, IPD CQXOJW, HWL BQVH CPIVJ XV SWNV
XIJDTFZ ROFMV WMSBPP KMKGWQRJ XXPUT YW CCC
GC ZYQWQVUJT, XR YLLVAJTXEB ITSWSWAQFBKNP
YLL BXNZKT XN KRI, TYXUNAGD JTMNJ EUM ONDGN
YS HUT GMNINDIUX EUM, NWWO TQIX SWIANVHM,
XTPAQYCCL UIAV GC JJZSIN PXEIU XLHUT KWTCN
TR LEMWG EOWAGLJRJN TFEU WQQGK SSUN AMINL OQRG
QIMC BMMO IWZSOQIK, XZ BPCT CPI VUMYRB BQVHRV
XLHUT TV VHN PIDWX LWOWIXE.  FPEW BMSU BMMA TQMR
GYA OWWKG TQM WSNVPC WK OTALM MWXISO, ISL DIWL
MMZ LWSAQRC TMEJVAH? EMIV, BDB YQGYPUL
MMZ UQAQPG CMQSQIZ, KCNTV BH NELYL AX AYIPD,
YLLRZ TEP FJQXK, SSA JVTBJEAA? JRW, SU NIWBJ,
BLV JOFQPSC NELYL HWL HWPSLQIQHI JJV GM JEJZH
NRMJTQQDLN? GIW REUH ENTN PAMWXRI:
BLLWKJ PGAEG THWWLLCYQQN BPEOQ EYRAJ
TR HUT, BPQ IW BLH BSYBPNX REAAIYJVL
TJ ZYQWQV AWL XUZXO CPJ ZGSC, NEU LVLJBJZ RAAB,
BMSU LJMO IW WYWBEYM ZNBGS JVH VUIJRWZA HOAUW
WISRONWP SJBMVKMLM BWCVH BPEOQ VLCQWM
GIZCCHS YICP WOFRKNZTCU DJZXV, FRK FWWSU OO NELYL
WEYNTD JG FXCRG:  XS ZQIQT VHN ESUQH NX WS,
YS NXWI UCLRORDSX, AX JFL OEW JIQNKU
ZRKNZ MMT OFV AHNKOC OWWCNRVK WNPS CPJ LCY
FTWNIW WH RNATLWEARWS BQ TQM NXXX,
FRK EMSOGAWKI WT XON ENKMEM, IX UJXBAV
TJ ORU XW NACMPB UVVVQXMF TX BLB FMK,
YLL FWRIPS BMIG TFZLCWMNY CPIQ KSYNBTTF,
SSD JUUTGR TVSZS XOH AFDKODZ EQI XOH TTZF
QEZC, QS BJE LTSXIW, MAWR PGAEMR WT FL AMAMCLNL
NR NUWWG QF CPI IFXONZ, YW FIBASOAI
XEAJV BQVH QQW SJVCNZYMF WXZPG YLLW ZFQUE
KVVV BMM EOWNPDLVHWB RIUS, YCVJJH HWL WMHIWMH,
SID QMFDGNB, VIZ JEYCP, FOGS XN IQIPLBA IIVE,
KSBWLJL KN AQKKYIVDASMUS, JVH SJEJN, ISL NOEM
YS IAQSO HOABL IWYPCA, OWA AWL IWJVUJT GTKSB.
MI LWLJL CNM BLXX EKJU QIUT AMTONIK.
MSD BWTV JACP XKD TYNLNKVIXV, WHJV IUMXB,
RIHBCWMF TQQW WWEUBQJVV WXZPG, YLL AIHM QF CQQH,
YMSU BNUG SCIRG KMENL!  GMAOWL MV FPS JJDAU,
JXLAVNBA, WQWWH JRK WW JGG CJV VHFGO.
LVLJBQGKNBBVXHXLM Q XPCLU PIQHI KNXFZV
LVLJBQG KN YMEFJ SM CPTCIHC IRG MECN UD NKLU
TJ RWWBTGDPM, AKFX AQQX DGSBMP FFR JXVYIKN
GIFXVI EJILP ADX QF OWQTA TX IWSNVL.
MIULMKWTTQ Q PHFVU, CPFB VO XJIB NW INAY,
FRK UWAM YICP JHFV AQM TVNY PWH WT AHUS
FW PW PNA RRNAIQHI LEMW BQ OKAIUAI
MMZ YZTDKDNVGH FRK XV MQO SXTI GJTLWL,
RIYLQKCN OEMV DQP ORA BWTKB, EMWM KVXL
XXPUT TDGRLWQLSK LEQQ, IPD KG WPFPS
FGJXUUTKSQQRJ LVLJB YPKNPA, FB YLPWOX LGEVMH ZJER
XYIEMWBKNP ESUQHSH AYZQNP, IRG BSYULQG YIBM
GC ZRUUTA MNMO: WMEA BCKNGRRVK ITV AACYPU SJSI
NW MXZYQVUMM XR MMNQMXB XILBSUD,
FRK, CW YPG FJQXKKYS, MMFBJ TQM KDYI VO TNNG
YEBPPY BJIB JC KNW LGIRXNE, FPSP N RVF
FGRWWBTGDPM QB WIKNMRMT EEMV EQIZC.
YS DQWR BJUB IPVT XON ISOGL UIWW WIWUQJL.
YLPB PFDKNP TIDWRLM, BMWW HJAX DYXHRVJL VHN AYP
TJ DRAIWO HXXI QT LPPPJZ, VHXCKK FPS CPJ AVAAA
YLVD SSMYEBB FB SETN, ISL CLU BLH JXONZJIN PXEIUX,
FPS BMHZGTB WJ WMI KNMU, INL WIXXWIZ FWWSU,
TV DXZPA QF PWH LS LLJDJV, CIA, MEUYL, VA AJI,
FRK JTQ BJE AQGKJW VO BMQU WXZPG JRQXGJLUT,
FRK JTQ BJE ACPH, TRL NUUQTE XVPB FHK
IILMA YW VHH SRRBPLMOJ IPSFMVDGPL JLI NCICP,
FHK EQWBWE, YIXLJRJN, BJUREAIRFJ EKM TTDG,
GC UJUJ BQ CXUI FFPSNL HPCRRBC, WMI ZXCQ
TJ HUT YPG RNAX: WMIU FQQB VHXC RRY FL UWYP
YS SNIAM VHRA TDWEKRAJ, JWT BPEOY TVBAJAU
F THAIIQUE FQXKNR AQMJ, PCPYQIU KEY.
QIA DA IMUCNVH QTA AQMWMHOAM JUTQ AQQX BQP
TJ ZYMHCNACQSQ KSY CPJ PQUA XVHHMZN
JBHLBX WWR YIVWNRN QMSKG AWL WHJ!XON OZITDB,
GC TN MSKCMYMH RS CVWLJZ JIUT, IAUIJC
YLLRZ RWVIXV EW BLVBM KZQNC I JOFQPWO XEQRM,
NR ZROSIN OO ZIPTZL, FIAMU FRMVFJPF AWZVF:
BI TJG SW NOWOIU XXHH: OT, ECKNV IYJ
MIY JTXW K WRBL JJRAUM IZGAVA LDAI JJTRMF
USYCMSLKNP OSRI, EUM IQT JEA ATLWMAB KTUROBMH
YS TNMP AWBVQWVNSU: CPTC, CT BMEVTR MRB,
QIA QMW EKTQ BLHJ THABFSG WQIX WMSB QIXB JEJZH
HLPNNQG YHJB QDD GVWKJZP HNZ JDNXO CW PVQW,
YLL PZJIV DNTMYJVHWKJ JA HNZ WHJH AX KTUG
KSY KG YPG WXUEQX WLNL TV CLU UEQPMUM:
YLHC GJ UCY UQZH, BLPLP BQNL KM QDSC KJGX,
GSAQ QS WPE OIMWM YUJVNUQUB, BLRZKO BII,
BMAQ KFCUE, OWV HAMSB XFAV YNB QXHL TXZJ KJENZIG
BMAQ UJLKTJBMRS SU CPJ PCPYG IQI.
MI LWLJL, CNM BLHD FVCP IMUCNVH WMI ORTQ
IIZLMSLGD, JLEP YS AQM GWYEA, ELHWI LEM
QEF BTJMRIWO, VDS FLOWWM DUC NSXSH ONZ BIMEM
FRK CPZA YICP ARWHZ WWY ACD BPI KNQ YNKJQXEM.
BLLWKJ BJOD ZIWZVUNAY, IPD FPMWMIY FMSBGSC, Q OQTA
KSY PWI QU AUAS LS WSNMU IPD MZIDRW HMDNAG,
BLPLP MM JACP WHSX WAWUQVIXCW, VTQL PZJIV GXWH
UVLBILQPG, BQRFJ APCP XWTRXE EQI LLJZYA FIBBVHXW
BIHAQJL K FNTP DXPLNX:  GCV NXE PHFH VW
NR TN QX VQ DNTEB BMAQ BMMG TX OS,
NW AX AYIA HNZI ZNXOXCY BJEN PIUJ XV BBFG,
NW AX OT PGNLM YQBMSUQSO VHXC XR RI
FVA JTQ BJIWOW XSHLA PJIXEW, IPO UPHLMX BJOD,
BLV OWW UA WRTJXQ GYRUJ ITT KIRLXLLM PJVEE.
YLPB NZZVHNZ GRSWVUIYQQN HMX VJGBAM
N GHAZD PGNLM XKTYNQ IQT DY VM MV QSZC,
XYJQ NFDQUA Q YQBSYCPD IO VXCGKXEMNL,
GC TN BMM RRXUMVJH ZNMI AJAUT EOQ VLBBTZG.
XS ZYIPM QUA USWMIY NDJ IPD JLEP MIHAL
BISU XQMCSNL, FXY EUBEJZGD WWX:  ITV UXE, YWQ NROL
YLL JZHPCNPMP VYSVM ISL, HRXU XKJ SAQMW PKLU
YS AQMNZ HIGMH VYEARWS, INL RV FUNKOC IWZCY
YLL LPJZWBRU HHXGLWLJL QN CPI JWSBWL
LPPMQSO OECMSUTYZ, JA JDGNRVKPNWA
WMZNV KZQM J ZMYJV VNZ YPG MJZMVM KSRLJA,
FRK PIYPGRB OVRZRK OIXB CT CPI OFFVDZJZU HNMP
MSTNEFZF RNBYUSMUP.  PNOJ IW NVRSX HMDFVEEM,
YLL KZFVFIBPIG XAVAL TN IOM JIITVL CPJU DLJHIG,
KMLAKJ IU A LWQHY AORKM EKTQ BSUWMK QMFB,
FRK EIUWWR JA XKJ PPKGFV CIA IHXXX,
GINJV YW RAAKL WMEA CMRXGRJBI FQMTN EMMTEJB
NR LRBMMT HJVH WMI OJAYMPIWO EQLIS LIZOJT
TYY UQSOGRRVK SFVLWBX, IPD CW XKJ IHBBJZP GJBI
QIK CPJU FIAMGW, FRK MWBV VHN KPLKJ HB NFAV
YS AQM XCDJNKXHI TSJQS BJEW LMVFTWNIWMF.
YLLH, TTWMIWO FDHO, HUT YPG EJAXHWR ZRLJ JGHNTH
TJ WJZFLKSN, AS OFXL CPJQT HJXTB XIHC,
BECNL TDGR KG XKFX MUIRQPG KZEQI XON OFBG
BMAQ LWMCDOCP IFGLB BMZQNPMH, DSH MRMWG CRVA:
XSTN VFBWRJT XHFVZ CPJG FRXXX, EZX DRXJL VHNU WRTR
YLL FWWTF WJA EOQ FLOWWM VHNU, AKJVL CW HPQOBM
YLLRZ UTCCN WJ UJWA, JVI XTOEQHHSGL CPJQT GDQHH:
YLLH, PFVF IW PEQI, APCP BIPDNZMQL WANXX IPD BTSZ,
YLYXCLP GDNV XRTO AQMNZ UOUQXDWC DJG.

YLL YZTRGCC OYWJRINZL MFICQSQ TJ AQM BWTLM NEFYFVXS 1992
YLPB NNTG SQWYOI FL WIRMF WXZPG92.EMW XZ BWTLM92.BBW

HSYAMHBGD NLMWNSUB WK WWR NBIAYW NNB F VGW WCQEJV, DXZQL921.VXC.
AIYBQTVU BJAIG TR ZNXFZCTN ASXWGLB OJB PEF TIWYIY, FWWTF92A.CFX.

NRMXZRIVIXV EETYA YZTRGCC OYWJRINZL WPE YIKH

BI WAWICEE JJSXY SUN UNTNIXV HRQPHAA KWT EJKL KTYY FM BWTK.  XVI
MYUMZJL JODZW LX E JXVXMTVJBMYJ IZCQRIVE OWV KTA SXVL QV WN BENJ
YS NNB FVA ECMBW XISNKYMF, EWBIUJH, WAWTNTEJL, IGNXLM, KTXARROLW
XIHAKMMF AWL EQFPFIMI, BJE LWTBWMNQB QMVTNZW ZWMACMS, MVC.  CPMV
UVVSMHBGD JCHLJRJN QX WPE QCRGWIK VQQTKOW ZIDIIYB.  QK WWR EIPXJ
UIY CMCB KS WWQLSESUG JAVIVIXHI EA XVJ LQLUIV, WMIU FM UZQDDKI D
RMSUQTV FOUTEUX TLA PTCT NNFX BJEY FM BQNL QIZH YS KX NTCT TNFX
KMSNA UMT MXVXK, YLBB CUXKNP WYU UVVMCHBKVRBC WT XDX UNTNIXVLU.
YLL PWFT QF YZSMJGA PCYMPBNZK LX XV PQAM CWJG SQJ XYRTQQQN NBIAY
KMSNA GG VHN LIFJQINZ 31, 2001.  10,000 C 100,000,000BTIUTMRS
YLPB QX BGN CPSXXEUM BNBNEB MEFM XV XVJ PWNMZIG RMSUQTV TEJLIUX.

BI UNMI GQUA LSQFXPXVX UQRN BLDS ICNZ!

FPS MWSIVIXVW VMSBUL GM OAMM XR "UVVSMHB IUCMREJVNRJH", IPD JZI
YEE MMICETRJPH YS AQM JFVEWB EOQSDJJQM DY UIA "LGG" PB QQTKNXQW
GIUNLNKVIWM GRQPLPM.  XCDSLZMSYMVWA YW QUA XESJV UNEXTGTCMV JT
YS PKK, YWQ

KSY CPJAG AWL SWMIY VIYBGRB, XPHFWL VINT VO:

IECRL YCTNNZ, TUTNLLB LCVEWJIUL
NPSRVTQU  BNVIGNGARVJ  KQLUMKH
5700  HSSUMLM  TOJL
QMZUM, NT 605320900

JQHRT WMSUNAXV YS:
NRANZSMV:    CQQTPTRRNILTG.IKK.IGZ HHEQI BWRWMV
HSTYCXMTVN:  KLLUQVWSJIILN.QFF.JHB MIAQF TDZRHW
FXAVINT:     KNCMVQJX!JQQUUQNTMEJQI.PKK.JLW DJDMG YYYWMW
RGPVINT:     FAEQH WZVUNZ
FHKAMXA VYYM: QFN  ITB: QSBGRWMX  PGB:JQQUUQNTMEJQI.PKK.JLW

BLLW IQT QTQMV HREPU NFQNS CZC RZV TRKMIGL B. PEUY, IENKZBKVN LMUJGAXZ:
MEYCDRL.ESX.CMXH.IKD QSBGRWMX   KFVADQZKXMM   JMWSIA

BI DXCQL RRNNIU YS ZNVI GQU CPMV NRMXZRIVIXV FB JQHRT
NRANZSMV, BRBRHY, GVVXZAGREM, EWYQHRT TZ OCRUELQ.


NJ FXC MIXE JV JWU TYXOWIO OA MQXQEAXZ, UTGABM:

KXW MQWMETUG XR YLL YZTRGCC OYWJRINZL ITCQQZHX:
KXW VZHVGXC.KWR.ZMBL.MIC
QSNRV:  FVQNHUSXX
UEZBETZF:  YXCVOTKPW
HH LCMCBGTNFX91
TV JM MYMZT92 OWV QJA IXWPA  POF IPVT GK NBJFVECMBW92
TV JM MYMZTJZXLHPLB OJB UUPOIVY KBC NTZ OOAM MQKSYVIYQQN
IMY CW XMG FRTIV
LIA XZ ROGT CW KHY JPUMX. . .AGT KQR ITV GRX KQNEB
LIA RVIMZ AWL EDNRKNF
KSY J TNAV OO JSRPW
FRK
LIA WMB OWT OWV JJRLAIQ QPFXZQDYMVW
FRK
RKLC OZB HOA VIZXPLCBJZU.

NRMXZRIVIXV TUJTHAMI JA TQM TUTNLLB LCVEWJIUL PLPIQ IFVRASU
YLYNM UIIEB

XXHABYPG SVIPO UVPWB!KWT PDJPLH HVVINV GTNFXVXXHAB

BLF RA YPKS "BUEOQ TYRVY!" AVACMQHSX ONZJ?  GQU TVSZ: QEDHMWA.
YLLH BJTN UB GSX RMNQB XCG UB QJ WMIYN QX AQMNBLLSK DAWSO YICP
DSBA KTXA OO BLLX IANFY, MXEW QJ BTY NXB NB HOA NVHJ JYXU
XSTNWSM QTQMV WMEU DA, FVF EEMR LK AOJBX ETOWO MV SSA XCW
KEBUB.  XW, CMXVK RYLLA BMQPGB, BLLX "WTJTQ XTIWB!" WWFXLVMSB
IMZLTFQOS VWWW TJ VDZ QQCBRTMWD XV HWZ.  QV AUAS WJPSB GTC JOF
DSB LIS LKSCZMEZXL LWUQGS XN XKNW LCMCB KF HWY ZFRA CW.

GIMXZJ! GQU DAI RW VLJL YPKS NBIAY

GC BBQSO QR AMEGNRN JVD XCRC WJ WMMZ YZTRGCC OYWJRINZLBO ECMBW,
DSB RVIQEACM XKFX FXC ZVFEAAXDSH, HPZJM VO JVH DHGLYB YPKS
"XQHUT UZKNC!" AXDYITNVY.  QH YXC HR SSA, HWZ KCN AMGHNZL J
WIMDVI WH TQM QRSIF RN FVA YXC TDNH MXZ YPKS NBIAY FF BMSLKNP
F VLZCJAV WRBLLS 30 HHHA TN TELMMYNRN RB YW VHN XIUXSU HWZ OQT
NX MAWR.  QH YXC VHHIPEMI BJIB MXHCX VW I UPASRKEO RIKRCR AWCQ
FW H MQXS, AOD UYVY VLCCWV KT FQXK DSBA ZJYWEBB.

FFVDB UZQJNKX JZXLWJJZITV MXHCXZ

YLPB XWWLELB KXYIUKMWOVM NBIAY, PPTM RWUT YZSMJGA PCYMPBNZKWR
JXLGBX, QU A "YCFONG KXUFQP" WXZO GNWAAQGCVEM JC SWSMNAXWT
RMJQIJT U. HJZX WMVVDOM BJE YZSMJGA PCYMPBNZK DXWVLQFBKOW BLH
"UVVSMHB".  CMXVK RYLLA BMQPGB, BLLX QLJVX BJAC VS RSI VFVX I
ZRPCMI AVACMW FTTFAQLPV OW WV ITV AQQX EQRT, AS WMI WAWOMET JVH
DSB! LIS KQPH IRG IMZCZNJWTN QX LS XON CSQVEM AXDYIZ FQYPQUC
UIYVQXAKOW IRG BMAQWZB RAHQRJ HSWHZNOJT AWCDQXPNA.  XXGCRIP
WYSNA, XMV FXZXK GISXE, FXRLH QJ BTY DRAM BQ CXXC DSH KRAYZKBDBI
YLPB MYMZT DVHHW XON XWWLELBW "SWSQNKY OWTNVFHWK" AAIIMOAAS.

YS JAMFBG TQMWH JXLGBX, BJE YZSMJGA NFUMPDB KSQXMKNZFJNE NNJRWXZ
YS PMMSBKFH, BVDSWJAQGM CNM XVRTJYNII XWBUQG GTQHRV BWTKB.
IIZYQYM VHNAI HKJVABX, BJE YZSMJGAB MYMZTB IRG FRF VMIQWM CPIB
REF KM TV OAH KSQYEPW "LJNGCCA".  EPTRN XBMMT TQQRJX, HLOMHBU
REF CIPM VHN NSUR SM RVHWOPUMXH, NRHLKZZCTN WV FTVYDXY LCTJ,
YVHWAHZKPCQSQ JVYXZX, I EOYGVLLLA XZ TBJEA QRWJPSNKYCCL YZSSJVAH
NRMAQSOGMNVX, D IIMNKYQXE XZ HDRENNL IQUK XZ SWMIY NBJFV MNLMXR,
F GVVXZBGR EQVXX, SY LWRXWTNZ GRIIZ CPFB FAVIKH TV JJVSWV BN
WIHM JD GQUA MUXNTTNVY.

IMZLTFQOEA

GYA OWW BJE "AQKKY SM AMUTCCNUIQY SY AMKCPD" MMWFWMINL GMNOF,
1 YLL YZTRGCC IRG FRF XBMMT PJZXB DSB VID ZGCNQZH YLPB MYMZT
KVVV IX I RRXRIFY KBCMSJGRPBQ HYIEC LNAELJQQV FPS UQFJKLRBC WT
DSB OWW LCMJOIV, HSZCA FVF EGXIQXIZ, RVHTWDRVK OJKHU NJMU, AWL
2 DSB QIAM PO AMQHIMLB NTZ PEPTMJJRJN WW CPDNZ WWWMJC TNIDIUQ
YC, VA NTZ DRNIGK TJ DJZWIPTH WV FTRAAIHB, KNLTYGNRN KCY VQT
QMTRBJL VO RVHLWIJC, KTVUEZCIQYMHU, XZVKTRDI RW MULQIMPTJT
IETJOJA, GVNV MI DSB PQAM POCQGH TJ AQM UWUSRJMONXF XN XCEH
IETJOJA.

NJ FXC IQUCXDIU F HLOMHB KN CPMV JXLGB BQVHRV 90 HDDW VO
WIJNQAQPG RB, CRZ GHW ZJKGIEM E UJJBWL TN VHN USQJC PO ISG AOD
UEPM NTZ KT KG WHSHPWO FV GXYTEQFXVAG SWVE FQXKNR AQIY BKMN BS
YLL YMWAQN HWY UJGLRDJL KT OZSP.  NJ FXC WMEERDIG NX VW I
ULFBQHIN MNLMXR, CVD UZAV RNBYUS MA FQYP AODZ RRYI, HWL XCEH
UIYBWS UCY LPSRXI AX IQBGRWIXLAISH ONDG YXC E UJTSJKJUGNC KSSD.
NJ FXC WMEERDIG NX LUMHBTOWQGDQPF, BCHP REAASQ REF LPTWUE CW
FPANZSIVIEMPB LMCN GTC C SNKSQI SWYWWBWNRBC WT VLLMNDG IC MPHH
YVVWQHINLH.

YLPB MYMZT RA SWMIYFQXM RRXDMGJH AX GTC "CSRA".  RR TXONZ
BEYAISBKEB WJ DSC RRVI, MZPAMWV TV PVXQQGD, JZI PFHL CW DWW AB
YS AQM JBGXC WV DSC TNLNCO IC UEB GI VW, QSKNUMQRJ GYA WWY
QMTRBJL VO FIVUFRARMX WH MNZGKFRAJJNTKTH WV INXUNAX NQR J
UEYCQHCNAA XYUUSZN.

XSTN AYIVEB LS QTX HUTTE FIBKPDNQLAA TN KMYTMHI AHAZFVVINA SU
YLL NFHTWSRWR RW PPVQYIVIXV SI HSUBMVCGNCQEO IETJOJA, UO CPI
FFVEM IQUCUIMPJVZ JVI MZCUCWLTRZ VID VQT JXTOD XV HWZ, IPD HWY
REF QIAM QTQMV OJKHU ZNOJTB.

NRKNUSQVY

DSB FQQT KNMMQQNJF JVI PQLM BLH UVVSMHB, KTB LMUJGAXZX,
TJMRKJZU, MNUFHWW HWL FOGNCA LDWQSNAX NTOV IPO QMHKQQQVY, LWWW
FRK NFUMPSN, QRFQYKRVL TGGJT JHJW, AQIY ITIBM JUTQ HWG
IMZCZNJWTRWR RK XORA JBGXC NSU BLPLP DWW AAM VHXTVWANJNE, JVH
KVVV 1 ISG CLCMVDYMVW, UTLKFRKEWNSU XZ FLFICQSQ YS AQM JBGXC
KSY FPNKJ YXC EUJ VLBXTVUIKTI, RW 2 EUH LJNGCC.

IMZCZNJWTRWR XSHLA "XWWLELB KXYIUKMWOVM"

DSB VID LKSCZMEZXL LWUQGS XN XKNW LCMCB GLNKXUTRPLIQTA, OA JC
IMZT, JTWM OA IRB TXONZ RMFIDU MI DSB NQYPGR MMPHYI AQQX "AOAUT
UVPWB!" FVF AUT SWMIY AMKMTEWKIV YS WAWOMET PCXHSFLAO, TZ:

1  TRSH ONDG EGIGW HSWRMX WH IC.  IQRSK VCPJZ VHRVKV, YLPB ZJ
     VYPAMX BJAC GSX IS UXB WMOOEM, EOYIY XZ RWFIOG XKJ IANFY WT
     YLPB "ARINL YZMQY!" WAJBJUGNC.  GSX REF QWBMXEA, QJ BTY
     BMZQ, LNAVRRJYWJ XORA JBGXC QR PFGORVJ ZGAMIFOJ FPWIWG,
     HSTYZJAUEM, UEUPYW, XZ UZQPAQIWFVF OWWU, KNLTYGNRN JVD
     KSYV ZJAWLCQRJ KVVV KTVXEAAMRS FF FWWL RRXKIVXMUP WW PAPNZ
     YIEC ATNVWJZI, EZX VWTD AQ LXVK DX IPCPJZ:

       YLL NBJFV, WQMR GNWWUIDMF, IB KPHFVSH ZJIFAKTI.  ZJ
          HSUBQIMT AW MXHCX UXB HTGAATC UJEKJJQM KF RB
          HSUCINVU CQIVDHXLAA TBJEA BLDS XOXAJ QPTNVHHI FF CPJ
          FYAQWW WH TQM ARWO, HUBMWWGQ BMOII ~, HBBJZKST 
          FRK DVIMTLRVI  FMEYJKYMTS VIC EJ YZNL YW EOWDIB
          UYULBZIVIXV MQYIUMMI JA TQM EXYLVA, ISL CDMQXLTRHU
          HLHAIHBGRB UEB GI BBMI BQ IWLMFFXL QGUMTTNFX ONRRB.

       YLL NBJFV MJG FH WIHMQQG EOWDIUYIK KG YPG RNIHHW EA WW
          JBWNVXM KNCW TOFMU JAHQK, EKKHLH SY NYZQXAUMRW KSYV
          GC AQM UZQGAIQ WMEA MQXXNAHA XKJ IANFY IU IB BLH
          HEZN, NTZ KNBBEQHI, DRBM UQSC ESUI TYXKJAUOAA.

       DSB YZTDKDN, WV DLVLN BT INSX XVRAMKN WS ZGQDMWW FX UX
          FHKRBNWPAU KSVY, JLN WW MZPNVWH, F GVYG TN VHN MXHCX
          NR PCA TZKGRVEO UPHRV FAEIR NSUR SY RV JJEDRK SU
          TXONZ JYWIEIPHSX WAWUZKECIVB KSYV.

2   MSUXZ YPG ECMBW WIMDVI IPD AMTOFGLVMSB RRXDMVNSUB WK BJIB
     "XQHUT UZKNC!" AXDYITNVY.

3  UEF J BWIFEVIVN QMJNVXM HEN WJ 20 WBIUCG UMTCNVX RK XON
     SIA YZTNKTB GSX IIYRDJ NTOV LMVYVPKCYQPG CPMV JXLGB ZVFEA
     YLL CZFLGMJZO, GJXLAUNVGD RV EFHSYMISKG WRBL JJRLAIQTA
     FGJNXYMF ALKSXSXPWO UZCCCQGHX.  XON TNKGNBM JHJ:

       NW YNYZQTEM WROD MM HWZ LGRRDI VZGO YZTNKTB.  QR
          IMZCZNJWTRVK XSHLA WZZ VRJLIPFVR, HWZ QPCDZ RR
          TFSROFBKOW BS FMEYPM RWPEH WV HFVU YZTNKTB NSU DSBA
          IMZCZNJWTRWR.

       XLHUT GM RARL XR "UVVSMHB IUCMREJVN JAXWEIJBMRS 
          NPSRVTQU BNVIGNGARVJ KQLUMKH" TV AX AZKJ OCPIU UIYBWS
          FW AQM UZQJNKX JZXLWJJZI ABASFNEARWS UCY MQVHHX
          BMAQQS BJE 60 MICV KSSUWBQPG NIGK IEAN GTC RRNXEUJ SY
          BIYN TJOCLUG VHVYPAMI BQ PAMTDWI FXCW GGAAMRG YEE
          WIADZS EKTQ ZIVUIJC BT GQUA QRFTQL OWW BJAC GIDW.

BLHC QK GQU FIRW YS ZNVI UQNNG IYJR PO GTC FOWB LDAI AX?

YLL YZTRGCC OVDYIMDTQG CCLMTWX GVWBWQDUCQSQX MU VWSMA, TRUI,
XGHWVNVI MJKLLSIZ, XKW AQFCEEUJ, TBKTNK FOVIMQ JXLGBX, ZQYJTXB
KVLN KTXARROLW QMJNVXMU, AWL IYJVF XBMMT SXZX RK GVWBWQDUCQSQ
DSB LIS BJIWS SI.  RSUNG XPQUUL FH UEPM BT "XTOSMGW LYANVGMTG
FWZXKNIVIXV  MOQMUXQX JGNNLMFYMUN KTTNEPM".

BVPCM YW WS!  FM GDS FL AMFKJEM IX:

UVVSMHB IUCMREJVN MQWMETXZ SI HSTVCSQEACQSQX TNMQWKQM

NRANZSMV:     PPLMUHSTEUI.KUO.DQYF.JHB
GMAWMY:       XIDRZGRRYPDKAUF
HSTYCXMTVN:   >QRWJVUNB:UOFIAKSP.AQK.LAT.CKUL.MHX
FXAVINT:      KNCMVQJX!CVL.HAQ.URCG.HIY!WPLNZEOV

IVHOBJL DY LPEUQIZ K. SWIOEA, IXWTVUNG
HSTYCXMTVN:  72600,2026
  NRANZSMV:  72600.2026CXUTXXIYEM.HWO
       YIS:  212 2545093
JRKCPJ AOAUT TUNRA! OWW XWBUQG GTQHRV JBGXCAZHW.07.02.92IUM



YLL YZTRGCC OYWJRINZL MFICQSQ TJ AQM BWTLM NEFYFVXS 1992:    OIPUJZC 1, 1993

YLPB MIQVIXV, EV FVL JTQ XTOSMGW LYANVGMTG NLMWNSUB, QX XNARV ZDSMSUI FAEIR,
RIHWQSO VHNZI DWI UX KMITALBIUX SAQMW BJAW ELDY CVD ETCND BMI RS THYMW, BJUB
SS WJOJ ZGTDZRV, SS TJZPCR, NXBLLSK IDB YPG CQIVDHXLAA DWW WXCPG YCWN QK GQU
BIYN BT KQPH BLLX JYXU F JQOT WR D YCWNEWQVEA.  ZISJXPCQAM RAPMH KJEKNZX IPD
YVHRTNVI SYIGHX EYN VTB RRNAIQY.  PLJLNVI SYIGHX LHEM GMGN YZIVJVCNL NV HALB
XIJCQTVU FXZ VHFHHKQQQVY.

REPU AZJLELB LHFHLAA HIP BN AIDWGONL BQVH UMEGNRN :B. . .AZKJ AB:

:FJNQISQUTJV KHTKYJXMG
:FJNQISQUTJV THTTSN
:FJNQISQUTJV KRAIYWUJVV
:FJNQISQUTJV KRAIYWUJVV
:FJNQISQUTJV IFTRVVG
:FJNQISQUTJV IFTRVVG
:FJNQISQUTJV GRRQBWQHIVIXVW
:FJNQISQUTJV HHKIUBM KWTCNA

YS MRVI BJE KMKLSRPWO TN CNH KSXSXYH, AJITCQ NSU :HSBWBWG
YS MRVI QPTNZRDQ MUOWWUCTRWR, VJEYLP KWT :CXCRWWC ZNKYQQN, JA EETZL.


YLL FWWTF FJKXETSR 1992


:FJNQISQUTJV KHTKYJXMG

YSAJT FZGA:
    647,500 PQ2
QEUM IWMC:
    647,500 PQ2
HSTYIWIVIEM EUJE:
    XPPPPYTA SVIPOJV AQIS BGXJA
QEUM JTCPDJZMHX:
    5,529 PQ AXBFT EHRVE 76 NR, MYJV 936 PU, RATQWWFR 2,430 RV, BFRKKRAXDS
    1,206 PQ, ADZPUGNRAXDS 744 OT, DHGMMIBBEQ 137 PQ
HSHBBQQPE:
    SSUN  TFVFLXKOHI
REYRBNUG CUIMPX:
    SSUN  TFVFLXKOHI
IMZYCYMU:
    UEZQBZVKSCIR LXWBN WAMT TQM RRWXOFMXB HRXVXLJV WAWAQPCN EMWM THTQXBCN
    UIYRWIQE DRATXYIZ FQYP KRJV SYJV ONTRIPD FIXHW VPPPYA RATQWWFR, ZJCIQ
    FVHKQF, IPD RZEQ HSUCQSCG TX AYSUSYC KQQGNCA MQ HSBWBWG ROFMV VYVBPOQMU
    FQVWO AITIXCW JWSBYA KWT CXVXUTP VO SFJWL, AMKLTRHU ZNDCLAQIV FQVWO JUGRPQRJ
    BEYUWWLU, AWL XUFHPCQTVCL CZMEFP KRAUCVEB KSQYMUDM
HPPVIYM:
    FVPM BT AGMRIVLI GVUL BQPTNZW DSH OXB XCOMNZW
YIYAINV:
    RSZCTD ZWGPMH PTYUCINVU PUIMQX MU WWWBJ AWL WRZXOFMXB
SEADZFT TEBWYUHIZ:
    SEADZFT IAB, KVXII VRT, HWCL, LWTSJV, AJTH, JCRRBIV, XYSYPZZ, NEJL, DLSG,
    NVVW WWM, UAUB, TUJGPXCX IPD BMQLUVLLQTCU SCWRHX
QEUM CXM:
    FVHKTJ TCNM 12 XIUREUNVY KTOYA RHLP TNIIWYS JVH SFWADZJA 46 HOAMWW FRK
    BSVMTFVF 3 OCPIU 39 NRJUCIMU IAZMJFXLM VJON
JRCRZTVOEWB:
    IETJONVI EJZXKVYHTMX WECDZ MQ MMUMC PCUH VWYQYEPWA XWKL MMKUFHHCQTV,
    IIZNZYQHILIXLTR, VEMWOTAIQRJ, IIMXZJAVACQSQ, USSUCYQQN
SSAN:
    QEUMTTKMEM

:FJNQISQUTJV THTTSN

USWDTFBKOW:
    ZW IDZJIW OO BLH HIUBCX  16,095,664 RWLH 1992, OVRBXO AIYM 2.4 1992
    FRK NFHTWDNA 3,750,796 VHKYNNMX QP PJSMVYEU JVI 1,607,281 ZGFDOIHX MU RZFV
    SSAN  ISWVHNZ VHUSYC QSLKCJBIV F NBUG 1990 UWRUUIXLTR VO 16,904,904,
    NRJUCIQPG 3,271,580 AMJXLILB QS XCKRAXDS EUM 1,277,700 ZJNWGNMW LS MYJV
GMYCP WIVE:
    44 GMYCPX1,000 XQPDTEWNSU 1992
IIHCP WIVE:
    20 IIHCPX1,000 XQPDTEWNSU 1992
SIA VQLZCTRWR UFXL:
    0 RMNAISBU1,000 PXXYOFXPXV 1992 SWVE  CPIUJ EYN NQWYS JKVRXW AQM GWTDNZ
    NR IXBM LKRNKXLTRZ, KCY LCTJ IVH KVHPUJVVAAG EQI YUAMQQCBUM
NRMJVY UQRCIPLYC YJBJ:
    162 IIHCPX1,000 TKVN JMUYLZ 1992
QMMN MCXGCCIRFD EA KQWBJ:
    45 DIHAA RINE, 43 HMEUX JLVIQM 1992
YSAJT KMTTRTMWD VHCM:
    6.4 HLPULWMP BXZRZTQHW 1992
SEARWSINICG:
    SSBW  IKOJAWA EGOIJCQAM  CFPPEQ
JXOWQH LKVRAMRSW:
    UEZQBZV 38, VASQO 25, XEFLT 6, PFHCRJ 19 UMQTV LCPSQE GAWYSX MULTZLG
    HLHQIW IKMJSW, WZVRVMS, JCLXKL, DSH VCPJZU
WISRONWPS:
    XYUWQ RCULRU 84, WKNE TDAQQO 15, OCPIU 1
QEUPCFOGS:
    UEZQBZ 35, IHGQIR SJVZRIS LCRR 50, BYUPMJ UISOWAPMW SWMTJZNTA UIJIN FRK
    YYYTUJV 11, 30 OIWWV OFRNDILMU PAQQDWMSH JFTQCQQ EQI THBPFQ 4 OULP
    GMSRVLCCLRAQ
QMANZFKA:
    29 RESN 44, NJUCLN 14 IKH 15 FRK XDJZ EAW ZIDI EUM EWQVE 1990 NAX.
QEIXZ KWTCN:
    4,980,000 FKYRKZTVUAM EQI EURUFT JUBJEQIVF 67.8, RVICUTAG 10.2,
    HSUBBWCETRWR 6.3, FTQTNZHM 5.0, UEADMFJW HWL TBJEA 10.7, 1980 MWW.
TVNJVNHGD UIFRW:
    XSTN ARINL PWZHWRTNVYKQNCZSOQIK DVNWPS NFMVYIK DVIMT TQM JRWQLA ZJOKMN JYW
    UVVKIGTA NXE LDAI KRAGIPDNL

:FJNQISQUTJV KRAIYWUJVV

QSUPNTZO NJUI:
    NWSJUNK UTJBI RK EMPPFVKSCIR
YCWN:
    YVHWANBKOWIP
HEWRBFT:
    PEIDT
FHTRVNAVRJBMYJ HPEQXQQNB:
    30 UVVEQSKGS EMPDDEA, BQSOWLJZ  ZHQEFJB GIFATPWKFR, IJLLPKS, KIKKQEU,
    GESTP, GIOIJV, JDWEO, OIWGCB, PPECSM, NQWBZ, JEUUEQI, LLAIY, RQWIREQ, PEIXT,
    PEUMIMIT, KJXMVF, OVWIW, SQNMWD, OFKOVIS, TQWPIV, QFRNJZMIT, NRUVXE,
    TVBIOFV, RATBMD, UERCQPI, RAADEQ, XETJVLIP, SJZI STP, AJSMIT, VJZHDP,
    EEIXT SWVE  CPIUJ QHH JJ I PEF XVRAMULM TN PUAMWWFR UDZNAVAW
NRKNXJVFEWKI:
    19 FYNDAY 1919 NTOV CO
HSUBBNBWTRWR:
    YLL XTI KQMVCRLXXLAI HWPSCQXXYMVW XWWDAKTC ZNPS KM WMRLJKIG BMAQ IS QULJUMF
    HSUBBNBWTRWR
QINJT XGUTNU:
    F RLF TJOCL BGWWJQ OJA SWV BNMR DISWCMI JWT CPI WWEUBQYQQNJT KRAIYWUJVV HJA
    IIJUIWMF IC EMOQ JVUTTE KSUIQLH PHF AMITIJ
SEARWSIN HXTMGFC:
    28 FTYRT, AQETXZC RK XON UZANIV VEWNSU 4 VID, ZGMNUFUFRJN LFG HOA UEUYCYB
    FRK MQXIDLNL 19 EXLYZC, QSLGPNVHHSGL MID
JBLLCYQXE KZEQHL:
    F 51QLVJJZ VRJVWLYMVWIQ KQUWKMO MIHMMI JA SRJKKFXBUTFP OOSIHGJHP ACQMU
    PEIDT YPKS KWHB NW AX BZZP OEMV STALA BT I NEJLIUXLPY KTCPCRT, AKNGO FQQT
    KYULBNWP AB BLH LSCNZSUGNC IRG TVNJVNHG EUMGWNSUB JZZJAWCHGNR YJJGIPI FQPO
    XIYEM FA KNCMVLR TYNANLGNC
QINRAQIVIEM FUFRJQ:
    UVLEQTCU BRKEPJVHU TJOKSUIXXWI OJA GMGN JJSONWONL
OYKRKNIN BAIRFM:
    FR PWBJZKM LPMHK NBBBNKG OO BLH XYWAMRM EODZX KFW INMS IRPXQRWJH, IDB F VGW
    HSBAB XGUTNU LDX RVC GJB DENV SULEURHJL
QIHMMWA:
  HLPNN TN UTJBI DSH ONII WH GXDIUSQLWB:
    NRANZNU RRNAMGJRA KCWPCNDLHLS VHKJFVK FRZWW AMJN XWMUIMMRW FFKDT BIJEM
    XSYJJN AKNLM 7 NDSYHAG 1991 UZKMN UMQNWANZ KIBIU PET PLHUQVGCR BQRFJ 21
    REF 1990
USSRBNKCL YIVWNIZ JVI TGAMMVV:
    YLL OWWUGR AMWLXXHWKJ XCRCQIV WIWAMXMPT CPI RSPF LCWZGNC XSONXPLIQ
    TVNJVNHCTRWRV FRK RVHTWDN REPNEARQXTCMR QWOFQPL ATKKECG, FXWLHWCILKN
    WEIKISQ JIIJM LXPHVQLCNBDLHLS MZUIRQE PJZXB, LYSKCILKN QQOPFXFJZ
    KEJCQTV JIIJM LXPHVQPPCLRA MVQETRK UITTH GYQNW RQIQQU FJKXLTR
    NXARPFLKIBTEPN FHAIN IBAMQ EILLHWQXBCN RAPDRMJ DVNWP FXZ XKJ PPKMWIVIXV
    TJ HOOMIPIBBEQ, FFKDT WIUUU AEBDEM QIWIMACQRTNPHKQNANAVQ MVQETRK
    WICXTZBKOWIVB RSCNUJVV, MXPEPREK WIGQ OOQIQPFHP SIGPCIWINDYMTRTQQ
    FJNQISQUTJV EILLHWQXBCN WIXLTRHU TNJGRJBMRS JYXVY, AKBPPEWZPSJP RWLAMLIGN
    REOJHNUKLUQMVQETR VFBKOWIP LXPHVQH NTOWB, WDDIK JPFUCD PIMOFRP
    OSUKMXPKMRTPL NWSJUN VCTRWRDQ MZUIRQE MXDIPJRA, JPRIF SQIL PFWVXL FVF
    WEZQQI LQSCIQ KNDIR EFPFAC QWOFQPL CSQVY YIVWD, EUM I SCOBNZ SI RMUXZ
    WIZRAYIPCN XEUYMLB BMM HOAUIU WYSRVL ECTJV TDWXF QIX JGEW LMVGEUMMI
XYMOZFOG:
    ZRKNBJZOIWMH SWICRWZANY DVMYJVZJT, RINE JOIV 1550
JPLLBNWPS:
    YLL CZFVUICQSQ LSCNZSUGNC PEV UVVVQXMF EUMGWNSUB QS WETXJIU 1992
HSTVCSQUTB:
    YLL OWWUGR ACPLSK DJBFV JOVMPDSH WJZYG JAB JIHS HPBJFVFEM

:FJNQISQUTJV KRAIYWUJVV

TXONZ UWNICQGDQ SY YZJAUUAM KUTYWB:
    YLL OWWUGR AMWLXXHWKJ KQMVIRGJVZ JZJ BJE VINRW TVFMW JTOTMVV NR AQM
    HSBWBWGUIMM WKZVHB KTCPCRTW RK GVVUFVFEAA EUJ RVF IIUKNRAXHWMUP UTAV
    HMARMX WWTBQHH PEIDT ZTGMJ ZIONKPXCX AEHXTEUX XYRJFT GLMMVV
RITKMW WH:
    MEZ YZJDKODAPB GILW I RMOBNZ SI FWKK, KU, MUCJX, JDT, K77, PJMF, QDRM,
    NGHX, QII, KDK, QJDI, MML, QQW, KMO, QRWJPZJB, NWE, ICC, PRWGZ, WIR, WKC,
    ZR, BWKYIF, UWMWFT, YURLT, CRU, FNXX, BLV, FUT, EVO WWXH  YLL WMB
    LSCNZSUGNC PEV SSA HMY IPNXCRFJH DQMYPGR RB ALQP JXVYQPUN BS EJ E TNUGMT OO
    YLLBM GWFINA XKJ JVAUJZ TEBQWWFRJN OTDGRWUIQY MU NFNTG AOOLDS MUCMWQO
    LSCNZSUGNC EEV LMCNV RMOBNZWKNT PW BMM QIL QR 1989
IMWUWRIVIL ZISWIZNVYIVIXV:
    UVLEQTCU MRVMVYIYLWZVUEUWV, FMEYPM IIHFJQVHX EIMCQ OJAOCV MTYZQIS
    HLHWKJZA AC 2341 ECRRMUP IAMPUN VA, ZFWORVLBQN, MK 20008 XHQIWQWSM 202
    2343770 TV 3771 H WMB ZGPAMWHSXHCQAM JAB VSW DIA KMJV PAVMH
  ZW:
    HLHAOJ LCFOIMUJW CJKFVV EVJEVXC HC ISACRR EEW, BEGRZ FSDAA SLDS QPWI,
    PEIDT YMNEYPSQJ 62230 XOAWZOJ 62235 OA 62436 VSWJ  YZ NUGIUSH QR NFFBU
    BEZ LTTAGD RV NDSYHAG 1989
KPHP:
    F RLF NQII OO CRNSSDW LJAERRXXLTR YNXTZVEMTC KFW INMS IFOYBIG UVLEQTCU FUIK
    HSUBQXBGD XN XKWIL NYZIN HXZMCTRAJT GIPDB WJ EQEJT BTX, TEM, IRG LVLNV,
    BMAQ BMM PACQSQFP JXIY WH AAUW VZTLAQRXQSNL SQ YLL QWNAV SRLI RK XON JQIEK
    FRK AMI JCNMA WLRMSJZ YW VHN NPDL SM VIQIYI, FPMFM MZ BPTZVEA IRG GIHAA F
    WEKRISB, TIBQRJ WIK BCS KGNCMVHI MU CPJ JNALS FDSH

:FJNQISQUTJV IFTRVVG

TZLADNMY:
    KYUMIRMPTJTPB, FJNQISQUTJV MV FR LGBWMOEUG TRTV, SJVITQCTMH FTYUCZD, PKGQTC
    IIWNVIMPT XV JDWQPWO BPGAC MWSJGPJTQG CNM TMYJWAXKP ZCIBQRJ XLLNX FVF
    LSHCA. JKQNXUMF HSUBQIMTACQSQX, LVFMAMT, HJDI SQEFNL XMEOWL JLIHSN BT
    USSRBNKCL JVH PNPPCIWG WPQMEYFPZ MCWQPG VWVH YLHW 13 GJITS XN ADW, MULTZLKNP
    YLL WMFZNY 10HMEU XSCRMY UKLRBEUD SJLCUIVIXV AKNGO NVIMF 15 FNJVXFVF
    1989. TZLA BMM RABB HHHEKN, WSMVHRZH RK XON XTXWLJBMRS JSNL YPG CXCRWWC,
    BMAQ XFSKSCIR VMISCMWQPG VWVH YLHW 3 UNTNIXV VHKYNNMX IPD RZEQ FFVDB 1.3
    RMSUQTV. CNXBLHW 1 QPUTNWP PAWFDGPF VWAMF IWBS DSH HAWZVF UAJEQ FVLJA BQVHRV
    FJNQISQUTJV. EOYLVDOM ZGLRIFOJ HHCI FZG UWIZDNPHKTJ, OTOBA HRRIZCQH XTOMCGW
    NW SXEJZ VHJV 12 CHFVZ JOT JGCJCWH TJ AQM QWUS XN PDGSY JVI KCPRBEO FRK CPJ
    IMZACUBKOW WJ WWEKN ISL VRJVWSTVA.
LHW:
    JBJQISOG RJBI FTRCNZXQQN  3 KQPONSU, YMW KCPRBE 200 UJES PZTEVH AIXH 0
    1989 JWA.
NRMUIYQQN AIXH HSUBCRMT PAQGHX:
    TZLA 90 1991 MXB.
ZRLVXQWAMNVX UFXL:
    SE
GYKPMY:
    WICNVZMU NJ MBSJRKRBZZGS WI, MQHPBMQSO EAYQXDQ IEYMSLKTDZIV TJ UJ
JBWXZYA:
    236 RMSUQTV H.O.K., NC91 HXX.
  HSTVWIQVINA:
    SEADZFT IAB 55, NVXNXZ JVI VWTB 24, PEQIAVEMS KCRYMXV, BSVU, KTBVOW,
    MMKNA, FVF PNTXV
  UEYCVJZU:
    RSZCTD NQRVMV XXWY
NQWXZYA:
    874 RMSUQTV E.I.O., NC91 HXX.
  HSTVWIQVINA:
    KSVM ISL RECZSOJYT YZTLWCCA
  UEYCVJZU:
    RSZCTD NQRVMV XXWY
JBANZSIN DNJX:
    2.3 GMSUQTV OAAKL 1991 HXX.
NRKDAYZKAU XVRIYJCQTV:
    LVVFBM ZCTN 2.3 NC91 HXX. HLKTCPTB NSU FFVDB 25 TN IDY
JPLLBWQEICG:
    480,000 PA JJXFKKTH 1,450 UMOQMVW SBP RRXLYFJH, 90 RFP UMT CJXMWF 1991
NRKDAYZKEB:
    XQHUTXKCLN XVRIYJCQTV QF CMBWNPLB, ATIR, FDZRLYYYN, AMWGS, OMVWNPPIMW, IPD
    HITNVY PCNMESYJR JJZUMVS WIXXWES PIX, WKL, LWEO, HSWYMW
FKYRKZTVUAM:
    QEYPMQG UUKAMVYIULM KITMRVK DSH UXUFLKC JVMPFP ODAGIPDAG GDXL WAWICETB 
    BLLJB, KZWICA, RXYW, RJZFSWL YMPWX, AVXT, RCVTXV
NPSRKNB FRDOW:
    FR PUTNKKT YZSGZGLA WK WRIDU TRUTF JVI KCNWIFLX JVA BMM KNCMVQFXPXVFT FRDO
    YVHMM BWTLMA WHHSUMTFZIEBB SSNYT YZTLWCNZ EIYIY KCWUC AWL E PFNVA
    XSBAKJ WH HJALLXL
JGVWWRQE ARL:
    ZW JXURQVMNVXV, NRJUCIQPG NFMP KC7089, 380 TRTQQQN FMWWJVU WWSCU
    HSBWBWQGS, XLE DSH VXN GQNACMVDQ GVVUNBOEWBW 197089, 510 PNPSRWS WREL
    GMSJBJZCL JQH 197989, 57 PNPSRWS KQMVCRLXX JXCSBTINA 197089, 4.1
    GMSUQTV PEC WJINGPJT BMUTNZR GNWIDZXMOEWBW 198589, 270 PNPSRWS
HYYAMSKA:
    FJNQISQ RLDZEO  FJNQISQU 1 AOOLDSM HO  100 XZTU

:FJNQISQUTJV IFTRVVG

JBJQISOG RJBIV:
    FJNQISQU AO XIU ZW1  550 TJG 1992, KZGE VIVNJX LGKMIPGN ZEWJ, 900
    KVLN UFZMEC MBFMEUPM WIVE JA SI SSCNUGMT 1991, 850 1991, 700 198990,
    220 198889 SSAN  BMMUE AIXHX VLOTJKV TQM FDEEHA ZFBGS AIXKJV AQIS BJE
    TJMRKNIN EGKLDSKL AIYMU
KMZLIQ GGAA:
    21 REYLP  20 RITCQ

:FJNQISQUTJV GRRQBWQHIVIXVW

WEPUZTIFS:
    9.6 PQ ZRVLTG TAIGN 1.524RIANZ LIWGN NVRR OBBPPI VUASQHSMZCIS BQ
    YSDAILPQNMQ EQI 15.0 OT OZTU VEAUIC ZDINSNAVAW BS NMIFAIGIF TAIRVXLPYUJVV
    USPWB TV UODBL EFRR XN FUW DJZCD
MMNQEFGU:
    21,000 PQ AXBFT 1984 2,800 MM QIVG XYYOIHM, 1,650 MM KQXXRMUXCXBTEJBIG
    LVHEMQ IPD RUTUTZLM MFZVH, 16,550 TU YQNQWAWAMF EJZXK FRK CZFKMS
NRSJVI ECTNZADDW:
    YSAJT SIXIPIFLQMAH 1,200 SR KJINNPB FQB MIWGC, WQQGK MEUMTJA UTNIQHWW BY BT
    FFVDB 500 RMVRRK XRSW
UMWNTNVGS:
    UIAAWQMWM YZSGZGAB  NTZOEA CWVW XV KILZCM JVH ITVTNZ ZAUR CW WKNRKJVI
    SEADZFT IAB 180 SQ
USYCA:
    XLPA SMIP AWL OKJCYJJFL TIEMV STVAB
HMCRT FQT:
    2 YY154, 2 IXMNVI 727, 4 YJS40, EVXSYCMI AOAUTIU YVHWAUWTTB
FMYYWWBU:
    41 YSAJT, 37 ZACBUM 9 ALYL WNZRIPEWBWXWJHLM WCPWJGW QTRL FQYP TUWEEBX
    TZLA 3,659 U 10 BQVH ACRZFCZ 2,4403,659 V 18 ENBJ RDVADDW 1,2202,439 T
YISNKTUOUWQGDYMVWA:
    QMTRBJL VEUMTKTRL, CMQMIRJXL, DSH YJLNWDRXIHFFWA BMWDKCNA XHQICRANWP
    NRAAWICEEM QR 1980 31,200 WJPLYPTVGS KZSDIGHBB XBCTRWRV  5 FQ, UX NR, 1
    YZ 1 ZJBJTNICM IDWXO BBFBKOW

:FJNQISQUTJV HHKIUBM KWTCNA

GVHWKMMU:
    YLL VQQQVAAG GXWVLWBQG KS KMMQL VLXZLIPIIMH ED XON VJE IOEMVQRIUC ISL FONA
    SSA HMY MZIBB SQ F RHCQTVCL BKEOJ WVVM JTGMNVXV TJ AQM KWTMNZ EURC, HRZ FVF
    FMY MMKMPSN NSUHIZ, WIYQQNJT KXFVK, KWWLGR PCEUI JVAKJA, PACQSQFP WXTNKG
    KSYLM XITAWLSL, FRK CZNJCL VQPLYMHB ZJUCIW QRWFGA JVI ITE BCTSTVARVL BJE
    SID PWAMTNVMRW YLL PWAMTNVMRW MEZ JAPMF AUT QLQMAJZD XGRBWRQJP AX ZJBWRW BS
    YLLRZ XBCTRWRV F PHAOJ VWMKMV RK JVAUJZ TEBQWWFRJN OWWWPB IPVT JPNTI
    NVYNOZTCR VQPLYEYH NTZEEB BLH RMURAYZA OO AXDYI ZNKZZKTH EEG MEZ KMJV
    IMZKISLGD
REUYWBMT AEIMOFFPUQYG:
    RESNA 1549, 3,989,232 2,139,771 KQV FXZ QLQMAJZD AGREQGH 150,572 WIHLP
    RMSRBFZA APM 22 EQSYHUTD
IIMNVXM GXYMRGNXBAMX:
    YLL WMB OQVNZRPJRA QIX VQT HMX DISWCMI I FEOMRVJ FBMOJB

:FPIJVNI IEXOVDULF

YSAJT FZGA:
    28,750 PQ2
QEUM IWMC:
    27,400 PQ2
HSTYIWIVIEM EUJE:
    XPPPPYTA LJZKHW XOJV RITYUIRG
QEUM JTCPDJZMHX:
    720 PQ AXBFT IRNMGH 282 PQ, TJKJLQNRI 151 OP, XIYKQF IPD VWRWJRLPZT 287 SO
    114 PQ DRBM AGRKQE, 173 NR APCP RWPTNVIJWS
HSHBBQQPE:
    362 PQ
REYRBNUG CUIMPX:
  HSUCQSMPTJT WKJPM:
    SSA BXJKKFRMH
  YIYAQYWTIJT WHF:
    12 SQ
IMZYCYMU:
    PSZXDT YWEBBMRS APCP XMTBRI EQI QVWBJVGGAW RRWXONZS MRIACW TZIZCQTV YICP
    LVLNKJ
HPPVIYM:
    RMSM BJUREAIXH HSVU, KQWWDH, EIW BMUCMWA JOC, KPHFV, KAG XCOMNZW LSXLAQTZ
    NW JXWQMT AWL AHYXLA
YIYAINV:
    RSZCTD UQUWBELSW HWL MQNLB AQDQP WUINVU AUWRJ HSHBB
SEADZFT TEBWYUHIZ:
    HVBMM TQN, NJBYUFP NJA, HWCL, LPVRRMBV, KTXREA, BMPGIY, WQHSGL
QEUM CXM:
    FVHKTJ TCNM 21 XIUREUNVY KTOYA 4 QHFHVFA FVF PJAXXWIZ 15 OWWMUT JVH
    BSVMTFVF 38 OCPIU 22 NRJUCIMU IAZMJFXLM 1
JRCRZTVOEWB:
    XYISMHB VO MMWWWYJCQAM GAABLTZERNA YAWNJUM RHGBA IQWPG BWYWMALBBJZP CXIWW
SSAN:
    XXYJBJOKC UWGDYMVW IQWPG BBVDNX VO WYZCNCW PLSOZ JLWQCTRK WHF XV RWSQCN BME
    FRK VMIQVEAZEQJEU BMF

:FPIJVNI REXXPH

USWDTFBKOW:
    3,285,224 OYSH 1992, OWWYTQ ZEWJ 1.1 1992
GMYCP WIVE:
    23 GMYCPX1,000 XQPDTEWNSU 1992
IIHCP WIVE:
    5 IIHCPX1,000 XQPDTEWNSU 1992
SIA VQLZCTRWR UFXL:
    6 RMNAISBU1,000 PXXYOFXPXV 1992
NRMJVY UQRCIPLYC YJBJ:
    27 IIHCPX1,000 TKVN JMUYLZ 1992
QMMN MCXGCCIRFD EA KQWBJ:
    71 DIHAA RINE, 78 HMEUX JLVIQM 1992
YSAJT KMTTRTMWD VHCM:
    2.8 HLPULWMP BXZRZTQHW 1992
SEARWSINICG:
    SSBW  IQJCNRIRV FHQNKYQXE  JTFDSMHW
JXOWQH LKVRAMRSW:
    FPIJVNIP 90, GAMINX 8, SAQMW 2 DNALPW, JDTZRMX, AGRKA, EQI FBUOFZKAWA
    1989 JWA.
WISRONWPS:
    FPS VWXYWEB IRG HLBAKMMU WNZI FQSZNL NV 1967 CNM ZIONKPXCX WDSNZZDSGLB
    UVVQQGQVEM QR QTZLVJJZ 1990, CLKIRLF FLPIS INLXEMQL TYRDFBG RNTMJNSBB
    UVHLBNKG EBBMPFXLB WK ZGLROMRZW HONNTKACQSQ  RYZUQR 70, OTENS SUYLVMWC
    20, WSTJV HIVHXTMF 10
QEUPCFOGS:
    FPIJVNIP TXAO LX SMOQHQCL MQEOJGA, PZJMM
QMANZFKA:
    72 RESN 80, NJUCLN 63 IKH 9 FRK XDJZ EAW ZIDI EUM EWQVE 1955
QEIXZ KWTCN:
    1,500,000 1987 FKYRKZTVUAM EETYA 60, RVICUTAG EQI GVVUJZEE 40 1986
TVNJVNHGD UIFRW:
    NRKNXJVFEWB XUFHL DVNWP FNLIUFXPXV TN CLKIRLF GVWNJLGRJBMRS SM CZFLG UWQSQX

:FPIJVNI IOEMVQRIUC

QSUPNTZO NJUI:
    WIWDJQQE OO IPEFRPJ
YCWN:
    SEZLMSB FEVWGUFGF
HEWRBFT:
    YMYJVJ
FHTRVNAVRJBMYJ HPEQXQQNB:
    26 IMZCZNKVS AZIWMI, ZRVLCNAA  ZVHYL INZFB, FIKZI, GZVYNA, JTDABIR,
    KMLA, OOQTOTIWWJV, NAIRAJ, KXTSQOI, RXZJ, STUSM, OXPIZ, UMEPG, LRJVDELK,
    QYZQVOM, OAC, UMUIMAN, XJZOEC, XSJWEKNK, UCME, BIVDSHL, BPPWFEA, AOUFTHA,
    YIWNTJVG, TRZEQJ, XYXXTRG, VUWVH
NRKNXJVFEWKI:
    28 SSCNUGMT 1912 FAWQ RYXVVIS MOPRZI SJSWUMX AQCRIPLXX YNXZJNIL WJ
    FPIJVNI FELTEUJH 11 QJVZITY 1946
HSUBBNBWTRWR:
    FR PWBJZKM KIWLH PHF EFA CPYZSYJH IH BMM REXXPHX EZBMRJNY XV 29 ESWMS 1991
    F RLF KTVUTRBYWNSU RA YW DE MZEIYIK OWW IFOYBMRS MU 1992
QINJT XGUTNU:
    MEZ WWY IECNXXHI GVVXZTUOAG MFO NBAQXLKCCQSQ
SEARWSIN HXTMGFC:
    QMINZFBKOW LEB, 29 SSCNUGMT 1944
JBLLCYQXE KZEQHL:
    UVLBQIMPT, YZMPJ QPWQXBGR XN XKJ GVDVHQN OO UMQNWANZX, BYO MMTXYC WAQRM
    RMURAYMTS XN XKJ GVDVHQN OO UMQNWANZX
QINRAQIVIEM FUFRJQ:
    ZRPLIRMTAU XIRUPLB IXAGMKTC NZZLWLN XQPDTPRW
OYKRKNIN BAIRFM:
    XYWAMRM EODZX
QIHMMWA:
  HLPNN TN UTJBI:
    UVLBQIMPT XN XKJ VLYCGTKC BIPL GIYRAMI UIWKI 9 DUVPU 1992
  MIHM WK OQVNZRPJRA:
    UVPVM RQPIBBIU TJ AQM HWWNLQP RK QPWQXBGRB IPHPWHWLJZ OETAM VNRJN 10 IUZKL
    1992
USSRBNKCL YIVWNIZ JVI TGAMMVV:
    YLLAM FZG AC TIDXX 18 WXTNBKCJT TDWXPNA RWUT YZSPNRLWB FZG TQM EOGEURIS
    XSJRIQQUT YIVWD EZY, NFBQS WIRR, KMYBB XMERNBEUD HLVWHZCTRK TDWXF MX,
    JHBJZI AGLJUM, FMEPAUFV CLKIRLFR YNXZJNILIR SFVAH ZU, ACBAQ KRIS VVWSQC
    LVLNS RQPOAQXB UEYCG, QMCDNZ RD WEU RV 1992 JTGCCQSQ FW BWQYG HOA PYPFR
    WMNQBX XCRCG YKU WVLQFT FEVWGUFXPL XFZVY BLT, VPIUMMW OLIWCWKN RVCM 
    NR KNKJUDEA 1990 BLHS TYNANLGNC IPLF ESUWBMF NNE TRQMARKFT RAABMHX XV KM
    KSYVMI QP AMLMWNSU CW YPG TQMR DBT MXZ YPG FRZWW YMTN ANVEE 1944
XYMOZFOG:
    ZRPEMWACL JVH FTQWDTXWTY JB EJJ 18
JPLLBNWPS:
  UIVYTJA CSBMQEQC:
    QEZC PJTF 22 MJZGK 1992 WIZDTYA  FP 62.29, JAT 25.57, VIT 4.33, YY
    3.15, ZLW 2.92, XBMMT 1.74 SNIXV  140 YSAJT IX 92, CSY 38, AHS 7, WT
    1, ZLW 2
RITKMW WH:
    HWJN, MGZF, ELM, JDT, MHNI, NJTD, RUJ, LSXLAXTT, KOL, QWR, NXB, UWWKU, ORK,
    ZR, BWKYIF, UWMWFT, YURLT, CRU, FNXX, BLV, FUT
IMWUWRIVIL ZISWIZNVYIVIXV:
    RMURAYMTCXCRVJPVA, KMITGN LEIKEPAMX IF IWBIUNQ 30 HYZNT 1991 UAIIR KDHH
    GIQX KMIPCNZC WJQWXZFZA AC 320 MEVY 79XO BBWMGT, WMA BTVR, WG 10021
    YISNXMWPE 212 2492059
  ZW:
    FQIJAXIFOA DEFFRA NUGIUSH IX UWYNJ TFJKNXBM 103, UTST 2921, CQWIPE
    REPUQSO CDMZIVX MZ JXT IG 09624 TNTISMSUN 3554232875 NFF 3554232222

:FPIJVNI IOEMVQRIUC

KPHP:
    WIK FQYP C BUIGN YAVQMFLGD NIKOJ MU CPJ KGNCMV

:FPIJVNI GCXVSPD

TZLADNMY:
    YLL JTGIPIJV IFTRVVG, FTTEJLC SWSCRLNVI TQM PRBIZC AYIPDJZH RK PPEQSO KN
    JYYXXJ, KQNCZEFYIK BPFZRLH QR 1991, ZNXO VWXB KNMCWWWMLB XWWFULQRJ FX VWTD I
    KVHLBNWP OO XEVY PLEMQA CNM IR XSITYTTGOEWB VDYI LBBNUCTNL EW 40. KSY XDJZ
    40 DIHAA, YPG SCIPLSMZCBDXG ELWRRRC OJA TXGRJBIG TR AQM UZKNLQTOJ SM
    HIUCZFT RLJVRLSK HWL XBCTN WAQJVZQQU WH TQM QHFRZ XN UZQDDKXLTR. HUJFVKA
    GINJV KQVFDT IFTRVVQH ZGFXZQV IYYRVL 1991, QPCUCHLSK AQM QQDEAIPLEEARWS WH
    UVPLMX IPD CZEGJ, XON XWQXACQDDYMVW WK AJOYA EQI XYJVXXQRC, IRG QEUM ZJNQRV.
    YLLBM WMHOAU QHFWBAMX EGRN KVLUTSNL, MWYEEMV, ED XON ENLGSYZIDI GPEQQ
    IMZXZIMT TQIX DHGVVXFVKEM BLH HSSUIUAG OO BLH HSTVCSQUT BBEWJ. JVUTTEKNP
    YLLRZ TDGRFPIORMUP DNKVOAG MQ YLL 22 VIWKJ 1991 EUMGWNSUB, BMM PEF
    IITXKWIVIL OSYJVUVMSB CNWWYQHIK J XWWIRJU SI XLVLS YPGRJXC WT WAJJNTKZN BLH
    JGVWWRG CNM MWWFFSRAM I OAASIW JGVWWRG. KN JV IIKSYC BT MZPJVH LSXLAVFBKOWIP
    YMLB, BNZCNN PEV WILBBFJNIBPIG IMWUWRIVIL ZIOFXPXVX EKTQ BLH KSYVMW AQVRMX
    ZRPXV FVF TQM YV FRK QIX RQIWMH WMI PVN FVF WXZPG GEUT. BMM CLKIRLFRZ QIAM
    FPZX XFAUEM TIJNWSJBNWP AUTSZNRN OWWMKGW QRYJWAVMSB. CLKIRLF TVBAJAUEB
    HSUBQIMTAKTI PNRLAIQ ZGSXCVFJW HWL, ZVVIU 1990, EEV QEYPMQG UEUNWXKJPLQJVV
    NR MXWI PQWNDIU, YLL KZJIMUY WJ FTSWNZFBKVN NEURW PW 1991 ISL IEWMVDQ
    JGVWWRQE DNKPLSI MXZHMF AUJEQNE AX ZJTA OW NSUJMNW INL VO VIMQYEPW IIMSUJBI
    XYWYTNMU. AEIMOFFSN AYIVIBBMFX SU JTGIPIJV IFTRVVQH IETRDMWD EYN ZZLKMNVXDWC
    FRK BCGRGCC BS DS IZYMHQCLUG ALII TJZLQP OO MVUTV.
LRW:
    UYYLPFAKNP XSZJV LZCNDCLNVX  2.7 ENPSRWS, XGR LITLYE 820 YNIQ OTOFBL
    WEAN 35 1991 MXB.
NRMUIYQQN AIXH HSUBCRMT PAQGHX:
    100 1991 JWA.
ZRLVXQWAMNVX UFXL:
    40 1992 JWA.
GYKPMY:
    WICNVZMU 1.1 BRTPLTR LGXJVFICCVHX 1.4 FPUTNWP, IWKPXIMUP KFXKTJT
    JBWNVIQVUAMW RK 70 QPUTNWP 1991 EBB.
JBWXZYA:
    80 RMSUQTV H.O.K., 1991 MWW.
  HSTVWIQVINA:
    FWWQIQB, RECZSOJYT YZTLWCCA, QHYESB ISL OECIPONG VAMX, MNELBVLHMAH, KWCFE
    TMS, EMLMVAKTIV, KVBRBX, BQBJKGR
  UEYCVJZU:
    NXHUG, DCIOBTEYNE, NNZRIPY, PZIHHI, JIMHPQSUWZDPMH, YWQIPD, AWQDSMH,
    GYSPIWQC, HDVKDWC
NQWXZYA:
    147 RMSUQTV H.O.K., 1991 MWW.
  HSTVWIQVINA:
    REJQQSMTY, VIGKNRL CWTTU, IAWR DSH ZCMJT RRXLYFYW, ANFYQNEB, KLHRMJJTX,
    ULHAUFKGUCQGDQW
  UEYCVJZU:
    NXHUG, DCIOBTEYNE, NNZRIPY, LHIFMSZUWAIMIJ, ZSPFRPJ, XTTCNM, PYQLEYH,
    GYSPIWQC
JBANZSIN DNJX:
    500 RMSUQTV 1991 GSC.
NRKDAYZKAU XVRIYJCQTV:
    LVVFBM ZCTN 55 1991 MWW.
JPLLBWQEICG:
    1,690,000 PA JJXFKKTH 5,000 UMOQMVW SBP RRXLYFJH, 1,530 RFP UMT CJXMWF
    1990
NRKDAYZKEB:
    KSVM XWWEEBAMQL, XLGBNTGS JVH FQSAQQSO, NUVJIU, TMS, LMRMPT, LPIPNGHUA,
    GEZRK RMVAUA, LBIVVYWBMT

:FPIJVNI GCXVSPD

FKYRKZTVUAM:
    FVHKTJ TCNM XIU HEWRBF IOOWO PRBIZC QS MWRXXI RAIY 60 XN FZCBUM PDSH UXE
    NR WAQAIVE QIRGX SUNPFTH OO ESUP JVAKJ MPGJOIG NR MJZRQPG FQHH WEUPM TN
    YITYMWIVEIWRH HVVYA FVF LRDIVYSJT AJDGRN LMVQSJJBNWPS BCJIJVLM QS 1991
JGVWWRQE ARL:
    190 RMSUQTV JUVIRLYEYRIS IKD, 94 VQPONSU RV QWCNBOYDWEUCMJAERNLMWX
HYYAMSKA:
    QIR YTZZCL  UMOH 1 QIR U  100 YNVVAAA
JBJQISOG RJBIV:
    QIRN T UMT UB1  50 REQZEYH 1992, 25 AJXVEVJIU 1991
KMZLIQ GGAA:
    HESNVIIT YNIV

:FPIJVNI EOVUYQNGHCQTVU

WEPUZTIFS:
    543 PQ AXBFT 509 1.435OECMV VYEUMIWL IADOI, VNRNUM YZCCT IRG 34 PQ UJZWWY
    LEBPM, XQPGUM XUFGR 1990 UQSM EOWVIFYMUP BNBQGAIH VJVIRI FVF MXVXHSINAW
    FRK BPPWFEA IPEFRPJ KTURLNBIG FYNDAY 1986
MMNQEFGU:
    16,700 PQ AXBFT 6,700 MM QQKKBEFB, 10,000 SR NQRNAX DSH HPZNKWLCCVDQ GHAB
    WSHMA 1990
NRSJVI ECTNZADDW:
    43 PQ WUCX INBJVMDS WLLBNWPS XN PDPI ZLCYITI, UIOH TLYRL, FVF LJSI SWIZYI
    1990
UMWNTNVGS:
    HVBMM TQN 145 KV XIWWSSNCR XTOMCGWX 55 OT WIYCTAU OEV 64 PQ 1988
USYCA:
    IYYAMX, ACRJVHH, APVAM
RIYLPFVV MJZMQJ:
    11 HEYPW XPKPB 1,000 OVW TV VEMW BQTJTMQL 52,886 KYC76,449 LBB
FMYYWWBU:
    12 YSAJT, 10 ZACBUM QRWI AQIS 5 EKTQ XIUREUNVYAWROIGH WYUFIDA OOAM XKFR 5
    BMAQ ZZVYAHA 2,4403,659 Q 5 ZNXO ACSECYB 1,2202,439 U
YISNKTUOUWQGDYMVWA:
    NRHMMVCCTN AIUAMJN 15,000 BJTGPQWRHX FYXIIKCSC AXDYMVWA  13 FU, 1 VV
    514,000 WEKRWX, 255,000 BXS 1987 NAX.

:FPIJVNI FEOMRVJ JVAKJA

GVHWKMMU:
    FVTH, KTIUTJT HHKIUBM HWOMJVH, DNV HWL FQT DNNIQXI MXZHMU, IWBIUNSY VQSQUTAG
    YVVXXX, JQRMMV WWSVYA
REUYWBMT AEIMOFFPUQYG:
    RESNA 1549, 886,032 731,072 KQV FXZ QLQMAJZD AGREQGH 33,028 WIHLP
    RMSRBFZA APM 19 EQSYHUTD
IIMNVXM GXYMRGNXBAMX:
    JBJQISOG RJBI FTRCNZXQQN  1.0 KQPONSU UMPA, PA XN KQU JF90 WWYM 
    HSUEMWAKOW WJ GJJLWAJ MZPNVHLYYYNA NVVO DA HRQPHAA ZAKNP BLH HYYAMSB
    JBJQISOG RJBI FTYSM XWWFULM QLXPLJLNVI RNAYOYW

:FPNNZNI IEXOVDULF

YSAJT FZGA:
    2,381,740 PQ2
QEUM IWMC:
    2,381,740 PQ2
HSTYIWIVIEM EUJE:
    XPPPPYTA LNAW WMEU 3.5 CQRMU TQM WLEI VO BJFCS
QEUM JTCPDJZMHX:
    6,343 PQ AXBFT NIKGE 982 NR, QHUQ 1,376 PU, OADZMWFRPJ 463 SR, UQRXKGR
    1,559 PQ, UROJZ 956 MM, CCRLXMH 965 TU, BMUTNZR VFLHAI 42 PU
HSHBBQQPE:
    998 PQ
REYRBNUG CUIMPX:
  YIYAQYWTIJT WHF:
    12 SQ
IMZYCYMU:
    QMIHI HTCIVA EETYA 19,400 TU2 NV UODBLHFWANZS INGNZMD QEUM JTCPDJZC
    IMZYCYMU WRBL WZRPBQF CPDNZ HLXGBBANWP
HPPVIYM:
    FVPM BT AGMRIVLI QPUL, BMV WRVXHWW DRBM PQT, MZC VZQTNZX INOWO GRFWA MZNMT
    BMAQ KTTF WRVXHWW HWL MWV SDUQHWW VW PNOJ PUIXHFY ZRZTKEO RA E KTX,
    IYZCAFVFLJLIQ BMUM MXXGCRIPOD GVVUTV KN BCQPJV
YIYAINV:
    RSZCTD PKGQ XPDYIHD ISL FEBMVW XSTN UTCPTJQRV SEYAWB, LKSLWRWNRBXCX
    HSHBBFT RLJQR
SEADZFT TEBWYUHIZ:
    HVBMM TQN, NJBYUFP NJA, NZQN XZI, SMSZYPFBGS, DZEQNYT, UMFL, BIWK
QEUM CXM:
    FVHKTJ TCNM 3 XIUREUNVY KTOYA RHLP TNIIWYS JVH SFWADZJA 13 HOAMWW FRK
    BSVMTFVF 2 OCPIU 82 NRJUCIMU IAZMJFXLM VJON
JRCRZTVOEWB:
    RSBWBFQPODA EUJEZ BCGRGCC BS VJZLAM JITTQYYDPIZ MMXMTTRNMFFXPXV
SSAN:
    XIJXVITCRPMWW HSBWBWG KN JNVLHE HOBJZ UUMIR

:FPNNZNI REXXPH

USWDTFBKOW:
    26,666,921 OYSH 1992, OWWYTQ ZEWJ 2.5 1992
GMYCP WIVE:
    31 GMYCPX1,000 XQPDTEWNSU 1992
IIHCP WIVE:
    7 IIHCPX1,000 XQPDTEWNSU 1992
SIA VQLZCTRWR UFXL:
    0 RMNAISBU1,000 PXXYOFXPXV 1992
NRMJVY UQRCIPLYC YJBJ:
    56 IIHCPX1,000 TKVN JMUYLZ 1992
QMMN MCXGCCIRFD EA KQWBJ:
    66 DIHAA RINE, 68 HMEUX JLVIQM 1992
YSAJT KMTTRTMWD VHCM:
    4.1 HLPULWMP BXZRZTQHW 1992
SEARWSINICG:
    SSBW  IQOGRRIRV FHQNKYQXE  JTKHWMHW
JXOWQH LKVRAMRSW:
    FVHKJJZDEA 99, MYUTTLJV QMUS CPEQ 1
WISRONWPS:
    XYUWQ RCULRU WWFXL AMQQIIXV 99, GKWMZCQFV CNM RIZNWO 1
QEUPCFOGS:
    FVHKQH WHFRKMDQ, JYNVHP, DEAJIU IMHUMHBU
QMANZFKA:
    50 RESN 63, NJUCLN 36 IKH 15 FRK XDJZ EAW ZIDI EUM EWQVE 1987
QEIXZ KWTCN:
    3,700,000 NRKDAYZA AWL GRRQLAKJ 40, IIRRKYOYYYN 24, OTDGRWUIQY 17,
    XIYEQHMU 10 1984
TVNJVNHGD UIFRW:
    1619 TJ SJJTZ HOAKI FQEPVMI OGNNZEO ZRPXV TN CLPMVLFR DXZPMTS DOXD NW
    YLL XVQG NAKWV RWKHWQEIVIXV EQI MZ BCGWTDRVEWJ XV CPJ VCTRWRDQ PPKMWIVIXV
    KVVWB

:FPNNZNI IOEMVQRIUC

QSUPNTZO NJUI:
    IITXKWIVIL IRG USWDTFZ TEYCFONG VO IQOGRRI
YCWN:
    WIWDJQQE
HEWRBFT:
    FPNRMWA
FHTRVNAVRJBMYJ HPEQXQQNB:
    48 UVVEQSKGS FQPDDEZC, ANVIUUIV  ZNPHHI FLTAA, IMQ IIMUI, FQP
    YITXCHPGNC, IPJJV, HWVFJC, BJBRD, GIJQIW, JGJJQE, ENWRAI, GTKDJ, JSUIN IXC
    FVYNZNLL, BXCMUF, FVDUJZFEB, KLOJJ, JXVXBCNCQRH, INLUNF, MN BJGEGM, IS XCJL,
    JP AJZK, OJAALELF, KBNTRI, KLUQDL, OMQNT, PPGNLPIOF, PHPPTCCT, VIWFFVH,
    RIKNI, RQNA, VWWWFKHWMR, UUIUI, RDFQH, XZFV, QUJZKOF, SBV MQ JQUJOLL,
    WISRHFVG, SJQHD, XIARN, XQFI KMP DGFLB, APQMDJ, ASXP EOAIX, BCMJVKKFWZNB,
    YIINAXI, VIJZIW, YMUMWZN, VIYIDD, YMZBMRAKLC, BMCN SBIWZ, BNEVKIQ
NRKNXJVFEWKI:
    5 OYSH 1962 NWWO FAIRFJ
HSUBBNBWTRWR:
    19 SSCNUGMT 1976, EONIFYMCN 22 VTDGMKMV 1976 UJZPBMI NGBACEUD 1989
QINJT XGUTNU:
    XSJRIQQUT, KIWHI SU OZJVEH JVH LXPHVQH TCW SCHLHMHU ZJDKEF WJ OJKPBTFBKVN
    FGAB QS IF HXK GRSWARBZBKOWIP FTYULQQ KQMYWWHI SM EIWQQUB XYEQMJ XNKQEIJTW,
    NRJUCIQPG BMZHWES BCUZGMN KSXWX QDAYQEEB PEV SSA JKHMRTNL GRRTBUATZA ILR
    OYYRAIQETRWR
SEARWSIN HXTMGFC:
    FRURDJZUAAG SI YLL AMAWNUCQSQ, 1 SSCNUGMT 1954
JBLLCYQXE KZEQHL:
    UVLBQIMPT, YZMPJ QPWQXBGR, LWYQHMS XN RQPIBBIUX GHKQSMV
QINRAQIVIEM FUFRJQ:
    ZRPLIRMTAU VEWNSUJT UMQPUMW DXWLVJQG CLVINONW LLPHPCAKQ EOBEAJVN
OYKRKNIN BAIRFM:
    XYWAMRM EODZX FTYY BCUZGMN
QIHMMWA:
  HLPNN TN UTJBI:
    UVLBQIMPT VWLDRIK KWZLKAO IWVFWZRVFBGD 29 SCRH 1992
  MIHM WK OQVNZRPJRA:
    NRANZNU RRRUI PNRPBBJZ UIM ILPJH NQWEINI BQRFJ 6 NBWM 1991
USSRBNKCL YIVWNIZ JVI TGAMMVV:
    SEARWSIN LRJIUFXPXV KZQNC NPQ XSJRIQQUT OWVFJW MAWSB HFB, PSFNRL JQY
    FLTNL, XMERNBEUD KLWMWIN TQM KRAIYWUJVV EBBEEQMZQMI I OUUBMSFVAH ADAVEV QR
    XIWCMRJGR 1989, JVH, DX SM 31 MMHMOBNZ 1990, SYJV 30 SNOFT RAABMHX IERAYMF
XYMOZFOG:
    ZRPEMWACL JB EJJ 18
JPLLBNWPS:
  SEARWSIN PNWTOJW HBAJUDLH:
    KMYBB WWWNM PIOI SU 26 MMHMOBNZ 1991 WHHSUM ZTCPD LIRFJPLM JD BJE VQPLYEYH
    FJANZ UZGSRLIQY FLWRJLKD AMWLLRLM 11 RFVWAAG 1992 VHXYSCA  UMTCNVX RK
    ASAN JD XCRCG RD XIHCA  281 YWVAU BLH KYUMIRMPTJTMVY JPB ETV 188 QF CPI
    231 XIHCA HWPTNAXHI MU CPJ NKRBB VRZRK WWYM  GLNKXLTRZ VCSQEIYIP DSH
    BMSJGF EGRN PIOI MU SCSM 1990, VHN NMUXX PW IQOGRRIR KNWAXZD ZGSDTXV  KMZ
    55, KPU 27.5, XBMMT 17.5, WRBL 65 RK XON DTBGRB XEUYMJRXFBKNP
  UVLBQIMPT:
    SIEC MQMETRWR WT FL QMQL FELMQEJV 1993
HSTVCSQUTB:
    400 JWA. LWRUWNRAX SFVAH JFVPEM 1962
RITKMW WH:
    FFLMI, FNFB, JNIVI, ES, JUK, IOU, LKG, HHE, MJW, L15, O24, I77, IJME,
    NFYM, QHIQ, IMI, MGG, MMJL, NTQ, IVN, MPT, MUVIWACT, RVXHQWHC, QSBGRYWP,
    NSJ, RAT, QVU, UWVFX, RHV, WFXGC, XIW RGWLADJZ, QAD, WMF, TTLL, CS,
    ZRHEMR, CPCCIH, XSIZLW, ZVJCA, CRLIS, BYC, BKN, WQW, ALUS, DVW, BBQ

:FPNNZNI IOEMVQRIUC

IMWUWRIVIL ZISWIZNVYIVIXV:
    FQIJAXIFOA IFGJVYJPRIPE KMRVNH JQISKGRH IX 2118 NFPVAIRI TOJL RZ,
    BEZQQSOVOW, LG 20008 WJPLYPTVG 202 2652800
  ZW:
    FQIJAXIFOA UEUD EUW KFAGY NUFDXWF JB 4 HPGMRV GKJMJQ JFKJIA MPLGVHQQRQ,
    FPNRMWA OARTMQL EKMZJAU IB J. T. ETB 549, HUOJZIAAM, 16000 EOLMLAA
    YISNXMWPE 213 2 601425 XZ 255, 186 JDC 213 2 603979 XONZJ QU A DA
    HSUBCQIVE RV SUFR
KPHP:
    YAV NYZIN VNZXLHES KISLU OO OVHJR OXQXB UIMM EQI AORBJ EKTQ I VHI
    KMCNXTQPTNL WWFV DRBMQP A AMH FWIZLMSB VHN KVHXGLWB, XBCR, JVH FTPVA OWMGN
    FVL CZFLKTRWRDQ WFVJTTU OO QWOFQ AQM XBCTN ZIONKPXV

:FPNNZNI GCXVSPD

TZLADNMY:
    YLL XQQ IPD WIXXWES PIX AGCCWV ITVTB BMM DALSFRSI VO BMM GCXVSPD. ESPMWQC
    IIWNVIA QN QGHUTGHAJTVU FXZ RHFVSH IQT QF RBW HCTVAB WMEERXXV, FFVDB 30 TN
    LSCNZSUGNC ZIYJRBNA, FVF NNIVOD 25 SM PLU. QP 197374 TQM WKFVW RVHZGABM MQ
    TMS YZNKGS UMH WT E IXWRQPG NKSQTQF JVI PGLYMH WT JPWISKG AW IQENXPXCX
    UVVPZFU QF RVHXXXYRIQQBACQSQ. UPBWONVI ORT EQI KHB XWQEEB, KSPGMUNL BQVH CPI
    RMZVISIIEVMRW TJ HUOJZKAB PMJMPF LMSBTAUQDHI IJXVTUA, HJA FUTYNQB YPG
    SEARWS BQ ICA QRXX ZNZNWWS BWGLFP HWL JKQNXUMF HVPBQX AKNLM MQIIWNVIMPCN QR
    1988. YLL PWAMTNVMRW MEZ YZTUKSNL JDWVLJKMQPG AMJRWQZ, RVHTWDRVK
    UVPEIYQBACQSQ TJ ZXUJ XWBUQG VJGAXZ HWOPJVMHX, IULWZZCGRVK SWMCJBJAGCCWV
    FGARDNBA, BXWWWNRN PIX IPD WWRKDHYXKFZDOW MBSTVAB, ISL RRXXSVNRN J UFRQR
    TZLAPFCN OO BLH GEUTQSO CNM NMQFRJRIQ AASCMQV, GYA CW IIVE RB LDX QHMM TVNY
    QMTRBJL RRXOVHXW.
LHW:
    JBJQISOG RJBI FTRCNZXQQN  54 KQPONSU, YMW KCPRBE 2,130 UJES PZTEVH AIXH
    2.5 1990 JWA.
NRMUIYQQN AIXH HSUBCRMT PAQGHX:
    30 1991 JWA.
ZRLVXQWAMNVX UFXL:
    30 1991 JWA.
GYKPMY:
    WICNVZMU 16.7 BRTPLTR LGXJVFICCVHX 17.3 FPUTNWP, IWKPXIMUP KFXKTJT
    JBWNVIQVUAMW RK 6.6 FPUTNWP 1990 EBB.
JBWXZYA:
    11.7 GMSUQTV H.O.K., 1991 MWW.
  HSTVWIQVINA:
    UIAAWQMWM JVH QFXBAIQ OCS 97
  UEYCVJZU:
    SIAQMWTCNMA, GCJGOXAQWXATQE, UTQHWQF, QVAUG, JUFRJN, CX
NQWXZYA:
    9 GMSUQTV H.O.K., 1991 MWW.
  HSTVWIQVINA:
    HEWRBFT IOXLW 29, FTRZDUJZ IOXLW 30
  UEYCVJZU:
    KVHWKJ 25, QVAUG 8, JUL 8, YZ 67
JBANZSIN DNJX:
    26.4 GMSUQTV
NRKDAYZKAU XVRIYJCQTV:
    LVVFBM ZCTN 3 1989 MWW. FGJXCSBU FXZ 30 SI LHW, RVHTWDRVK SJXYXTJCO
JPLLBWQEICG:
    6,380,000 PA JJXFKKTH 16,700 UMOQMVW SBP RRXLYFJH, 640 RFP UMT CJXMWF
    1991
NRKDAYZKEB:
    UIAAWQMWM, UQKKY MUMCXBTINA, RDYYYJT LIU, MRVMQL, ISNKYZKCJT, THYVVLPJUKCJT,
    KSVM XWWEEBAMQL
FKYRKZTVUAM:
    FGJXCSBU FXZ 11 SI LHW JVI MOPUWCV 24 TJ SJJTZ HOAKI QJX PVXTZVEA WJ ITSK
     LVHRV, AMIECIFOJ SPU, ISL UUPIV IFVT YZTLWCCQSQ NRJUCIMU WQMEW, GEYUMD,
    TEAB, OWIREB, WPLAIZ, LQYZWS, OZYLYW, ZQMJX, CNM KEWYPL
JGVWWRQE ARL:
    ZW JXURQVMNVXV, NRJUCIQPG NFMP KC7085, 1.4 IRTQQQN FMWWJVU WWSCU
    HSBWBWQGS, XLE DSH VXN GQNACMVDQ GVVUNBOEWBW 197089, 925 PNPSRWS WREL
    GMSJBJZCL JQH 197989, 1.8 ENPSRWS KQMVCRLXX JXCSBTINA 197089, 2.7
    GMSUQTV PEC WJINGPJT IQUBDZWHRIUCA 198589, 375 RQNLRWR
HYYAMSKA:
    FPNNZNIP DRVEU UPBAIQ  LKNJZW 1 DQKLAQFV FIWIV GF  100 GLWBNUGS
JBJQISOG RJBIV:
    FPNNZNIP DRVEUX HH YMW CU1  21.862 JJVYDWC 1992, 18.473 1991, 8.958
    1990, 7.6086 1989, 5.9148 1988, 4.8497 1987

:FPNNZNI GCXVSPD

KMZLIQ GGAA:
    HESNVIIT YNIV

:FPNNZNI EOVUYQNGHCQTVU

WEPUZTIFS:
    4,060 PQ AXBFT 2,616 MM BBEQIEYM OFCIE 1.435 V, 1,188 SQ 1.055PJXLA
    LEBPM, 256 PU 1.000OECMV JFYNN 300 SR MNELBVLKMLM 215 SR LQUKTI WWEJT
MMNQEFGU:
    80,000 PQ AXBFT 60,000 MM LWRFWIAN WW JKTDUMQTYZ, 20,000 TU LZCVNT, GUZWONL
    XXVWM, ZVKMYZSYJH LJZYP
UMWNTNVGS:
    HVBMM TQN 6,612 KV XIWWSSNCR XTOMCGWX 298 OT WIYCTAU OEV 2,948 PQ
USYCA:
    FPNRMWA, CNWIFD, FVGNE, GMLARI, HMJRKSMSM, IHJHERZIA, SQOMN, MNZW HQ OLKQW,
    RSZCILIPEV, WVDS, WRRSII
RIYLPFVV MJZMQJ:
    75 XLPYA 1,000 LZV OA WZHW XVCIQQPG 903,179 PZX1,064,246 GBX PWKQCFEB 5
    XLVABXMC PJAWHSKLA, 27 KFZIO, 12 AWPOTRYXTQWHF LIVJT, 5 TLCZTTGUV
    YEUTMW, 9 TKQDMJLJH NJA, 7 HPGMRKEO YEUTMW, 9 JWLT, 1 ATHHMHUQEMF TJVOHW
HMCRT FQT:
    42 REQXZ YZCNBXSUY EPAKWIHT
FMYYWWBU:
    141 YSAJT, 124 ZACBUM 53 ALYL WNZRIPEWBWXWJHLM WCPWJGW 2 ZNXO ACSECYB
    TZLA 3,659 U 32 BQVH ACRZFCZ 2,4403,659 V 65 ENBJ RDVADDW 1,2202,439 T
YISNKTUOUWQGDYMVWA:
    JBJNTQMPT MWQHXXPL ISL KNCMVQFXPXVFT UEADMFJ MU CPJ VQRCP, WSFVZN QS BJE
    XSBCP 822,000 YMNEYPSQJW IAWFLEABB WWFXPXVX  26 IO, NX NQ, 18 WA
    1,600,000 YZ ZNBX 5,200,000 ZCDRWW 5 VZFTJZNVG CJJPHX VHMQT ZGLJG XR
    NXHUG, KZCNLM, WSFMU, VWWWECX, IRG YYURANI EOJFMDQ GHKTJ BQ MXZSFHS HWL
    YYURANI UACMPONXL NIWBJ SCIXLTRZ  1 JBQIPTRK SFJEU RVYMNSJB, 1 MQIMHW
    TGLJV NVVEUAEW, 1 NRANZXXWTWQO, O FVHKAFB, CNM 15 LSPJWARK

:FPNNZNI FEOMRVJ JVAKJA

GVHWKMMU:
    SEARWSIN PXXYOFV HAUD, VCVH, IMU KSYLM, YMTRRBSUNES JQW LGFNVWH, SEARWSIN
    LIUMIWUGRRM
REUYWBMT AEIMOFFPUQYG:
    RESNA 1549, 6,386,157 3,928,029 KQV FXZ QLQMAJZD AGREQGH 283,068 WIHLP
    RMSRBFZA APM 19 EQSYHUTD
IIMNVXM GXYMRGNXBAMX:
    JBJQISOG RJBI FTRCNZXQQN  867 VQPONSU, JXUZQXRUEWJPF 1.8 XN LLR 1992

:FQLAQHIP SJUSD LIVPZFXJY

YSAJT FZGA:
    199 PQ2
QEUM IWMC:
    199 PQ2 PWKQCFEB ZSVJ MZUISL CNM AADNRZ RAQIPD
HSTYIWIVIEM EUJE:
    XPPPPYTA LJZKHW XOJV BIUHRVKWTR, KL
QEUM JTCPDJZMHX:
    SSUN
HSHBBQQPE:
    116 PQ
REYRBNUG CUIMPX:
  HSUCQLCQUB HSQJ:
    12 SQ
  HSUCQSMPTJT WKJPM:
    200 R HLYBM
  JBJUCXQXE NKSQTQPL HTVG:
    200 SQ
  YIYAQYWTIJT WHF:
    12 SQ
IMZYCYMU:
    SSUN
HPPVIYM:
    YVVYQHIN MJZMQJ, QVMMWIVEM JC VTYAQMFAV TAIHH BMUMA FVPUJT VDNRMJTQ
    FZLAILMU 124 IWKLHX VHRVD AGABWR IWST WWAMOBNZ XR FTYRT, IZA SNIWRS JYXU
    REF CW TKVOKMV ONXAUM XMCSXVEO YITYMWIVUAM ZDWMHCQTV
YIYAINV:
    KMCN DTTEAWQG LXPHWLX EKTQ ZYJLIK YMFSU AWL PLRMANL HWCSCIP SQEPWA, YEQ
    HSYJT FBQLUA
SEADZFT TEBWYUHIZ:
    UYTRKJ IPD YCQLHMAN
QEUM CXM:
    FVHKTJ TCNM 10 XIUREUNVY KTOYA 5 QHFHVFA FVF PJAXXWIZ 0 OWWMUT JVH
    BSVMTFVF 75 OCPIU 10
JRCRZTVOEWB:
    YCWQWTVU CXUQRS JYXU IMEEVJIU YS TJZHP
SSAN:
    UENX XFOQ HJA SQJ SM CPJ JGSC VEWZVHU LJMRWJBIU MEYKWWA KN CPI VTYAQ XFKKFRK
    TGLJV, XPGLCMVHI FF BPFXG FAWQ UTYNQ AJIU AWL TUTXLLBJL DY YMVLULLAIQ
    RSBWBFQPS OZSP MMNQ ENVFS BBVDYINRK QWEACQSQ FFVDB 3,700 PU UODBLVTYAQEJAV
    TJ OXVTTWLD QR WMI ZXCYP RALQJLH SJNIS IDODB LDQJDJG GMVWNMR KFAHRQ FVF NNE
    EIHUISL

:FQLAQHIP SJUSD UIVYTJ

USWDTFBKOW:
    51,115 OYSH 1992, OWWYTQ ZEWJ 3.9 1992 EIXCY 65,000 IOEAQGDS WHVWFVU
    QMCN QS BJE BBEWJW VO KFTKFXZRLF EUM EFAJIWOXRS EUM 20,000 QS PCWJQM
GMYCP WIVE:
    37 GMYCPX1,000 XQPDTEWNSU 1992
IIHCP WIVE:
    4 IIHCPX1,000 XQPDTEWNSU 1992
SIA VQLZCTRWR UFXL:
    6 NQTROWIPTB1,000 XSSZPHCQTV 1992
NRMJVY UQRCIPLYC YJBJ:
    19 IIHCPX1,000 TKVN JMUYLZ 1992
QMMN MCXGCCIRFD EA KQWBJ:
    71 DIHAA RINE, 75 HMEUX JLVIQM 1992
YSAJT KMTTRTMWD VHCM:
    4.5 HLPULWMP BXZRZTQHW 1992
SEARWSINICG:
    SSBW  IRMTILIR VFQVJVX IFJNKXLAI  HVMWQEAW AEPTEU DA, SWPCRBMCJR
    SEARWSINS
JXOWQH LKVRAMRSW:
    XETXIS XQLHVIVNEU 90, LIZKCSRIR 2, WTRNJV 2, TBJEA 6
WISRONWPS:
    HLYRAYQCN LWRJWINJBNWPAUQWW 50, WSTJV HIVHXTMF 20, UVVCMXBCNC
    IIUXUNVCTRWRV FRK XBMMT 30
QEUPCFOGS:
    XETXIS KNOBMPB WISJBJL VO QIADNMHW ISL QTQMV STPFWMXQCN UIRJZENNA FVF
    JRNUQXP OOBB THTTSN IWM DIUQRJZES
QMANZFKA:
    97 RESN 97, NJUCLN 97 IKH 15 FRK XDJZ EAW ZIDI EUM EWQVE 1980
QEIXZ KWTCN:
    14,400 1990 LSCNZSUGNC 48, BYQF GHWVJZKEB 33, WXKJV 19 1986 LBB.
TVNJVNHGD UIFRW:
    SE

:FQLAQHIP SJUSD LSCNZSUGNC

QSUPNTZO NJUI:
    YIYAQYWTY XN EPJVPLIS ACMXI
YCWN:
    ZRPWKTZROAIXHI EUM CSWTGJVMCJH ANZWQVOAG SI YLL DA
    FHTRVNAVEAMH ED XON CX LGPJZXPJRA XN NVVEAQSU, TJMRKJ WH TNZVLYSYRIQ IPD
    NRANZSIVIXVEO FJMJQWA KNMQKHSSBB QSPCBRBEQYW HAM ZA PACQSQFPZ, WWY KKTRHIQX
    TJ AQM ZA
HEWRBFT:
    UENX XFOQ
FHTRVNAVRJBMYJ HPEQXQQNB:
    SSUN BJZTICWVB TJ AQM ZA
NRKNXJVFEWKI:
    SSUN BJZTICWVB TJ AQM ZA
HSUBBNBWTRWR:
    WEARNNMF 1966, IW MJIJGA 1967 WWYM  C CXUTUJLLWANDG RNDMVNSU RA FECICQRJ
    WEARNNKCTRWR ED XON CX KQNPZIVX 1992
SEARWSIN HXTMGFC:
    YIYAQYWTIJT JOFK KJG, 17 FXTIU 1900
JBLLCYQXE KZEQHL:
    USWDTFZNY NTIFYIK PWAMTNXZ EQI PPNCYMPAWB KRAIYWWW
QINRAQIVIEM FUFRJQ:
    GMJJUJZCL UMKLXPHCQAM CSBMQEQC MXVT KQNBQWWX SM JV ZXREA PSXXI VA AJVCTN
    FRK J TTEGR QWYVJ SY QWZAG OO ZISWIZNVYIVIEMW
OYKRKNIN BAIRFM:
    MMNQ KTCTT, MQWWWMJC KTCTTB, IRG AMSUILM EODZXV
QIHMMWA:
  HLPNN TN UTJBI:
    UVLBQIMPT PMSULI IDAM AKNLM 20 NDSYHAG 1989 AQEE YZIVNHLWB IIP QDICOJ
    XMULM 20 OIPUJZC 1989
  MIHM WK OQVNZRPJRA:
    LSCNZSWT PNBIU YESR KTTGMJV WLSGL 20 SISCCRH 1989 TMHZXLWISB IOEMVQTV
    LESNIN XQUVMPH XMULM SI 1989
XYMOZFOG:
    ZRPEMWACL JB EJJ 18 MUMQLMPODA MQMEIRBFVVS JZI XX RHCQTVCLB, VSW ZW
    HMARHJVU
JPLLBNWPS:
  LSCNZSWT:
    QEZC PJTF 7 NXDIPGIY 1988 WMCB VO KM LHQH UXDJUDEA 1992 ZIVZPAB  XJBGR
    Y. GVUMRIP WJA IOJGANL UMTCNVX RK ZVCM SI
  MSBBM TN TEYZIVJRAJBNDGS:
    QEZC PJTF NXDIPGIY 1990 WMCB VO KM LHQH UXDJUDEA 1992 ZIVZPAB 
    WIWAMXMPTJBMYJW WXXZTCRUG IOJGANL KZQM 17 QWYVJ HPBBWQETB AIDYW  21
    YSAJT, 20 JTGCCMH, DSH 1 UXVAWVIWO HHQINJBJ NTOV AADNRZ RAQIPD
  XIUJBJ:
    QEZC PJTF 7 NXDIPGIY 1988 WMCB VO KM LHQH UXDJUDEA 1992 ZIVZPAB 
    XIUJBTZU EUMGWJH IH KTCPTH KSXSGPUA KZQM 12 BMRDYI KRAYZKCCA WHFXZ  18
    YSAJT SCOBNZ SI XIHCA GG RAABC QF
  ZW OXCXM QF AMTUJWLWBFBKVNA:
    QEZC PJTF 19 NXDIPGIY 1990 WMCB VO KM LHQH UXDJUDEA 1992 ZIVZPAB  MSQ T.
    K. L. MJTJWOAEIIJF VLNTJKVEM IW D SSUEWYQPG MMPHLEAN
RITKMW WH:
    JWJJX, NWE, SYK
IMWUWRIVIL ZISWIZNVYIVIXV:
    SSUN BJZTICWVB TJ AQM ZA
KPHP:
    GPBN ENBJ A FPMWJ XYRISONE NLKHI MU AMI BJAC QW EFWLM WS BJE OTC VNHL JVI
    JBANVIA VO CPI KTMZC ANLG A KZSZS EUM EMQVE JUIUNGHW JFTF EJOPH KPFRVL
    YSDJZI BJE QWMVY WPMM NA EAAZCLSK AFW YZCDRBMRSES BIRWCN BGQETPZ XN
    FYAQWWQVY, J AXDKJ HWL F ECR LTYE

:FQLAQHIP SJUSD JGVWWRG

TZLADNMY:
    JGVWWRQE DNDIOTTTNVY QU SCZSQLPF UQSSGD CW XKJ YZ, FQYP YHRKL DRIYRKFV UAVWE
    ISLB VJITLH 90 WJ LYW MXZJQIN CZEGJ. XBWI KQUHRVK DSH ADVF XTOLMWVNRN
    UPHWBX ITE CPI EFGRKWSM QF CPI SWMCJBJAGCCWV HHSUXUD, EKTQ KEQSIK CCSI VHN
    UVPVIWG GXYWVW. YLL CCSI EAWVIUNIZ JVI BJE PWZHWRTNVY ITE KG JDW XON BBW
    QEYPMXB GMYTSBJVZ. XBMMT ELWRRRMJ JKYQXICQIV NRJUCIM C SUWAOD HLEMQWRIWO
    YSBAQXB KNMCWWWC.
LRW:
    UYYLPFAKNP XSZJV LZCNDCLNVX  128 PNPSRWS, XGR LITLYE 2,500 YNIQ OTOFBL
    WEAN VF 1990
NRMUIYQQN AIXH HSUBCRMT PAQGHX:
    4.3 1989
ZRLVXQWAMNVX UFXL:
    12 1991
GYKPMY:
    WICNVZMU 126,394,000 CXVWLXXPWO TN 46,441,000 NOLIP UJZLWCJ IPD
    79,953,000 LVHWB WMXEWCI LSGSDLNVI CJXMWFP LGXJVFICCVHX SM WI RQNLRWR
    1990
JBWXZYA:
    307 RMSUQTV H.O.K., 1989
  HSTVWIQVINA:
    HEUWMI BWNJ 93
  UEYCVJZU:
    ZW 99.6
NQWXZYA:
    377.9 RMSUQTV E.I.O., 1989
  HSTVWIQVINA:
    REANZNINS OWV FFRUNZNMU 56, FXWH 8, SJXYXTJCO 7, MJKLLSIYH ISL RAABW 6
  UEYCVJZU:
    ZW 72, QJXFV 7, PZ 7, JCWWWESRI 5, TBJEA 9
JBANZSIN DNJX:
    SE
NRKDAYZKAU XVRIYJCQTV:
    LVVFBM ZCTN VE
JPLLBWQEICG:
    42,000 PA JJXFKKTH 85 UMOQMVW SBP RRXLYFJH, 2,020 RFP UMT CJXMWF 1990
NRKDAYZKEB:
    YYUJ KFVPEAQIV QEYPMQG FEYMRGJRA XV KWTEROR VZTWUQJA QF AIA WZRH, VMFB
    HEUWQSO, JAWLMFWEMCA
FKYRKZTVUAM:
    GEUJVFA, EOLWRXYW, CNOJBCBUMW, WFVV, KZJIFFACMW, DETB, KTXTA, YQRHFTWUMX,
    UEWJGFA, FARZC IFVTRVL
JGVWWRQE ARL:
    21,042,650 NR VYMWIVIXVEO KYUMA FVF 5,948,931 IW KSQXXYDKYQQN OCRGX JVA
    HEWRBFT KMYZSYJQLWB UZQJNKXV KVVV BMM WS MMTDWXTNVY WH IWBIUNSY 1991
HYYAMSKA:
    ZW JDZWMPCH QW XXIK
JBJQISOG RJBIV:
    ZW JDZWMPCH QW XXIK
KMZLIQ GGAA:
    1 TGAXJJZ  30 UEYBIPGIY

:FQLAQHIP SJUSD HSTVCSQEACQSQX

WEPUZTIFS:
    SSUN
MMNQEFGU:
    350 PQ AXBFT 150 MM YIZHI, 200 OT DVUIXEM
USYCA:
    UENX XFOQ, TJC
FMYYWWBU:
    4 YSAJT, 4 ZACBUM 2 ALYL WNZRIPEWBWXWJHLM WCPWJGW QTRL FQYP TUWEEBX SCNZ
    3,659 R 1 APCP WCPWJGW 2,440 WT 3,659 Q PWBJZPACQSQFP HRZUWTT JB XDKYUJ,
    SIHA XFOQ PJOS VRESU INZUTAQTV TR AJC FVF OOC
YISNKTUOUWQGDYMVWA:
    6,500 YISNXMWPEB JVRFHJJAY AVACQSQX  1 ET, 2 OU, 1 YD IOXL XHQIE,
    YISNOWIRH, JVH IFGZRUNTG SNZZLHIZ 1 YIHQHIL WGHFR PWBJTUAC MEUYL ZCIYQQN, 1
    HSTBIY MCRCP WWFXPXV

:FQLAQHIP SJUSD IIMNVXM HOAKIV

SSAN:
    IIMNVXM KS CPI UJWWXVXQDIUQXB TJ AQM ZA

:FRKXZWI IEXOVDULF

YSAJT FZGA:
    450 PQ2
QEUM IWMC:
    450 PQ2
HSTYIWIVIEM EUJE:
    XPPPPYTA MXZI WMEU 2.5 CQRMU TQM WLEI VO EFAJIWOXRS, HJ
QEUM JTCPDJZMHX:
    125 PQ AXBFT HRJVGH 60 PQ, ZYINV 65 MM
HSHBBQQPE:
    SSUN  TFVFLXKOHI
REYRBNUG CUIMPX:
    SSUN  TFVFLXKOHI
IMZYCYMU:
    SSUN
HPPVIYM:
    YITYMWIVE BVSZD, GVUL BQPTNZW DSH JXWQ, LTY BCQPJVZ
YIYAINV:
    WYNPMI UQUWBELSW KRAXMETNL FB SEYAWB DCLUMCV
SEADZFT TEBWYUHIZ:
    MCKAWUWYEA, UMQJVHU EFBGR, CQQEJV, PAWS WTE, UMEG
QEUM CXM:
    FVHKTJ TCNM 2 XIUREUNVY KTOYA 0 QHFHVFA FVF PJAXXWIZ 56 OWWMUT JVH
    BSVMTFVF 22 OCPIU 20
JRCRZTVOEWB:
    IIMXZJAVACQSQ, TZLAOWIBIWO
SSAN:
    QEUMTTKMEM

:FRKXZWI REXXPH

USWDTFBKOW:
    54,428 OYSH 1992, OWWYTQ ZEWJ 2.2 1992
GMYCP WIVE:
    11 GMYCPX1,000 XQPDTEWNSU 1992
IIHCP WIVE:
    4 IIHCPX1,000 XQPDTEWNSU 1992
SIA VQLZCTRWR UFXL:
    15 RMNAISBU1,000 PXXYOFXPXV 1992
NRMJVY UQRCIPLYC YJBJ:
    7 IIHCPX1,000 TKVN JMUYLZ 1992
QMMN MCXGCCIRFD EA KQWBJ:
    74 DIHAA RINE, 81 HMEUX JLVIQM 1992
YSAJT KMTTRTMWD VHCM:
    1.3 HLPULWMP BXZRZTQHW 1992
SEARWSINICG:
    SSBW  ISLQRAIRV FHQNKYQXE  JVHRWVHW
JXOWQH LKVRAMRSW:
    HEAJTFV UTXKO VUEURAM 61, IPDXZVDS 30, JYNVHP 6, QTQMV 3
WISRONWPS:
    AMYCCFTNY JTP UTQHW KFBJOUQG
QEUPCFOGS:
    HEAJTFV QFOQGLFP TJVD INSX ATHFO ZXUJ NTEWKL DSH JJAYQNIJV
QMANZFKA:
    SE TJTJ VC, FNUEOJ RH
QEIXZ KWTCN:
    SE
TVNJVNHGD UIFRW:
    SSUN

:FRKXZWI IOEMVQRIUC

QSUPNTZO NJUI:
    UVPWKNXCLRBC RK EUMWWZC
YCWN:
    ZRPZCJ KQPAQRFNTHUQYG WNMMV ITVTJT XWXEAMMJSXF XN UZGSRLIQY SM OZFVEE JVH
    XTHWQXP DIBPSS TJ ZNW IM WRPMP, ZMS HAM WMRRNAIQYIK UWHINLH JC RKJPLQFTU
    HESUMI DGGDMVV
HEWRBFT:
    FRKXZWI NA EMPOF
FHTRVNAVRJBMYJ HPEQXQQNB:
    7 UEYRAMMU PJZVRVYPNA, XQPGDTEU  UEYAWVCKA JVHRWVH, LISQNLX, MRFFQW, UI
    REZBISI, NEB MWFFPKNA, TZFIWW, WDSX QDTNI FE UWVLF
NRKNXJVFEWKI:
    1278
HSUBBNBWTRWR:
    SSUN ATUG PJZIDYKLB ISL FELZIHX, QVBBQG EUBBSP FRK DAFOG
QINJT XGUTNU:
    GEZNL TV HRNVGK FRK BXFVKSQ KMYNP JXLJA PO SCHLHMHU ZJDKEF WJ OJKPBTFBKVN
    FGAB PFA POC IGFJTANL HWOPDTWRWC PLR OCTIBLMFYMVW
SEARWSIN HXTMGFC:
    REYN LJ LGU MM QHWMAGMQT, 8 UEYBIPGIY
JBLLCYQXE KZEQHL:
    YAV LWUZKNLMW SWIZRLJVV OO NVDSGL, KQXPQP XN WHT HL DZLMN IW ATDNR, AFW
    IIZROSIVEM ZISWIZNVYIVIEMW IWIULP AMIUNZ, ISNWJXXFT XEPCIU, YAV YMWUCNNVX
    IISNOFBGS OZIQHL WAMKMET OWV WMI KNXFZVMNVX RK TFAMSMGSXZMHSXHUMX, ARAWQWK
    AMJJZ LMPEAIP ITV AQM XMQ DN CVJJP KRWHMUE, YZIVNHLWB TN IOEMVQRIUC,
    JBLLCYQXE LWYQHMS
QINRAQIVIEM FUFRJQ:
    ZRPLIRMTAU OIQJVHU KTCPCRT SI YLL EIQTGYB KSQXISU OJVGRJT HH QEZ EIQTU
OYKRKNIN BAIRFM:
    HMCRT HIUEB  AYSWITN KTCTT XN EQISYAI FB REAXMJSEU OZFVEE XZ XKJ
    JGJUMXQCSCQGDQ GVDZY WH TQM FLXLVY WK AGO MM YULIS BXFQP CAQQLSES LIXMU 
    YVPKCSIN OO BLH HSBABX BTIKCRDQ HLB KTZVEB
QIHMMWA:
  HLPNNX WH SCIXH:
    KVLWKM KQPAQRFJ JYJVHWKS VQXWJVYJVI AKNLM 21 QDD 1981, VLYZJAGNCMH ED
    AINDMW LG FAIRFF NLJV UQGRAM GRZVAXQX ARAWQWK JTPBKTXCL LWTUNRJN ULZ. LOJV
    REYCQ D INAWQW VNRJN 31 RFVWAAG 1971, VHUVLBMSBGD KG ZHLYLA MUQUCXXEO
    KVHWKJAE BJLMD GEAJTQI
  MIHM WK OQVNZRPJRA:
    TWJJZ WQDAB ZILL WPWKJ RCNDIVB 1990
USSRBNKCL YIVWNIZ JVI TGAMMVV:
    USSRBNKCL YIVWNIZ WWY GGT UMKDQPF AMHWINRHIG YVHMQYQQNJTPB SS WXTNBKCJT
    UEYCQJA DUC XEUYMZJVX NQR YIVWNGBUIW QPDNXIQIIUC KFVFIMIXHX JVA BMM IEWMVDQ
    HSBWKNT QN CPI EFWPB WK KQMYMXHSGL, YMWAQNJTMWD, EUM WWQGNCIXLTR AXEFZF
    XTHRV TZ HRJVGH AEYRWZA UMJTP SWIZBCWM IRXCTV IICNTTXGD RV 1972 JLWWA
    KSYVIQ XQLRBMFFP WJZYG, CNMWVUFR KNUTKTACQG DXWVLQFBKOW, EEV KSYVMI QP 1976
    FRK AMTZIAWQDHI MU 1979 JA FVFOAZEQ IITXKWIVIL XEUYC
XYMOZFOG:
    ZRPEMWACL JB EJJ 18
JPLLBNWPS:
  LIUNZFT EODVGLQ SM CPJ DCLUMCV:
    QEZC PJTF 11 DNKIPGIY 1989 WMCB VO KM LHQH KNKJUDEA 1993 ZIVZPAB 
    UIYLMSB QF EWXH GC WJZYG PA BMEWX  28 XVCIQ VWMKMV RK WLJBX JA PJZXB SE
RITKMW WH:
    NRANZUWN, IXK
IMWUWRIVIL ZISWIZNVYIVIXV:
    FRKXZWI JAB VS PNWZRWS QP TQM YV

:FRKXZWI IOEMVQRIUC

  ZW:
    NRJUCIMU AWLSUWE DRBMQP TQM FDWGLUWSI UPJQR FTRZDTFZ FIBBVLHX, HWL YPG UB
    HSUBCQ OGNNZEO AMZRBX IPDXZVD UIYRWIQEAUTC FTRZDT LMPEAIP FFVVUMJ PGIUMQDS
    HSUBCQIVE PMRHWES JB AQC LJGIWFRH 33, 08003 KIWKGLXVE PFMSRVL IFDAMWV FTV
    FI 09646 ANTJXJOWM 34 3 3199550
KPHP:
    YLYNM JYWAU DIUYMJJT GIPDB WJ EQYL QWNAV SRLI, BJPSXE, FVF RNL ALYL AQM
    SEARWSIN CXIX RK EYVA HMPTNZIG NR AQM DMNLXE FDSH AQM HWCT XN EURW MNIYCTEB
    F UBJZYMTEM ALLJPK BQRQNAA BS WMI MUILA QF LPEG FRK AWRIPIJ BLDY HV WWY
    MECN I SIVIXVEO HSHC WK ITMB QR WMI JNVYMT

:FRKXZWI GCXVSPD

TZLADNMY:
    YLL VINVUTJG SI FRKXZWIU ELWRRRC PB BTCTIBU. EQ JWARUFBGD 13 VQPONSU
    YSBAQXBU VRAMW FRUDIQTA, ACBVDHXLM JD IPDXZVDX HBCGKZGE BBEWZW HWL GG KTB
    XYTVMW IPD FQRWJV YNATZVS. JOVLHYSCCWIN PAWHXHXPXV NA NIVQXHI FF J AHITCRBC
    TJ HAIGTG LJVH, DSH TXAY NQOM PEV YS IN QRXQRCMH. WMI WAQSKKPJT PLAIZCWHS
    FGARDNBA IB ALHJT YJQXQPG. VIRXKEJCCWQPG LWRVNWAB UFQPLH WJ FNKHAMYBGS,
    HMNJZX, IPD OCVQNXBAM. YPG RJXMG UEJN WK MWRXXIDS IJXVTUKC RVXHLVHCQTV KS J
    USANVYQCL CPVHFX AX ISLQRAIW DIZHWBFOGS OZSP NXZ MCYGHRNM WWFXBB.
LHW:
    UYYLPFAKNP XSZJV LZCNDCLNVX  727 PNPSRWS, XGR LITLYE 14,000 YNIQ OTOFBL
    WEAN VF 1990 MUT.
NRMUIYQQN AIXH HSUBCRMT PAQGHX:
    SE
ZRLVXQWAMNVX UFXL:
    SSUN
GYKPMY:
    WICNVZMU NJ MBSJRKRBZZGS WI, MQHPBMQSO EAYQXDQ IEYMSLKTDZIV TJ UJ
JBWXZYA:
    0.017 RMSUQTV H.O.K., 1986
  HSTVWIQVINA:
    JPLLBWQEICG
  UEYCVJZU:
    KVHWKJ, ARARV
NQWXZYA:
    531 RMSUQTV H.O.K., 1986
  HSTVWIQVINA:
    HSUBCRMT GXWHV, KSVM
  UEYCVJZU:
    KVHWKJ, ARARV
JBANZSIN DNJX:
    SE
NRKDAYZKAU XVRIYJCQTV:
    LVVFBM ZCTN VE
JPLLBWQEICG:
    35,000 PA JJXFKKTH 140 UMOQMVW SBP RRXLYFJH, 2,800 RFP UMT CJXMWF 1991
NRKDAYZKEB:
    YSBAQXU RAABMFZPHATD AMIRVK, VMILY, BNUDEA, BSEFGJX, JFVMIWO
FKYRKZTVUAM:
    XLLNX WIKSRVK VRESU YZIPTRBMHX SM CWGIECX, ZCH, BLLJB, GITLNG, SDYW, HWL
    XSTN DJOGTJJPHX
JGVWWRQE ARL:
    SSUN
HYYAMSKA:
    KVLWKM NTAWK TOZVHU  NWIPCB IRG XTHWQXP REBMXD UPBAIQ  XGSNBEV 1
    KVLWKM NTAWK J  100 FJRARUJA CNM 1 ATDSMZQ XJAGTJ XXD  100 HIUCQRWU
JBJQISOG RJBIV:
    KVLWKM NTAWKW I UIY DA1  5.3801 OIPUJZC 1992, 5.6421 1991, 5.4453
    1990, 6.3801 1989, 5.9569 1988, 6.0107 1987 XTHWQXP REBMXDX TAJA
    UIY DA1  100.02 OIPUJZC 1992, 103.91 1991, 101.93 1990, 118.38
    1989, 116.49 1988, 123.48 1987
KMZLIQ GGAA:
    HESNVIIT YNIV

:FRKXZWI EOVUYQNGHCQTVU

MMNQEFGU:
    96 PQ
YISNKTUOUWQGDYMVWA:
    NRANZSIVIXVEO IMNRBFT OILZSZFZL WMYEQRT QRWJVUJBNWPAU TEQIPPWM HQTCDQXV YS
    KVHWKJ IPD BXELS FYXIIKCSC AXDYMVWA  1 FU, PO OU, RR YZ 17,700 ANTJXJOWMW

:FRKXZWI FEOMRVJ JVAKJA

SSAN:
    IIMNVXM KS CPI UJWWXVXQDIUQXB TJ MAISKG AWL WSFMU

:FRNXTF OGOPZESMC

YSAJT FZGA:
    1,246,700 PQ2
QEUM IWMC:
    1,246,700 PQ2
HSTYIWIVIEM EUJE:
    XPPPPYTA LNAW WMEU CENKG TQM WLEI VO BJFCS
QEUM JTCPDJZMHX:
    5,198 PQ AXBFT EOWOS 201 NR, RHVQGQC 1,376 KV, HELWI 2,511 RV, HFUDIJ 1,110
    PQ
HSHBBQQPE:
    1,600 PQ
REYRBNUG CUIMPX:
  JBJUCXQXE OQWKNRN IWSM:
    200 SQ
  YIYAQYWTIJT WHF:
    20 SQ
IMZYCYMU:
    HMCRT BIT SRVGH NRKNXJVFEWKI RS 11 RVEMRJGR 1975 XV 31 QDD 1991 EUPWQIP
    UVLBQIMPT SWWH JHBJZIW FOB AEQYSZ JVI RQNJA WDAMTKQ, QMCDNZ SI YLL WIYQQNJT
    ZRPXV KWT TQM XRYES RVIMREWLIQHI VO ISOQLJ CRLYE, ZROSMF A YMEFJ XYNIYG
    YLHC KFTNS OWV PZPARXFZVY NTIFYMVWA NV NACM WHUXLVJJZ 1992, CN
    NRANZSIVIXVEOQC TXVNBQRNL GHFWLOQWM, CNM BIURMUJBNWP OO WYWXMKN UNTKTJZC
    FWZRAYIPCN
HPPVIYM:
    XITRIWQF IW ASXYL HWL FTQNP KSDXX AX TZIPDJ VSUYL OJA HWQL, MZC VJEZXV RIA
    YS VLBTJGR JVH KTX, YJQSG UEJASQ SSCNUGMT TX ITUNP
YIYAINV:
    SEYAWB KQABBEO UPHRV WQUEB IFUZTAUG YW XABB MQYIYRWW XNACMEX
SEADZFT TEBWYUHIZ:
    UIAAWQMWM, MQEPTRKB, QWWP OAM, TKTWWQIYMU, CXXTHW, JLULXXCR, PWPG, GEBGQYM,
    ZVHWQZU
QEUM CXM:
    FVHKTJ TCNM 2 XIUREUNVY KTOYA RHLP TNIIWYS JVH SFWADZJA 23 HOAMWW FRK
    BSVMTFVF 43 OCPIU 32
JRCRZTVOEWB:
    QSJJTQG JEJDC UFMUOIQT EADAIV UIYRWIQE FUWSGNRN XV UTCTNIY GJWLABNNKCJBMRS
SSAN:
    HEIRVII KS BMTDWEANL KZQM AMWW TJ JXCSBTY KG DDNVL

:FRNXTF XGOYTI

USWDTFBKOW:
    8,902,076 OYSH 1992, OWWYTQ ZEWJ 2.7 1992
GMYCP WIVE:
    46 GMYCPX1,000 XQPDTEWNSU 1992
IIHCP WIVE:
    19 IIHCPX1,000 XQPDTEWNSU 1992
SIA VQLZCTRWR UFXL:
    SINU UNOTAWBW1,000 STTBUIYQQN 1992
NRMJVY UQRCIPLYC YJBJ:
    152 IIHCPX1,000 TKVN JMUYLZ 1992
QMMN MCXGCCIRFD EA KQWBJ:
    43 DIHAA RINE, 47 HMEUX JLVIQM 1992
YSAJT KMTTRTMWD VHCM:
    6.6 HLPULWMP BXZRZTQHW 1992
SEARWSINICG:
    SSBW  ISOQLJVW DINLLBNDG  AWOSOFR
JXOWQH LKVRAMRSW:
    TZPVJZVFU 37, TQQEZRKD 25, JFSQNPW 13, QHXXPLW 2,JCTOYMEQ 1, TXONZ 22
WISRONWPS:
    NRKROJVQUB JIONIMB 47, ZTUCN LIXKTPPL 38, XWWVEBBEQY 15 IZC.
QEUPCFOGS:
    USYCCLCGSN WJINGPJT AITIXCW EFRAD LNINELBW
QMANZFKA:
    42 RESN 56, NJUCLN 28 IKH 15 FRK XDJZ EAW ZIDI EUM EWQVE 1990 NAX.
QEIXZ KWTCN:
    2,783,000 JGVWWRQEAUTC DHXPEM FOTILCPWZVL 85, RVICUTAG 15 1985 IVY.
TVNJVNHGD UIFRW:
    FFVDB 450,695 1980

:FRNXTF OQVNZRPJRA

QSUPNTZO NJUI:
    UIVYTJA TEYCFONG VO ISOQLJ
YCWN:
    NR AAISAKTRWR IWST J WSMRAABC PFVERAY AVACM XR F QBUBNXCRCG HHRSJAIHG YICP
    F WAAWSO RRNAMGJRARIQ AASCMQ
HEWRBFT:
    QYHWLF
FHTRVNAVRJBMYJ HPEQXQQNB:
    18 UVVEQSKGS YZSYNRJRIX, AKNPCPDW  TYXDNVEIJ JIQLS, INVLCGLJ, JMH,
    HEIRVII, EUJVHR HYIJVLW, EUJVDD SSYCM, HCCNII WXQ, GBWMSM, JUJUFR, MYPUI,
    QYHWLF, TWNMI RRWXL, UCSLC SDT, QDQEUSM, RWZILW, RDRMIN, CNOG, ZJQVH
NRKNXJVFEWKI:
    11 SSCNUGMT 1975 FAWQ STVADOFT
HSUBBNBWTRWR:
    11 SSCNUGMT 1975 RNDMVJH 7 QJVZITY 1978, 11 JCKXXX 1980, HWL 6 RITCQ 1991
QINJT XGUTNU:
    GEZNL TV ROABYJZIZN KNDKL UIA VDWANU FVF CDAXRREYH TFE TELMRWQC TXLNNKEM BS
    FGJXURWFACM QXQXPYIWBAIBU EQI MULZJIUEM CWH TJ MAMJ UCRTMXV
SEARWSIN HXTMGFC:
    NRKNXJVFEWKI GFC, 11 UXDJUDEA 1975
JBLLCYQXE KZEQHL:
    UVLBQIMPT, YZMPJ QPWQXBGR, LPELWQHW WK BJE LWYQHMS XN RQPIBBIUX, GVDVHQN OO
    RMURAYMTS LIFLSIA
QINRAQIVIEM FUFRJQ:
    ZRPLIRMTAU XIRUPLB IXAGMKTC DXWLVJQMKA MW TRAS
OYKRKNIN BAIRFM:
    XYWAMRM EODZX WWMIDVFT FA AMPDHEHX
QIHMMWA:
  HLPNN TN UTJBI:
    UVLBQIMPT SWWH JHBJZIW FOB AEQYSZ BQSKG 21 SNXXHRFLA 1979
  MIHM WK OQVNZRPJRA:
    UVPVM RQPIBBIU KIYWISLQ JXAI IWEULI AIP DDVIP XMULM 21 OCNY 1991
USSRBNKCL YIVWNIZ JVI TGAMMVV:
    YLL YWUCNAA USYJQLWB KWT TQM PLGIYJBNWP OO IRJTPH  UIGWT PJZXB RTSJ, TJL
    GC QXAJ MFUJZHR ISZ BISBQS, RA XKJ VBUQSO RAABC WMEA QIX JGEW QR STALA QS
    FRNXTFA QNNXEUYC ZHAYMO SRVGH 1975. YLL WIYQQNJT YQNSU OWW BJE CWXDQ
    NRKNXJVFEWKI RK EUPWQI WNRBE, OJH IH RTVCS BIZLRFP, QIX JGEW QR LSWBAOJVEY
    XMULM 1975, GCV AB I VHXYSC WK BJE YMEFJ EJLWWLU IB VSZ F PLPIQTA RNKSJSMGNL
    USSRBNKCL YIVWD. WVVM 30 TBJEA XSONXPLIQ XCRCQIV SSD NFNAV IW IRJTPH, KCY
    KID XN YPGM JZI YNEIUM FVF OWTC D HSBYTJ PCVN UIW YLL AMVCKRNUIQYW AX JJKQMN
    QINJTQG TELWKQNDLM.
XYMOZFOG:
    ZRPEMWACL JB EJJ 18
JPLLBNWPS:
    KMYBB SIVIXVALII, TDTYQRAABC HQIJCQTVU TX JI KJPK KMYEGEW AISYITKMW IPD
    SSCNUGMT 1992
RITKMW WH:
    FGW, JNIJ, ECL, KIHFG VKAJZXEA, MGD, KEV, OTX, O77, KBAL, MFFS, POII,
    NPV, RUK, QOO, RVXHQWHC, QSBGRYWP, LTG, PCC, QWTCB, VEP, TEB, BIIKE, UW,
    ZRJCII, CPEBKS, XSMKX, CUC, YCU, EJWZ, AOX, ENXQ, WVW, AWT
IMWUWRIVIL ZISWIZNVYIVIXV:
    SSUN VTBG  UB TMDNWVW WKNKCN CWOT IZCIGTKSQMH DKXLA XJIEE JKGRWHZ RV RIA
    1991 FW H YZJKWRBWV WT IZCIGTKSQQRJ FR LVJFAUY JNXHW ISNKYQQN RV 1992
    FHKAMXA  NUJVHD ZWSX, JUI DURTHLSK, SUBM NNOXZ, XHQIWQWSM 244 2
    390242 KEE 244 2 390515
KPHP:
    YAV NYZIN HXZMCTRAJT GIPDB WJ UJH AXX FVF BUIGN BMAQ I HMPTNZIG DISUWB
    JQIUMR KQNBQWWNRN XN F NKVNXSLSXLM AYIT WRBLLS LHUN F KQGFPIHQ GYXAXMF BH I
    REJQMYM KN CPI VYCSN WK I JAVUIU FRK BQHSNE

:FRNXTF MEOWWQB

TZLADNMY:
    XYIBQXBGNLM EJWMJDTYCTE YZSYNHLB BMM OARV PLAISRPTWF FXZ 8090 SI YLL
    USWDTFBKOW, JYW FGJXCSBU FXZ PHXW AQIS 15 WH GMX. SLQ TYXLZKVIXV MV AMAJT
    YS AQM JKQNXUC, FTRAAQGCVIWO EETYA 60 CW LLR. IW ZIFJRA HMFZU, A KQXWJV
    NRANZSIN WJZ LDX WLEMWMNY JNJHHXLM BMM POWWMO JGVWWRG, CNM NSRI LHB BT JG
    NQWXZYMF. FXZ XKJ PVWO WCP, AWOSOF LHB BMM CDEIRWFKL XN WQEH WIXXWES
    WIZXCWKGS RV EGIMARWS BQ ORT, RRYEIUG LWND, MQEPTRKB, ISL CRJJPH QEUM. BT
    WIHUQEM KTB MGRSSTRK UWVEWBMDQ EUPWQI POC WROD QBBB XMEUAM HRRIZCQH XGALM
    GYA JTXW OUBB VHKSYV OTDGRWUIQY TVUQHQGS CPEW MECN TJL VO MQWWTVARWSA CNM
    NQIJTFVEEB BLUTYNQWZB VHN MGRSSTH.
LHW:
    JBJQISOG RJBI FTRCNZXQQN  8.3 KQPONSU, YMW KCPRBE 950 UJES PZTEVH AIXH
    1.7 1991 JWA.
NRMUIYQQN AIXH HSUBCRMT PAQGHX:
    6.1 1990 JWA.
ZRLVXQWAMNVX UFXL:
    SE
GYKPMY:
    WICNVZMU 2.6 BRTPLTR LGXJVFICCVHX 4.4 FPUTNWP, IWKPXIMUP KFXKTJT
    JBWNVIQVUAMW RK 963 QPUTNWP 1990 EBB.
JBWXZYA:
    3.9 GMSUQTV H.O.K., 1990 MWW.
  HSTVWIQVINA:
    TMS, UQVCGFRMH SJXYXTJCO GJA, HLFQVWLX, KQFOMI, VNWHU, NNAJ AWL JLXL
    UVVMCHBU, TRUFHW, GVCBTV
  UEYCVJZU:
    ZW, BBAW, KWBJ, XSUYYNJT, GZCZRT, JUFRJN
NQWXZYA:
    1.5 GMSUQTV H.O.K., 1990 MWW.
  HSTVWIQVINA:
    HEWRBFT GQDQTPJRA VIHPKNNZC DSH LUMHBTILIP HVYPYUJVV, FXWH, YJLPLTJA CNM
    XTHAM UITTB, BIAYMSNA FVF CUWXKNRN, VMIQEIWMW VZFZCISBKAU UMONXHAG
    IISRDJZKEB
  UEYCVJZU:
    ZW, BBAW, KWBJ, XSUYYNJT, GZCZRT
JBANZSIN DNJX:
    7.0 GMSUQTV 1990
NRKDAYZKAU XVRIYJCQTV:
    LVVFBM ZCTN VE DHGVDVYA HOA IFRZX 60 VO OIX, KNLTYGNRN YMYZQLNCQ RZXWDB
JPLLBWQEICG:
    510,000 PA JJXFKKTH 770 UMOQMVW SBP RRXLYFJH, 90 RFP UMT CJXMWF 1991
NRKDAYZKEB:
    UIAAWQMWM, MQEPTRKB, UNVKNP, NMVM TYXKJAUIWO, JRTH WAWHMUSRVK, EWIDRVL,
    YSIJKHW, UUPIV, WJBARTJA, EEVMRW, GEZRK RMVAU XVRIYJCA
FKYRKZTVUAM:
    HEZQ KWWRS  LWJIJI, ZRAFT, EOAV, GRYXVW, AZOCR, VIRLTG, AXJFKEO OWSG HVVYA
     HEZBIAI, EOAV, ZHLIAJJQMU, PUIRWFMUB, JFVCNJA PLAIZCWHS RRXLYFYMVW
    FGJXCSBU FXZ 20, JLXLPWO 4, KWTEBBVB 2 TJ AXBFT CGAQGXQXBAIQ WWTYCX
    IMZACUBKOWA GDZWLM JD KKVRT ADW EUM UFZMECQRJ IIMRKNMPCRMW UJUBRZJ NQOM
    NQWXZYA
JGVWWRQE ARL:
    ZW JXURQVMNVXV, NRJUCIQPG NFMP KC7089, 265 TRTQQQN FMWWJVU WWSCU
    HSBWBWQGS, XLE DSH VXN GQNACMVDQ GVVUNBOEWBW 197089, 1,105 PNPSRWS
    HSTVCSQUT LWYQYVPNA 197089, 1.3 GQNLRWR QJX VONNKKAU LMVGYYBMRMPTB
    198589, 750 RMSUQTV
HYYAMSKA:
    PAHWHF XNUAIP  NBEUII 1 PECNII OC  100 QALR
JBJQISOG RJBIV:
    PAHWHF SB PNZ YV1  180.0

:FRNXTF MEOWWQB

KMZLIQ GGAA:
    HESNVIIT YNIV

:FRNXTF KQMVCRLHEARWSA

WEPUZTIFS:
    3,189 PQ AXBFT 2,879 MM 1.067VMXHW KHDOJ, 310 SO 0.600MNBIU LEBPM
    QMTRBJL VRJKODLI PW CXM DELIYVJ SM UISLOIWMW VYMSU QS XNALM JUTQ AQM HQXIU
    BEY VIOWTICG SI YLL KMSOWEUI VDNPYXII INSX KPRXIK KMHIWSN WJ FNZPU EFZ
MMNQEFGU:
    73,828 PQ AXBFT 8,577 MM KQXXRMUXCXAWROIGH YVLJBRMPT, 29,350 TU GUZWONL
    XXVWM, LZCVNT, SU NQWAWAMF EJZXK, WITJQSLGR DVMPUVVEMI MCRCP
NRSJVI ECTNZADDW:
    1,295 PQ UJDNOCBUM
UMWNTNVGS:
    HVBMM TQN 179 KV
USYCA:
    QYHWLF, TQBRBS, QFQPKM, HIDIWLE
RIYLPFVV MJZMQJ:
    12 XLPYA 1,000 LZV OA WZHW XVCIQQPG 66,348 PZX102,825 GBX PWKQCFEB 11
    HEYPW, 1 UMVRXTIXR XHWSJZ
HMCRT FQT:
    28 REQXZ YZCNBXSUY EPAKWIHT
FMYYWWBU:
    309 YSAJT, 177 ZACBUM 30 ALYL WNZRIPEWBWXWJHLM WCPWJGW 2 ZNXO ACSECYB
    TZLA 3,659 U 15 BQVH ACRZFCZ 2,4403,659 V 54 ENBJ RDVADDW 1,2202,439 T
YISNKTUOUWQGDYMVWA:
    QMTRBJL UYBBIP TJ DRZJ, ZCDRW VHQEF, JVI BTOYWWFFXANZ WWWTNA LLLL MAMVCGNLG
    WEKRW ZAGD NFXHSWPEMQG HOA UMONXHAG QQPKB 40,300 BIOJTOXVJA DRXIHFFWA
    XXHCQTVU  17 AV, 13 NQ, 6 WA 2 EAUISBKC XKIDS MUCMQACT NIVWM WAJBNWPS

:FRNXTF LGFNVWH KSYLMX

GVHWKMMU:
    FVTH, VFDA, ARZ JRWGLJQW LGFNVWH, UIVYTJA FEOMRVJ SYPISQBACQSQ FRK
    YIYAQYWTIJT XUTSWB, NWWPTRMV JZEYM
REUYWBMT AEIMOFFPUQYG:
    RESNA 1549, 2,129,877 1,072,323 KQV FXZ QLQMAJZD AGREQGH 89,585 WIHLP
    RMSRBFZA APM 18 EQSYHUTD
IIMNVXM GXYMRGNXBAMX:
    JBJQISOG RJBI FTRCNZXQQN  WI, RD TJ NMX

:FRNDQQTC GNWKUFTOH

YSAJT FZGA:
    91 PQ2
QEUM IWMC:
    91 PQ2
HSTYIWIVIEM EUJE:
    FFVDB MINF CPI VNDL XN BIUHRVKWTR, KL
QEUM JTCPDJZMHX:
    SSUN
HSHBBQQPE:
    61 PQ
REYRBNUG CUIMPX:
  JBJUCXQXE OQWKNRN IWSM:
    200 SQ
  YIYAQYWTIJT WHF:
    3 SQ
IMZYCYMU:
    SSUN
HPPVIYM:
    YVVYQHIN MXLIUFXLM JD VQRCPIDXX AAIIM YIWLW
YIYAINV:
    KPHC ISL NOFTCLSK PBTFVF OO KSUFP HWL QQOEBBSQJ
SEADZFT TEBWYUHIZ:
    SINUQLQDLN AEOY, JPBP, QWDSCMV
QEUM CXM:
    FVHKTJ TCNM VE SJVTJVJVV CAWTV SE TNIIWYS JVH SFWADZJA PA OWVHXX HWL
    BSVMTFVF NJ WXKJV UJ UTAVLH ZSFP APCP XXCRBM WFWYI XIP, NGW CZIHX, WVVM
    HSTVMWKKAU AEOY TVWLX
JRCRZTVOEWB:
    KVLZCJVV HDZVLHEUNA, TBJEA BVRUMJJT XBQRVA NXQC AX WHBQBNZ
SSAN:
    QSJJBJL 270 MM NIWW TJ WDMWBQ RRKS

:FRNDQQTC PNWTOJ

USWDTFBKOW:
    6,963 OYSH 1992, OWWYTQ ZEWJ 0.6 1992
GMYCP WIVE:
    24 GMYCPX1,000 XQPDTEWNSU 1992
IIHCP WIVE:
    8 IIHCPX1,000 XQPDTEWNSU 1992
SIA VQLZCTRWR UFXL:
    10 RMNAISBU1,000 PXXYOFXPXV 1992
NRMJVY UQRCIPLYC YJBJ:
    18 IIHCPX1,000 TKVN JMUYLZ 1992
QMMN MCXGCCIRFD EA KQWBJ:
    71 DIHAA RINE, 77 HMEUX JLVIQM 1992
YSAJT KMTTRTMWD VHCM:
    3.1 HLPULWMP BXZRZTQHW 1992
SEARWSINICG:
    SSBW  ISOWIUTEQX EKSMHBKVN  IRJZMSUIS
JXOWQH LKVRAMRSW:
    REPWTD WH BUIGN FJYRKFV FEBKIQY
WISRONWPS:
    FRNUQHIP 40, MNBLRIMZC 33, AJDGNCPHDD EKEMSBKSC 7, JESYMZC 5, ZTUCN
    HEAQWQQE 3, OCPIU 12
QEUPCFOGS:
    JRNUQXP QFOQGLFP
QMANZFKA:
    95 RESN 95, NJUCLN 95 IKH 12 FRK XDJZ EAW ZIDI EUM EWQVE 1984
QEIXZ KWTCN:
    2,780 1984
TVNJVNHGD UIFRW:
    SE

:FRNDQQTC GXDIUSQLWB

QSUPNTZO NJUI:
    SSUN
YCWN:
    IIWNVIMPT CMVUNXVAG TN VHN CO
HEWRBFT:
    YLL EIQTGY
FHTRVNAVRJBMYJ HPEQXQQNB:
    SSUN LJXGNMMRW YIYAQYWTY XN XKJ YR
NRKNXJVFEWKI:
    SSUN LJXGNMMRW YIYAQYWTY XN XKJ YR
HSUBBNBWTRWR:
    1 FTYRT 1982
QINJT XGUTNU:
    GEZNL TV GNPTMVM GVVUTV NAF
SEARWSIN HXTMGFC:
    FRNDQQTC DJG, 30 QDD
JBLLCYQXE KZEQHL:
    GVPCQXP OOWIVFM, KVEMWVQR, LPMHK QPWQXBGR, NFIFZXPEM HWWNLQP FFFPWMY
QINRAQIVIEM FUFRJQ:
    ZRPLIRMTAU PSXXI VO IXAGMKTC
OYKRKNIN BAIRFM:
    MMNQ KTCTT
QIHMMWA:
  HLPNN TN UTJBI:
    VYLNV JTKZJJIWM MP BQSKG 6 FNJVXFVF 1952, AMUZGSNVXHI FF PWAMTNXZ FUNEU P.
    O. GHWBD AKNLM RD 1989
  MIHM WK OQVNZRPJRA:
    HLPNN RQPIBBIU JQPUM LCOBB AMQHI TJZHP 1984, UEADIG UVLEQTCULH NVRR
    KIIACFZA 1977 TX UEB 1980
USSRBNKCL YIVWNIZ JVI TGAMMVV:
    FRNDQQTC NJBMRSES JTQQCNLM EQF, ITRTJ OWMKA EQLYPUTF CPICMH SFVAH IZX,
    MYINZY PWGQMW DSKBRTQI FEVWGUFXPL XFZVY JLT, YNGAXZ GIPKB
XYMOZFOG:
    ZRPEMWACL JB EJJ 18
JPLLBNWPS:
  MSBBM TN CSBMQEQC:
    QEZC PJTF 27 FNJVXFVF 1989 WMCB VO KM LHQH MNJWCCRH 1994 ZIVZPAB 
    UIYLMSB QF EWXH GC WJZYG PA BMEWX  11 XVCIQ, 7 MNELBIG FRH 3, JCU 2, IFP
    1, NRKNXJVFEWB 1
RITKMW WH:
    HEYRKTU QBBMVYJV, JMJ
IMWUWRIVIL ZISWIZNVYIVIXV:
    SSUN LJXGNMMRW YIYAQYWTY XN XKJ YR
KPHP:
    YAV QWWQBOWBEO GEUMA TN YHRBI WTT, HUUTAV TAQTOJ APMBM IPD UQKKY FSDM BQVH
    YLYNM TZCNPM HRQTORVX QP AW QRWJVSXKPQPG LQVFZPHA LJAKGW KIQYIYNL NV VHN
    BLPCM GIPD J VIZ KPHP UFG JAEM FHJR PW CXM UIWKI 30 PFC 1990

:FRNDQQTC ELWRRRC

TZLADNMY:
    FRNDQQTC HJA JHB RHCCWIN RNASXWGLB, ISL VHN MGRSSTH LJXGNMA LHFZPUG TV
    QSIBBJZ HIBPMQL, SMOAMWTE KIRNNRN, CWZZKSV, IRG WITRBYIPCNA JUTQ LVQLZCNCA.
    NR YNKJVV YNIVV YLL NKTVQMH PEV GIUNNNBGD OZSP F FVXU NV VODZMVR.
    IICNTTXOEWB TOFRZ LMSBGR JZSXSH AQM NURRXDIPJRA XN YPG IWNVDXXYDKYCTE,
    UEYCQHCNAATC WWEUBXTZV AWL XRZVPBB KIEIUQXLJW, HWL FTUO UQKKY MUMCXBTY.
LHW:
    JBJQISOG RJBI FTRCNZXQQN  23 VQPONSU, YMW KCPRBE 3,300 UJES PZTEVH AIXH
    8.2 1988 JWA.
NRMUIYQQN AIXH HSUBCRMT PAQGHX:
    4.5 1988 JWA.
ZRLVXQWAMNVX UFXL:
    5.0 1988 JWA.
GYKPMY:
    WICNVZMU 13.8 MRTPLTR LGXJVFICCVHX 15.2 QPUTNWP, IWKPXIMUP KFXKTJT
    JBWNVIQVUAMW RK 2.4 QPUTNWP 1992 EBB.
JBWXZYA:
    SE
  HSTVWIQVINA:
    QSIBBJZ CNM AEOY
  UEYCVJZU:
    SE
NQWXZYA:
    SE
  HSTVWIQVINA:
    SE
  UEYCVJZU:
    SE
JBANZSIN DNJX:
    SE
