lives a Hatter:  and in THAT direction, waving the other paw,
lives a March Hare.  Visit either you like:  theyre both mad.

  But I dont want to go among mad people, Alice remarked.

  Oh, you cant help that, said the Cat:  were all mad here.
Im mad.  Youre mad.

  How do you know Im mad? said Alice.

  You must be, said the Cat, or you wouldnt have come here.

  Alice didnt think that proved it at all however, she went on
And how do you know that youre mad?

  To begin with, said the Cat, a dogs not mad.  You grant
that?

  I suppose so, said Alice.

  Well, then, the Cat went on, you see, a dog growls when its
angry, and wags its tail when its pleased.  Now I growl when Im
pleased, and wag my tail when Im angry.  Therefore Im mad.

  I call it purring, not growling, said Alice.

  Call it what you like, said the Cat.  Do you play croquet
with the Queen today?

  I should like it very much, said Alice, but I havent been
invited yet.

  Youll see me there, said the Cat, and vanished.

  Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used
to queer things happening.  While she was looking at the place
where it had been, it suddenly appeared again.

  Bythebye, what became of the baby? said the Cat.  Id
nearly forgotten to ask.

  It turned into a pig, Alice quietly said, just as if it had
come back in a natural way.

  I thought it would, said the Cat, and vanished again.

  Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it
did not appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the
direction in which the March Hare was said to live.  Ive seen
hatters before, she said to herself the March Hare will be
much the most interesting, and perhaps as this is May it wont be
raving madat least not so mad as it was in March.  As she said
this, she looked up, and there was the Cat again, sitting on a
branch of a tree.

  Did you say pig, or fig? said the Cat.

  I said pig, replied Alice and I wish you wouldnt keep
appearing and vanishing so suddenly:  you make one quite giddy.

  All right, said the Cat and this time it vanished quite
slowly, beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the
grin, which remained some time after the rest of it had gone.

  Well!  Ive often seen a cat without a grin, thought Alice
but a grin without a cat!  Its the most curious thing I ever
say in my life!

  She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the
house of the March Hare:  she thought it must be the right house,
because the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was
thatched with fur.  It was so large a house, that she did not
like to go nearer till she had nibbled some more of the lefthand
bit of mushroom, and raised herself to about two feet high:  even
then she walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself
Suppose it should be raving mad after all!  I almost wish Id
gone to see the Hatter instead!



                           CHAPTER VII

                         A Mad TeaParty


  There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house,
and the March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it:  a
Dormouse was sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other two
were using it as a cushion, resting their elbows on it, and the
talking over its head.  Very uncomfortable for the Dormouse,
thought Alice only, as its asleep, I suppose it doesnt mind.

  The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded
together at one corner of it:  No room!  No room! they cried
out when they saw Alice coming.  Theres PLENTY of room! said
Alice indignantly, and she sat down in a large armchair at one
end of the table.

  Have some wine, the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.

  Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it
but tea.  I dont see any wine, she remarked.

  There isnt any, said the March Hare.

  Then it wasnt very civil of you to offer it, said Alice
angrily.

  It wasnt very civil of you to sit down without being
invited, said the March Hare.

  I didnt know it was YOUR table, said Alice its laid for a
great many more than three.

  Your hair wants cutting, said the Hatter.  He had been
looking at Alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was
his first speech.

  You should learn not to make personal remarks, Alice said
with some severity its very rude.

  The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this but all
he SAID was, Why is a raven like a writingdesk?

  Come, we shall have some fun now! thought Alice.  Im glad
theyve begun asking riddles.I believe I can guess that, she
added aloud.

  Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?
said the March Hare.

  Exactly so, said Alice.

  Then you should say what you mean, the March Hare went on.

  I do, Alice hastily replied at leastat least I mean what
I saythats the same thing, you know.

  Not the same thing a bit! said the Hatter.  You might just
as well say that "I see what I eat" is the same thing as "I eat
what I see"!

  You might just as well say, added the March Hare, that "I
like what I get" is the same thing as "I get what I like"!

  You might just as well say, added the Dormouse, who seemed to
be talking in his sleep, that "I breathe when I sleep" is the
same thing as "I sleep when I breathe"!

  It IS the same thing with you, said the Hatter, and here the
conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute,
while Alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and
writingdesks, which wasnt much.

  The Hatter was the first to break the silence.  What day of
the month is it? he said, turning to Alice:  he had taken his
watch out of his pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking
it every now and then, and holding it to his ear.

  Alice considered a little, and then said The fourth.

  Two days wrong! sighed the Hatter.  I told you butter
wouldnt suit the works! he added looking angrily at the March
Hare.

  It was the BEST butter, the March Hare meekly replied.

  Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well, the Hatter
grumbled:  you shouldnt have put it in with the breadknife.

  The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily:  then
he dipped it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again:  but he
could think of nothing better to say than his first remark, It
was the BEST butter, you know.

  Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity.
What a funny watch! she remarked.  It tells the day of the
month, and doesnt tell what oclock it is!

  Why should it? muttered the Hatter.  Does YOUR watch tell
you what year it is?

  Of course not, Alice replied very readily:  but thats
because it stays the same year for such a long time together.

  Which is just the case with MINE, said the Hatter.

  Alice felt dreadfully puzzled.  The Hatters remark seemed to
have no sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English.
I dont quite understand you, she said, as politely as she
could.

  The Dormouse is asleep again, said the Hatter, and he poured
a little hot tea upon its nose.

  The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without
opening its eyes, Of course, of course just what I was going to
remark myself.

  Have you guessed the riddle yet? the Hatter said, turning to
Alice again.

  No, I give it up, Alice replied:  whats the answer?

  I havent the slightest idea, said the Hatter.

  Nor I, said the March Hare.

  Alice sighed wearily.  I think you might do something better
with the time, she said, than waste it in asking riddles that
have no answers.

  If you knew Time as well as I do, said the Hatter, you
wouldnt talk about wasting IT.  Its HIM.

  I dont know what you mean, said Alice.

  Of course you dont! the Hatter said, tossing his head
contemptuously.  I dare say you never even spoke to Time!

  Perhaps not, Alice cautiously replied:  but I know I have to
beat time when I learn music.

  Ah! that accounts for it, said the Hatter.  He wont stand
beating.  Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, hed do
almost anything you liked with the clock.  For instance, suppose
it were nine oclock in the morning, just time to begin lessons:
youd only have to whisper a hint to Time, and round goes the
clock in a twinkling!  Halfpast one, time for dinner!

  I only wish it was, the March Hare said to itself in a
whisper.

  That would be grand, certainly, said Alice thoughtfully:
but thenI shouldnt be hungry for it, you know.

  Not at first, perhaps, said the Hatter:  but you could keep
it to halfpast one as long as you liked.

  Is that the way YOU manage? Alice asked.

  The Hatter shook his head mournfully.  Not I! he replied.
We quarrelled last Marchjust before HE went mad, you know
pointing with his tea spoon at the March Hare, it was at the
great concert given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing

            "Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
            How I wonder what youre at!"

You know the song, perhaps?

  Ive heard something like it, said Alice.

  It goes on, you know, the Hatter continued, in this way:

            "Up above the world you fly,
            Like a teatray in the sky.
                    Twinkle, twinkle"

Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep
Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle and went on so long that
they had to pinch it to make it stop.

  Well, Id hardly finished the first verse, said the Hatter,
when the Queen jumped up and bawled out, "Hes murdering the
time!  Off with his head!"

  How dreadfully savage! exclaimed Alice.

  And ever since that, the Hatter went on in a mournful tone,
he wont do a thing I ask!  Its always six oclock now.

  A bright idea came into Alices head.  Is that the reason so
many teathings are put out here? she asked.

  Yes, thats it, said the Hatter with a sigh:  its always
teatime, and weve no time to wash the things between whiles.

  Then you keep moving round, I suppose? said Alice.

  Exactly so, said the Hatter:  as the things get used up.

  But what happens when you come to the beginning again? Alice
ventured to ask.

  Suppose we change the subject, the March Hare interrupted,
yawning.  Im getting tired of this.  I vote the young lady
tells us a story.

  Im afraid I dont know one, said Alice, rather alarmed at
the proposal.

  Then the Dormouse shall! they both cried.  Wake up,
Dormouse!  And they pinched it on both sides at once.

  The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes.  I wasnt asleep, he
said in a hoarse, feeble voice:  I heard every word you fellows
were saying.

  Tell us a story! said the March Hare.

  Yes, please do! pleaded Alice.

  And be quick about it, added the Hatter, or youll be asleep
again before its done.

  Once upon a time there were three little sisters, the
Dormouse began in a great hurry and their names were Elsie,
Lacie, and Tillie and they lived at the bottom of a well

  What did they live on? said Alice, who always took a great
interest in questions of eating and drinking.

  They lived on treacle, said the Dormouse, after thinking a
minute or two.

  They couldnt have done that, you know, Alice gently
remarked theyd have been ill.

  So they were, said the Dormouse VERY ill.

  Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways
of living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went
on:  But why did they live at the bottom of a well?

  Take some more tea, the March Hare said to Alice, very
earnestly.

  Ive had nothing yet, Alice replied in an offended tone, so
I cant take more.

  You mean you cant take LESS, said the Hatter:  its very
easy to take MORE than nothing.

  Nobody asked YOUR opinion, said Alice.

  Whos making personal remarks now? the Hatter asked
triumphantly.

  Alice did not quite know what to say to this:  so she helped
herself to some tea and breadandbutter, and then turned to the
Dormouse, and repeated her question.  Why did they live at the
bottom of a well?

  The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and
then said, It was a treaclewell.

  Theres no such thing!  Alice was beginning very angrily, but
the Hatter and the March Hare went Sh! sh! and the Dormouse
sulkily remarked, If you cant be civil, youd better finish the
story for yourself.

  No, please go on! Alice said very humbly I wont interrupt
again.  I dare say there may be ONE.

  One, indeed! said the Dormouse indignantly.  However, he
consented to go on.  And so these three little sistersthey
were learning to draw, you know

  What did they draw? said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.

  Treacle, said the Dormouse, without considering at all this
time.

  I want a clean cup, interrupted the Hatter:  lets all move
one place on.

  He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him:  the
March Hare moved into the Dormouses place, and Alice rather
unwillingly took the place of the March Hare.  The Hatter was the
only one who got any advantage from the change:  and Alice was a
good deal worse off than before, as the March Hare had just upset
the milkjug into his plate.

  Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began
very cautiously:  But I dont understand.  Where did they draw
the treacle from?

  You can draw water out of a waterwell, said the Hatter so
I should think you could draw treacle out of a treaclewelleh,
stupid?

  But they were IN the well, Alice said to the Dormouse, not
choosing to notice this last remark.

  Of course they were, said the Dormouse well in.

  This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let the Dormouse
go on for some time without interrupting it.

  They were learning to draw, the Dormouse went on, yawning and
rubbing its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy and they drew
all manner of thingseverything that begins with an M

  Why with an M? said Alice.

  Why not? said the March Hare.

  Alice was silent.

  The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going
off into a doze but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up
again with a little shriek, and went on:  that begins with an
M, such as mousetraps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness
you know you say things are "much of a muchness"did you ever
see such a thing as a drawing of a muchness?

  Really, now you ask me, said Alice, very much confused, I
dont think

  Then you shouldnt talk, said the Hatter.

  This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear:  she got
up in great disgust, and walked off the Dormouse fell asleep
instantly, and neither of the others took the least notice of her
going, though she looked back once or twice, half hoping that
they would call after her:  the last time she saw them, they were
trying to put the Dormouse into the teapot.

  At any rate Ill never go THERE again! said Alice as she
picked her way through the wood.  Its the stupidest teaparty I
ever was at in all my life!

  Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a
door leading right into it.  Thats very curious! she thought.
But everythings curious today.  I think I may as well go in at
once.  And in she went.

  Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the
little glass table.  Now, Ill manage better this time, she
said to herself, and began by taking the little golden key, and
unlocking the door that led into the garden.  Then she went to
work nibbling at the mushroom she had kept a piece of it in her
pocked till she was about a foot high:  then she walked down the
little passage:  and THENshe found herself at last in the
beautiful garden, among the bright flowerbeds and the cool
fountains.



                          CHAPTER VIII

                   The Queens CroquetGround


  A large rosetree stood near the entrance of the garden:  the
roses growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at
it, busily painting them red.  Alice thought this a very curious
thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up
to them she heard one of them say, Look out now, Five!  Dont go
splashing paint over me like that!

  I couldnt help it, said Five, in a sulky tone Seven jogged
my elbow.

  On which Seven looked up and said, Thats right, Five!  Always
lay the blame on others!

  YOUD better not talk! said Five.  I heard the Queen say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!

  What for? said the one who had spoken first.

  Thats none of YOUR business, Two! said Seven.

  Yes, it IS his business! said Five, and Ill tell himit
was for bringing the cook tuliproots instead of onions.

  Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun Well, of all
the unjust things when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as
she stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly:  the
others looked round also, and all of them bowed low.

  Would you tell me, said Alice, a little timidly, why you are
painting those roses?

  Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two.  Two began in a
low voice, Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to
have been a RED rosetree, and we put a white one in by mistake
and if the Queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads
cut off, you know.  So you see, Miss, were doing our best, afore
she comes, to  At this moment Five, who had been anxiously
looking across the garden, called out The Queen!  The Queen!
and the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon
their faces.  There was a sound of many footsteps, and Alice
looked round, eager to see the Queen.

  First came ten soldiers carrying clubs these were all shaped
like the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and
feet at the corners:  next the ten courtiers these were
ornamented all over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the
soldiers did.  After these came the royal children there were
ten of them, and the little dears came jumping merrily along hand
in hand, in couples:  they were all ornamented with hearts.  Next
came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among them Alice
recognised the White Rabbit:  it was talking in a hurried nervous
manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without
noticing her.  Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the
Kings crown on a crimson velvet cushion and, last of all this
grand procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.

  Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on
her face like the three gardeners, but she could not remember
every having heard of such a rule at processions and besides,
what would be the use of a procession, thought she, if people
had all to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldnt see
it?  So she stood still where she was, and waited.

  When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped
and looked at her, and the Queen said severely Who is this?
She said it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in
reply.

  Idiot! said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently and,
turning to Alice, she went on, Whats your name, child?

  My name is Alice, so please your Majesty, said Alice very
politely but she added, to herself, Why, theyre only a pack of
cards, after all.  I neednt be afraid of them!

  And who are THESE? said the Queen, pointing to the three
gardeners who were lying round the rosetree for, you see, as
they were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs
was the same as the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether
they were gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her
own children.

  How should I know? said Alice, surprised at her own courage.
Its no business of MINE.

  The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her
for a moment like a wild beast, screamed Off with her head!
Off

  Nonsense! said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the
Queen was silent.

  The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said
Consider, my dear:  she is only a child!

  The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave
Turn them over!

  The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

  Get up! said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the
three gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the
King, the Queen, the royal children, and everybody else.

  Leave off that! screamed the Queen.  You make me giddy.
And then, turning to the rosetree, she went on, What HAVE you
been doing here?

  May it please your Majesty, said Two, in a very humble tone,
going down on one knee as he spoke, we were trying

  I see! said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the
roses.  Off with their heads! and the procession moved on,
three of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate
gardeners, who ran to Alice for protection.

  You shant be beheaded! said Alice, and she put them into a
large flowerpot that stood near.  The three soldiers wandered
about for a minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly
marched off after the others.

  Are their heads off? shouted the Queen.

  Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty! the soldiers
shouted in reply.

  Thats right! shouted the Queen.  Can you play croquet?

  The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question
was evidently meant for her.

  Yes! shouted Alice.

  Come on, then! roared the Queen, and Alice joined the
procession, wondering very much what would happen next.

  Itsits a very fine day! said a timid voice at her side.
She was walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously
into her face.

  Very, said Alice:  wheres the Duchess?

  Hush!  Hush! said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone.  He
looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised
himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and
whispered Shes under sentence of execution.

  What for? said Alice.

  Did you say "What a pity!"? the Rabbit asked.

  No, I didnt, said Alice:  I dont think its at all a pity.
I said "What for?"

  She boxed the Queens ears the Rabbit began.  Alice gave a
little scream of laughter.  Oh, hush! the Rabbit whispered in a
frightened tone.  The Queen will hear you!  You see, she came
rather late, and the Queen said

  Get to your places! shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder,
and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up
against each other however, they got settled down in a minute or
two, and the game began.  Alice thought she had never seen such a
curious croquetground in her life it was all ridges and
furrows the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets live
flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to
stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

  The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her
flamingo:  she succeeded in getting its body tucked away,
comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down,
but generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened
out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it
WOULD twist itself round and look up in her face, with such a
puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out laughing:
and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again,
it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled
itself, and was in the act of crawling away:  besides all this,
there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she
wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubledup soldiers
were always getting up and walking off to other parts of the
ground, Alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very
difficult game indeed.

  The players all played at once without waiting for turns,
quarrelling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs and in
a very short time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went
stamping about, and shouting Off with his head! or Off with
her head! about once in a minute.

  Alice began to feel very uneasy:  to be sure, she had not as
yet had any dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might
happen any minute, and then, thought she, what would become of
me?  Theyre dreadfully fond of beheading people here the great
wonder is, that theres any one left alive!

  She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering
whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a
curious appearance in the air:  it puzzled her very much at
first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to
be a grin, and she said to herself Its the Cheshire Cat:  now I
shall have somebody to talk to.

  How are you getting on? said the Cat, as soon as there was
mouth enough for it to speak with.

  Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded.  Its no
use speaking to it, she thought, till its ears have come, or at
least one of them.  In another minute the whole head appeared,
and then Alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the
game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her.  The
Cat seemed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and
no more of it appeared.

  I dont think they play at all fairly, Alice began, in rather
a complaining tone, and they all quarrel so dreadfully one cant
hear oneself speakand they dont seem to have any rules in
particular at least, if there are, nobody attends to themand
youve no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive
for instance, theres the arch Ive got to go through next
walking about at the other end of the groundand I should have
croqueted the Queens hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it
saw mine coming!

  How do you like the Queen? said the Cat in a low voice.

  Not at all, said Alice:  shes so extremely  Just then
she noticed that the Queen was close behind her, listening:  so
she went on, likely to win, that its hardly worth while
finishing the game.

  The Queen smiled and passed on.

  Who ARE you talking to? said the King, going up to Alice, and
looking at the Cats head with great curiosity.

  Its a friend of minea Cheshire Cat, said Alice:  allow me
to introduce it.

  I dont like the look of it at all, said the King:  however,
it may kiss my hand if it likes.

  Id rather not, the Cat remarked.

  Dont be impertinent, said the King, and dont look at me
like that!  He got behind Alice as he spoke.

  A cat may look at a king, said Alice.  Ive read that in
some book, but I dont remember where.

  Well, it must be removed, said the King very decidedly, and
he called the Queen, who was passing at the moment, My dear!  I
wish you would have this cat removed!

  The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great
or small.  Off with his head! she said, without even looking
round.

  Ill fetch the executioner myself, said the King eagerly, and
he hurried off.

  Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game
was going on, as she heard the Queens voice in the distance,
screaming with passion.  She had already heard her sentence three
of the players to be executed for having missed their turns, and
she did not like the look of things at all, as the game was in
such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or
not.  So she went in search of her hedgehog.

  The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog,
which seemed to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one
of them with the other:  the only difficulty was, that her
flamingo was gone across to the other side of the garden, where
Alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up
into a tree.

  By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back,
the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight:
but it doesnt matter much, thought Alice, as all the arches
are gone from this side of the ground.  So she tucked it away
under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back for
a little more conversation with her friend.

  When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to
find quite a large crowd collected round it:  there was a dispute
going on between the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who
were all talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent,
and looked very uncomfortable.

  The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to
settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her,
though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed
to make out exactly what they said.

  The executioners argument was, that you couldnt cut off a
head unless there was a body to cut it off from:  that he had
never had to do such a thing before, and he wasnt going to begin
at HIS time of life.

  The Kings argument was, that anything that had a head could be
beheaded, and that you werent to talk nonsense.

  The Queens argument was, that if something wasnt done about
it in less than no time shed have everybody executed, all round.
It was this last remark that had made the whole party look so
grave and anxious.

  Alice could think of nothing else to say but It belongs to the
Duchess:  youd better ask HER about it.

  Shes in prison, the Queen said to the executioner:  fetch
her here.  And the executioner went off like an arrow.

   The Cats head began fading away the moment he was gone, and,
by the time he had come back with the Dutchess, it had entirely
disappeared so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and
down looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.



                           CHAPTER IX

                     The Mock Turtles Story


  You cant think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old
thing! said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately
into Alices, and they walked off together.

  Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and
thought to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had
made her so savage when they met in the kitchen.

  When IM a Duchess, she said to herself, not in a very
hopeful tone though, I wont have any pepper in my kitchen AT
ALL.  Soup does very well withoutMaybe its always pepper that
makes people hottempered, she went on, very much pleased at
having found out a new kind of rule, and vinegar that makes them
sourand camomile that makes them bitterandand barleysugar
and such things that make children sweettempered.  I only wish
people knew that:  then they wouldnt be so stingy about it, you
know

  She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a
little startled when she heard her voice close to her ear.
Youre thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you
forget to talk.  I cant tell you just now what the moral of that
is, but I shall remember it in a bit.

  Perhaps it hasnt one, Alice ventured to remark.

  Tut, tut, child! said the Duchess.  Everythings got a
moral, if only you can find it.  And shL BYZMGZNL LHWWLUN ZX
HPVBMW BQ AUQGHX WPMM FA UHN ATRPI.

  FPPLM IQF NXB QXHL SRSJ SGEYQRJ XS JUWXM VO QMV:  INVZC,
GIJJCXM VHN LYFMIZB EFA XEAG YJQC HWL XMEOWLPB, GIJJCXM UHN EEV
JBHLBQG VHN ZMJMX ONQLPV TX ZIVY LLA KMQP UYWR DQMJNA XPQUULIU,
FRK RB BIU AW CRFTQMXZYIDLH ALDWT JQQS.  PQWNDIU, XLL MQI VQT
QMRN BT JG RDLI, VT WON JTZG IC IW ZJPS JA XPG CXCPG.

  YLL PIRMU GXQRJ TR YJBMMT BNBXHW RVF, AMM UARL, FB BEF XN
PILYQSO WP CPI FTRCNZXIVIXV E ONXAUM.

  YMZ BW, XIKD CPI GZGONAX:  IPD CPI PTVHU WK BJAC QW"RM,
YMZ UWAM, VIB TSYJ, XOJB RIMEB BLH BSYUL LW TODVH!"

  XSTNJTLA SJQH, DQMJN EMQUPNZIG, YLHC QYA FOWM FB JZLAGGWFY
RMUMQSO VHNQV RBR IDANVGSB!

  FL, DNTQ!  QV MNIRV RYJQ BMM UAVM XKNRN, BINL VHN LYFMIZB,
IMNPQSO JEA ALDWT SRBYTG CQQR LSXV JTNKGS BPSXQHLA IX AJE JLHHI,
FRK CPJ UQRJT SI YLHC QX"BCKN KEUJ SM CPJ AGNBM, EQI XON
XSBWLX EKLU BENJ GHAM TN VHNUWHQZLB."

  MSD OWSL UHN QW RK JPWLNVI MXZEOX MU CPNVIS! JTMFJ XOXCLPV TX
MIYBMQN.

  N HHAM XIA YXCVH BSUMMWQPG FPC L ISUC XZB OY JZQ UTYUM GTCT
BEPBB, YPG DDKLHXW ZJQI IHTNZ E SFYZN:  BMM TEJASQ NW, AQIY QO
ISBKBKCN AKWYW YLL CMRXGR XN CRZV MUIRQPGX.  ALDQP P CZD BJE
JBWNZNUGNC?

  MI TROMB DICM, EONGL LIZBKODAPB WIWUQJL, POC NIHQMUP IY INL
FRERWZA VO QIZH YLL NFUMTIVMRW YVPNL.

  AIYH BWCG, SJQH WMI KDKMMUS:  OTEPNRNXMX IPD VCWWFVK KWYP
GMAN.  ISL VHN USUFP VO BMIV IB"JMUIW VO I KMCTQMV IQSJT
YSNNBMMT."

  TRSH UZAVAAL MVSX H KQWL, CLRKI UJQHASJL.

  WMNQB, FA WSDIP, VFMK CPJ LWCQMWV:  BLHC I HTGAA EEB DSB
MECN WK XWTCQRJ YLPWOX!

  NXZ J UNVGRJT, M WMMUT, AFQF AUQGH.

  TJ JXCWAG IC QW, VFMK CPJ LWCQMWV, BLV BMJUGD AMEGD XV JOWMG
YS LEMWGVHRVK WMEA JTNKG SJQH WMIYNA F TCRPM QXXXHALRQPE WMEU
MIYN.  ISL VHN USUFP VO BMIV IB"BLH RSYN BMMTE RA SI RMUN, BMM
QIZB BMMTE RA SI DSBAA."

  TL, P TVTE! GXLTELRIK JTNKG, WQW LDI RVC IYBGNMMH WT XORA
QEZC ZJUCRT, QXV F ZLPMYIDLN.  QX GTIZWB QWQK UQOH TRL, KCY QV
NW.

  N UBRBJ IIRNM ALYL FXC, XIKD CPI GZGONAX IPD CPI PTVHU WK
YLHC QX"JG WQIX BTY DXCQL UENU XR GI"VA QK GQUM TMNJ MA YCY
RSYN ANURLH"VIYJV PVILQPE HWYUXISO VTB VO KM SWMIYFQXM VHJV
BLHC QY UKGQB ESUIHA BT WVHNZW WMEA FPFB AOD EIUJ SY VQLPV HJDI
GILW EFA POC WXKJVDRAJ BJAW ELDY CVD PFL DENV ARZPK QIAM CPYMEUJH
YS AQMR BQ BN WXKJVDRAJ."

  N XORVP Q UHXCPG ZRKNZXBCNM BLDY FLCBJZ, CLRKI VFMK EMWG
USSRBJTA, IO Q LDI MA FZNBVEW LSZS:  FBC Q HIPT ZCMWJ JVUTTE KT
FW FXC XIA IC.

  YLHCA SWVHRVK WT AOJB N KQUUL WDD MM R KMWUE, CPI GZGONAX
WIWUQJL, KN J XPHFWLM BTVG.

  UVHH LTVV TAWYEQI FXCWAGLO BS VFC PC ISG NOWOIU YLHW BMIV,
XEPM IQQEE.

  TL, KXVY BCLT IFRZX AAWZJNE! BIMG YLL MCHPGSB.  Q QDPI FXC
F TYNAJVV OO MZHWCAQQSO KVN AELI EZ HMY.

  F GONIU AQRC WJ SWIZNVY! BJODOLW FPPLM.  NU ILJL XKJC KXVY
LMCN JNZVHMIC SWIZNVYA NITM XKFX!  IDB XPG DRL RRY ZLWBZZG TX
XEF RB TCV LXCH.

  YLPWSNVI APIMQ? YLL MCHPGSB IWNJH, DRBM IPOCPIU IMN XN MMT
XLHAX QQVTUM GKNR.

  NZL J ZNOJT CW XKNRR, BINL CLRKI VMEYYTD, NQR BPI ZFW
GINRVSQPG CW JHJP H UQYBNE FWVUNIK.

  OYZC IGWWT JA QXHL YROMB, UARL XKJ HBLPJAU, AB XMJX LHEM YW
KPF JVI BJE V

  GYA QMWM, VO JTMFJW NAMFB UUAXVLXI, AQM ICEHNAWV ASPLM IQGD
FAHH, MAMP IW BLH RMKMTJ WH HNZ JDASBAQYM YOAL QRWES, JVI BJE
FVT CPFB YAB TMQPIK RVYW JEAA FHLEU CW YZGMKTI.  DQMJN TTWMEM CT,
FRK CPJZG SCWSG YLL ZCJMP IW NVRSX VO BMMO, WRBL KJV HAUX NQLMMH,
KVVFVNVI LRSI D YLBWLJZUTXZQ.

  F JPWM IIA, YXCV PFNLBBD! BJE MCGKJWZ KMLIP IW I PRB, ALJS
ASPLM.
