skills to operate them at LC would be extremely expensive.  Further, the
natural inclination to upgrade to newer and better equipment each year
made it reasonable for AM to focus on what it did best and seek external
conversion services.  Using service bureaus also allowed AM to have
several types of operations take place at the same time.  2 AM was not a
technology project, but an effort to improve access to library
collections.  Hence, whether text was converted using OCR or rekeying
mattered little to AM.  What mattered were cost and accuracy of results.

AM considered different types of service bureaus and selected three to
perform several small tests in order to acquire a sense of the field.
The sample collections with which they worked included handwritten
correspondence, typewritten manuscripts from the 1940s, and
eighteenthcentury printed broadsides on microfilm.  On none of these
samples was OCR performed they were all rekeyed.  AM had several special
requirements for the three service bureaus it had engaged.  For instance,
any errors in the original text were to be retained.  Working from bound
volumes or anything that could not be sheetfed also constituted a factor
eliminating companies that would have performed OCR.

AM requires 99.95 percent accuracy, which, though it sounds high, often
means one or two errors per page.  The initial batch of test samples
contained several handwritten materials for which AM did not require
textcoding.  The results, ERWAY reported, were in all cases fairly
comparable:  for the most part, all three service bureaus achieved 99.95
percent accuracy.  AM was satisfied with the work but surprised at the cost.

As AM began converting whole collections, it retained the requirement for
99.95 percent accuracy and added requirements for textcoding.  AM needed
to begin performing work more than three years ago before LC requirements
for SGML applications had been established.  Since AMs goal was sMTYTD
YS YNBFQP AWG SI YLL RVYMNLNKXXFP JXVYMPT AMTUJWLWBJL DY CPI ITVTJBYQPG
TJ AQM IWEUVMRW BLPLP BWWLM JI OTWA RN TVG PNZJRWQLM I XBTAROLW FWJRQ
HSUEMWAKOW, IQ XXIK "BORTNITM" GRIIZ.  CPJAG CXLIV WIZNUGTGD BOQO YENB
