NOTES:
     (6)  The CORE project is a collaboration among Cornell University's
     Mann Library, Bell Communications Research (Bellcore), the American
     Chemical Society (ACS), the Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS), and
     OCLC.

Michael LESK                  The CORE Electronic Chemistry Library

A major on-line file of chemical journal literature complete with
graphics is being developed to test the usability of fully electronic
access to documents, as a joint project of Cornell University, the
American Chemical Society, the Chemical Abstracts Service, OCLC, and
Bellcore (with additional support from Sun Microsystems, Springer-Verlag,
DigitaI Equipment Corporation, Sony Corporation of America, and Apple
Computers).  Our file contains the American Chemical Society's on-line
journals, supplemented with the graphics from the paper publication.  The
indexing of the articles from Chemical Abstracts Documents is available
in both image and text format, and several different interfaces can be
used.  Our goals are (1) to assess the effectiveness and acceptability of
electronic access to primary journals as compared with paper, and (2) to
identify the most desirable functions of the user interface to an
electronic system of journals, including in particular a comparison of
page-image display with ASCII display interfaces.  Early experiments with
chemistry students on a variety of tasks suggest that searching tasks are
completed much faster with any electronic system than with paper, but
that for reading all versions of the articles are roughly equivalent.

Pamela ANDRE and Judith ZIDAR

Text conversion is far more expensive and time-consuming than image
capture alone.  NAL's experience with optical character recognition (OCR)
will be related and compared with the experience of having text rekeyed.
What factors affect OCR accuracy?  How accurate does full text have to be
in order to be useful?  How do different users react to imperfect text?
These are questions that will be explored.  For many, a service bureau
may be a better solution than performing the work inhouse; this will also
be discussed.

SESSION VI

Marybeth PETERS

Copyright law protects creative works.  Protection granted by the law to
authors and disseminators of works includes the right to do or authorize
the following:  reproduce the work, prepare derivative works, distribute
the work to the public, and publicly perform or display the work.  In
addition, copyright owners of sound recordings and computer programs have
the right to control rental of their works.  These rights are not
unlimited; there are a number of exceptions and limitations.

An electronic environment places strains on the copyright system.
Copyright owners want to control uses of their work and be paid for any
use; the public wants quick and easy access at little or no cost.  The
marketplace is working in this area.  Contracts, guidelines on electronic
use, and collective licensing are in use and being refined.

