too expensive to create a system that acts on SGML in real time.
However, the regularity provided by SGML is essential for verifying the
content of the texts, and greatly speeds all the processing performed on
them.  The fact that the texts exist in SGML ensures that they will be
relatively easy to port to different hardware and software, and so will
outlast the current delivery platform.  Finally, the SGML markup
incorporates existing canonical reference systems (chapter, verse, line,
etc.); indexing and navigation are based on these features.  This ensures
that the same canonical reference will always resolve to the same point
within a text, and that all versions of our texts, regardless of delivery
platform (even paper printouts) will function the same way.

In order to provide tools for users, the text is processed by a
morphological analyzer, and the results are stored in a database.
Together with the index, the Greek-English Lexicon, and the index of all
the English words in the definitions of the lexicon, the morphological
analyses comprise a set of linguistic tools that allow users of all
levels to work with the textual information, and to accomplish different
tasks.  For example, students who read no Greek may explore a concept as
it appears in Greek texts by using the English-Greek index, and then
looking up works in the texts and translations, or scholars may do
detailed morphological studies of word use by using the morphological
analyses of the texts.  Because these tools were not designed for any one
use, the same tools and the same data can be used by both students and
scholars.

NOTES:
     (5)  Perseus is based at Harvard University, with collaborators at
     several other universities.  The project has been funded primarily
     by the Annenberg/CPB Project, as well as by Harvard University,
     Apple Computer, and others.  It is published by Yale University
     Press.  Perseus runs on Macintosh computers, under the HyperCard
     program.

Eric CALALUCA

Chadwyck-Healey embarked last year on two distinct yet related full-text
humanities database projects.

The English Poetry Full-Text Database and the Patrologia Latina Database
represent new approaches to linguistic research resources.  The size and
complexity of the projects present problems for electronic publishers,
but surmountable ones if they remain abreast of the latest possibilities
in data capture and retrieval software techniques.

The issues which required address prior to the commencement of the
projects were legion:

     1.   Editorial selection (or exclusion) of materials in each
          database

     2.   Deciding whether or not to incorporate a normative encoding
          structure into the databases?
               A.  If one is selected, should it be SGML?
               B.  If SGML, then the TEI?

     3.   Deliver as CD-ROM, magnetic tape, or both?

     4.   Can one produce retrieval software advanced enough for the
          postdoctoral linguist, yet accessible enough for unattended
          general use?  Should one try?

     5.   Re fair and liberal networking policies, what are the risks to
          an electronic publisher?

     6.   How does the emergence of national and international education
          networks affect the use and viability of research projects
          requiring high investment?  Do the new European Community
          directives concerning database protection necessitate two
          distinct publishing projects, one for North America and one for
          overseas?

From new notions of "scholarly fair use" to the future of optical media,
virtually every issue related to electronic publishing was aired.  The
result is two projects which have been constructed to provide the quality
research resources with the fewest encumbrances to use by teachers and
private scholars.

Dorothy TWOHIG

In spring 1988 the editors of the papers of George Washington, John
Adams, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and Benjamin Franklin were
approached by classics scholar David Packard on behalf of the Packard
Humanities Foundation with a proposal to produce a CD-ROM edition of the
complete papers of each of the Founding Fathers.  This electronic edition
will supplement the published volumes, making the documents widely
available to students and researchers at reasonable cost.  We estimate
that our CD-ROM edition of Washington's Papers will be substantially
completed within the next two years and ready for publication.  Within
the next ten years or so, similar CD-ROM editions of the Franklin, Adams,
Jefferson, and Madison papers also will be available.  At the Library of
Congress's session on technology, I would like to discuss not only the
experience of the Washington Papers in producing the CD-ROM edition, but
the impact technology has had on these major editorial projects.
Already, we are editing our volumes with an eye to the material that will
be readily available in the CD-ROM edition.  The completed electronic
edition will provide immense possibilities for the searching of documents
for information in a way never possible before.  The kind of technical
innovations that are currently available and on the drawing board will
soon revolutionize historical research and the production of historical
