AM's testing.  Users at technologically sophisticated sites want even
more sophisticated hardware, so that they can perform even more
sophisticated tasks with the materials in AM.  But once they acquire a
newer piece of hardware, they must learn how to use that also; at an
unsophisticated site it takes an extremely long time simply to become
accustomed to the computer, not to mention the program offered with the
computer.  All of these small issues raise one large question, namely,
are systems like AM truly rewarding in a school environment, or do they
simply act as innovative toys that do little more than spark interest?

FREEMAN contended that the evaluation project has revealed several strengths
that were gained through the use of archival resources in schools, including:

     * Psychic rewards from using AM as a vast, rich database, with
     teachers assigning various projects to students--oral presentations,
     written reports, a documentary, a turn-of-the-century newspaper--
     projects that start with the materials in AM but are completed using
     other resources; AM thus is used as a research tool in conjunction
     with other electronic resources, as well as with books and items in
     the library where the system is set up.

     * Students are acquiring computer literacy in a humanities context.

     * This sort of system is overcoming the isolation between disciplines
     that often exists in schools.  For example, many English teachers are
     requiring their students to write papers on historical topics
     represented in AM.  Numerous teachers have reported that their
     students are learning critical thinking skills using the system.

     * On a broader level, AM is introducing primary materials, not only
     to students but also to teachers, in an environment where often
     simply none exist--an exciting thing for the students because it
     helps them learn to conduct research, to interpret, and to draw
     their own conclusions.  In learning to conduct research and what it
