    Pago Pago, Ta'u
Airports:
    4 total, 4 usable; 2 with permanent-surface runways; none with runways over
    3,659 m; 1 with runways 2,440 to 3,659 m (international airport at Tafuna,
    near Pago Pago); small airstrips on Ta'u and Ofu
Telecommunications:
    6,500 telephones; broadcast stations - 1 AM, 2 FM, 1 TV; good telex,
    telegraph, and facsimile services; 1 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT earth station, 1
    COMSAT earth station

:American Samoa Defense Forces

Note:
    defense is the responsibility of the US

:Andorra Geography

Total area:
    450 km2
Land area:
    450 km2
Comparative area:
    slightly more than 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries:
    125 km total; France 60 km, Spain 65 km
Coastline:
    none - landlocked
Maritime claims:
    none - landlocked
Disputes:
    none
Climate:
    temperate; snowy, cold winters and cool, dry summers
Terrain:
    rugged mountains dissected by narrow valleys
Natural resources:
    hydropower, mineral water, timber, iron ore, lead
Land use:
    arable land 2%; permanent crops 0%; meadows and pastures 56%; forest and
    woodland 22%; other 20%
Environment:
    deforestation, overgrazing
Note:
    landlocked

:Andorra People

Population:
    54,428 (July 1992), growth rate 2.2% (1992)
Birth rate:
    11 births/1,000 population (1992)
Death rate:
    4 deaths/1,000 population (1992)
Net migration rate:
    15 migrants/1,000 population (1992)
Infant mortality rate:
    7 deaths/1,000 live births (1992)
Life expectancy at birth:
    74 years male, 81 years female (1992)
Total fertility rate:
    1.3 children born/woman (1992)
Nationality:
    noun - Andorran(s); adjective - Andorran
Ethnic divisions:
    Catalan stock; Spanish 61%, Andorran 30%, French 6%, other 3%
Religions:
    virtually all Roman Catholic
Languages:
    Catalan (official); many also speak some French and Castilian
Literacy:
    NA% (male NA%, female NA%)
Labor force:
    NA
Organized labor:
    none

:Andorra Government

Long-form name:
    Principality of Andorra
Type:
    unique coprincipality under formal sovereignty of president of France and
    Spanish bishop of Seo de Urgel, who are represented locally by officials
    called veguers
Capital:
    Andorra la Vella
Administrative divisions:
    7 parishes (parroquies, singular - parroquia); Andorra, Canillo, Encamp, La
    Massana, Les Escaldes, Ordino, Sant Julia de Loria
Independence:
    1278
Constitution:
    none; some pareatges and decrees, mostly custom and usage
Legal system:
    based on French and Spanish civil codes; no judicial review of legislative
    acts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
National holiday:
    Mare de Deu de Meritxell, 8 September
Executive branch:
    two co-princes (president of France, bishop of Seo de Urgel in Spain), two
    designated representatives (French veguer, Episcopal veguer), two permanent
    delegates (French prefect for the department of Pyrenees-Orientales, Spanish
    vicar general for the Seo de Urgel diocese), president of government,
    Executive Council
Legislative branch:
    unicameral General Council of the Valleys (Consell General de las Valls)
Judicial branch:
    civil cases - Supreme Court of Andorra at Perpignan (France) or the
    Ecclesiastical Court of the bishop of Seo de Urgel (Spain); criminal cases -
    Tribunal of the Courts (Tribunal des Cortes)
Leaders:
  Chiefs of State:
    French Co-Prince Francois MITTERRAND (since 21 May 1981), represented by
    Veguer de Franca Jean Pierre COURTOIS; Spanish Episcopal Co-Prince Mgr. Joan
    MARTI y Alanis (since 31 January 1971), represented by Veguer Episcopal
    Francesc BADIA Batalla
  Head of Government:
    Oscar RIBAS Reig (since January 1990)
Political parties and leaders:
    political parties not yet legally recognized; traditionally no political
    parties but partisans for particular independent candidates for the General
    Council on the basis of competence, personality, and orientation toward
    Spain or France; various small pressure groups developed in 1972; first
    formal political party, Andorran Democratic Association, was formed in 1976
    and reorganized in 1979 as Andorran Democratic Party
Suffrage:
    universal at age 18
Elections:
  General Council of the Valleys:
    last held 11 December 1989 (next to be held December 1993); results -
    percent of vote by party NA; seats - (28 total) number of seats by party NA
Member of:
    INTERPOL, IOC
Diplomatic representation:
    Andorra has no mission in the US

:Andorra Government

  US:
    includes Andorra within the Barcelona (Spain) Consular District, and the US
    Consul General visits Andorra periodically; Consul General Carolee HEILEMAN;
    Consulate General at Via Layetana 33, 08003 Barcelona (mailing address APO
    AE 09646); telephone [34] (3) 319-9550
Flag:
    three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side), yellow, and red with the
    national coat of arms centered in the yellow band; the coat of arms features
    a quartered shield; similar to the flags of Chad and Romania that do not
    have a national coat of arms in the center

:Andorra Economy

Overview:
    The mainstay of Andorra's economy is tourism. An estimated 13 million
    tourists visit annually, attracted by Andorra's duty-free status and by its
    summer and winter resorts. Agricultural production is limited by a scarcity
    of arable land, and most food has to be imported. The principal livestock
    activity is sheep raising. Manufacturing consists mainly of cigarettes,
    cigars, and furniture. The rapid pace of European economic integration is a
    potential threat to Andorra's advantages from its duty-free status.
GDP:
    purchasing power equivalent - $727 million, per capita $14,000; real growth
    rate NA% (1990 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices):
    NA%
Unemployment rate:
    none
Budget:
    revenues $NA; expenditures $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports:
    $0.017 million (f.o.b., 1986)
  commodities:
    electricity
  partners:
    France, Spain
Imports:
    $531 million (f.o.b., 1986)
  commodities:
    consumer goods, food
  partners:
    France, Spain
External debt:
    $NA
Industrial production:
    growth rate NA%
Electricity:
    35,000 kW capacity; 140 million kWh produced, 2,800 kWh per capita (1991)
Industries:
    tourism (particularly skiing), sheep, timber, tobacco, banking
Agriculture:
    sheep raising; small quantities of tobacco, rye, wheat, barley, oats, and
    some vegetables
Economic aid:
    none
Currency:
    French franc (plural - francs) and Spanish peseta (plural - pesetas); 1
    French franc (F) = 100 centimes and 1 Spanish peseta (Pta) = 100 centimos
Exchange rates:
    French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.3801 January (1992), 5.6421 (1991), 5.4453
    (1990), 6.3801 (1989), 5.9569 (1988), 6.0107 (1987); Spanish pesetas (Ptas)
    per US$1 - 100.02 (January 1992), 103.91 (1991), 101.93 (1990), 118.38
    (1989), 116.49 (1988), 123.48 (1987)
Fiscal year:
    calendar year

:Andorra Communications

Highways:
    96 km
Telecommunications:
    international digital microwave network; international landline circuits to
    France and Spain; broadcast stations - 1 AM, no FM, no TV; 17,700 telephones

:Andorra Defense Forces

Note:
    defense is the responsibility of France and Spain

:Angola Geography

Total area:
    1,246,700 km2
Land area:
    1,246,700 km2
Comparative area:
    slightly less than twice the size of Texas
Land boundaries:
    5,198 km total; Congo 201 km, Namibia 1,376 km, Zaire 2,511 km, Zambia 1,110
    km
Coastline:
    1,600 km
Maritime claims:
  Exclusive fishing zone:
    200 nm
  Territorial sea:
    20 nm
Disputes:
    civil war since independence on 11 November 1975; on 31 May 1991 Angolan
    President Jose Eduardo dos SANTOS and Jonas SAVIMBI, leader of the National
    Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), signed a peace treaty
    that calls for multiparty elections in late September 1992, an
    internationally monitored cease-fire, and termination of outside military
    assistance
Climate:
    semiarid in south and along coast to Luanda; north has cool, dry season (May
    to October) and hot, rainy season (November to April)
Terrain:
    narrow coastal plain rises abruptly to vast interior plateau
Natural resources:
    petroleum, diamonds, iron ore, phosphates, copper, feldspar, gold, bauxite,
    uranium
Land use:
    arable land 2%; permanent crops NEGL%; meadows and pastures 23%; forest and
    woodland 43%; other 32%
Environment:
    locally heavy rainfall causes periodic flooding on plateau; desertification
Note:
    Cabinda is separated from rest of country by Zaire

:Angola People

Population:
    8,902,076 (July 1992), growth rate 2.7% (1992)
Birth rate:
    46 births/1,000 population (1992)
Death rate:
    19 deaths/1,000 population (1992)
Net migration rate:
    NEGL migrants/1,000 population (1992)
The animal spirits, that from pure blood arise
Like gentle breaths from rivers pure, thence raise
At least distempered, discontented thoughts,
Vain hopes, vain aims, inordinate desires,
Blown up with high conceits ingendering pride.
Him thus intent Ithuriel with his spear
Touched lightly; for no falshood can endure
Touch of celestial temper, but returns
Of force to its own likeness:  Up he starts
Discovered and surprised.  As when a spark
Lights on a heap of nitrous powder, laid
Fit for the tun some magazine to store
Against a rumoured war, the smutty grain,
With sudden blaze diffused, inflames the air;
So started up in his own shape the Fiend.
Back stept those two fair Angels, half amazed
So sudden to behold the grisly king;
Yet thus, unmoved with fear, accost him soon.
Which of those rebel Spirits adjudged to Hell
Comest thou, escaped thy prison? and, transformed,
Why sat'st thou like an enemy in wait,
Here watching at the head of these that sleep?
Know ye not then said Satan, filled with scorn,
Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate
For you, there sitting where ye durst not soar:
Not to know me argues yourselves unknown,
The lowest of your throng; or, if ye know,
Why ask ye, and superfluous begin
Your message, like to end as much in vain?
To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn.
Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same,
Or undiminished brightness to be known,
As when thou stoodest in Heaven upright and pure;
That glory then, when thou no more wast good,
Departed from thee; and thou resemblest now
Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foul.
But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give account
To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep
This place inviolable, and these from harm.
So spake the Cherub; and his grave rebuke,
Severe in youthful beauty, added grace
Invincible:  Abashed the Devil stood,
And felt how awful goodness is, and saw
Virtue in her shape how lovely; saw, and pined
His loss; but chiefly to find here observed
His lustre visibly impaired; yet seemed
Undaunted.  If I must contend, said he,
Best with the best, the sender, not the sent,
Or all at once; more glory will be won,
Or less be lost.  Thy fear, said Zephon bold,
Will save us trial what the least can do
Single against thee wicked, and thence weak.
The Fiend replied not, overcome with rage;
But, like a proud steed reined, went haughty on,
Champing his iron curb:  To strive or fly
He held it vain; awe from above had quelled
His heart, not else dismayed.  Now drew they nigh
The western point, where those half-rounding guards
Just met, and closing stood in squadron joined,
A waiting next command.  To whom their Chief,
Gabriel, from the front thus called aloud.
O friends!  I hear the tread of nimble feet
Hasting this way, and now by glimpse discern
Ithuriel and Zephon through the shade;
And with them comes a third of regal port,
But faded splendour wan; who by his gait
And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell,
Not likely to part hence without contest;
Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours.
He scarce had ended, when those two approached,
And brief related whom they brought, where found,
How busied, in what form and posture couched.
To whom with stern regard thus Gabriel spake.
Why hast thou, Satan, broke the bounds prescribed
To thy transgressions, and disturbed the charge
Of others, who approve not to transgress
By thy example, but have power and right
To question thy bold entrance on this place;
Employed, it seems, to violate sleep, and those
Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss!
To whom thus Satan with contemptuous brow.
Gabriel? thou hadst in Heaven the esteem of wise,
And such I held thee; but this question asked
Puts me in doubt.  Lives there who loves his pain!
Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell,
Though thither doomed!  Thou wouldst thyself, no doubt
And boldly venture to whatever place
Farthest from pain, where thou mightst hope to change
Torment with ease, and soonest recompense
Dole with delight, which in this place I sought;
To thee no reason, who knowest only good,
But evil hast not tried: and wilt object
His will who bounds us!  Let him surer bar
His iron gates, if he intends our stay
In that dark durance:  Thus much what was asked.
The rest is true, they found me where they say;
But that implies not violence or harm.
Thus he in scorn.  The warlike Angel moved,
Disdainfully half smiling, thus replied.
O loss of one in Heaven to judge of wise
Since Satan fell, whom folly overthrew,
And now returns him from his prison 'scaped,
Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise
Or not, who ask what boldness brought him hither
Unlicensed from his bounds in Hell prescribed;
So wise he judges it to fly from pain
However, and to 'scape his punishment!
So judge thou still, presumptuous! till the wrath,
Which thou incurrest by flying, meet thy flight
Sevenfold, and scourge that wisdom back to Hell,
Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain
Can equal anger infinite provoked.
But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee
Came not all hell broke loose? or thou than they
Less hardy to endure?  Courageous Chief!
The first in flight from pain! hadst thou alleged
To thy deserted host this cause of flight,
Thou surely hadst not come sole fugitive.
To which the Fiend thus answered, frowning stern.
Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain,
Insulting Angel! well thou knowest I stood
Thy fiercest, when in battle to thy aid
The blasting vollied thunder made all speed,
And seconded thy else not dreaded spear.
But still thy words at random, as before,
Argue thy inexperience what behoves
From hard assays and ill successes past
A faithful leader, not to hazard all
Through ways of danger by himself untried:
I, therefore, I alone first undertook
To wing the desolate abyss, and spy
This new created world, whereof in Hell
Fame is not silent, here in hope to find
Better abode, and my afflicted Powers
To settle here on earth, or in mid air;
Though for possession put to try once more
What thou and thy gay legions dare against;
Whose easier business were to serve their Lord
High up in Heaven, with songs to hymn his throne,
And practised distances to cringe, not fight,
To whom the warriour Angel soon replied.
To say and straight unsay, pretending first
Wise to fly pain, professing next the spy,
Argues no leader but a liear traced,
Satan, and couldst thou faithful add?  O name,
O sacred name of faithfulness profaned!
Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew?
Army of Fiends, fit body to fit head.
Was this your discipline and faith engaged,
Your military obedience, to dissolve
Allegiance to the acknowledged Power supreme?
And thou, sly hypocrite, who now wouldst seem
Patron of liberty, who more than thou
Once fawned, and cringed, and servily adored
Heaven's awful Monarch? wherefore, but in hope
To dispossess him, and thyself to reign?
But mark what I arreed thee now, Avant;
Fly neither whence thou fledst!  If from this hour
Within these hallowed limits thou appear,
Back to the infernal pit I drag thee chained,
And seal thee so, as henceforth not to scorn
The facile gates of Hell too slightly barred.
So threatened he; but Satan to no threats
Gave heed, but waxing more in rage replied.
Then when I am thy captive talk of chains,
Proud limitary Cherub! but ere then
Far heavier load thyself expect to feel
From my prevailing arm, though Heaven's King
Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy compeers,
Us'd to the yoke, drawest his triumphant wheels
In progress through the road of Heaven star-paved.
While thus he spake, the angelick squadron bright
Turned fiery red, sharpening in mooned horns
Their phalanx, and began to hem him round
With ported spears, as thick as when a field
Of Ceres ripe for harvest waving bends
Her bearded grove of ears, which way the wind
Sways them; the careful plowman doubting stands,
Left on the threshing floor his hopeless sheaves
Prove chaff.  On the other side, Satan, alarmed,
Collecting all his might, dilated stood,
Like Teneriff or Atlas, unremoved:
His stature reached the sky, and on his crest
Sat Horrour plumed; nor wanted in his grasp
What seemed both spear and shield:  Now dreadful deeds
Might have ensued, nor only Paradise
In this commotion, but the starry cope
Of Heaven perhaps, or all the elements
At least had gone to wrack, disturbed and torn
With violence of this conflict, had not soon
The Eternal, to prevent such horrid fray,
Hung forth in Heaven his golden scales, yet seen
Betwixt Astrea and the Scorpion sign,
Wherein all things created first he weighed,
The pendulous round earth with balanced air
In counterpoise, now ponders all events,
Battles and realms:  In these he put two weights,
The sequel each of parting and of fight:
The latter quick up flew, and kicked the beam,
Which Gabriel spying, thus bespake the Fiend.
Satan, I know thy strength, and thou knowest mine;
Neither our own, but given:  What folly then
To boast what arms can do? since thine no more
Than Heaven permits, nor mine, though doubled now
To trample thee as mire:  For proof look up,
And read thy lot in yon celestial sign;
Where thou art weighed, and shown how light, how weak,
If thou resist.  The Fiend looked up, and knew
His mounted scale aloft:  Nor more;but fled
Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night.



Book V


Now Morn, her rosy steps in the eastern clime
Advancing, sowed the earth with orient pearl,
When Adam waked, so customed; for his sleep
Was aery-light, from pure digestion bred,
And temperate vapours bland, which the only sound
Of leaves and fuming rills, Aurora's fan,
Lightly dispersed, and the shrill matin song
Of birds on every bough; so much the more
His wonder was to find unwakened Eve
With tresses discomposed, and glowing cheek,
As through unquiet rest:  He, on his side
Leaning half raised, with looks of cordial love
Hung over her enamoured, and beheld
Beauty, which, whether waking or asleep,
Shot forth peculiar graces; then with voice
Mild, as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes,
Her hand soft touching, whispered thus.  Awake,
My fairest, my espoused, my latest found,
Heaven's last best gift, my ever new delight!
Awake:  The morning shines, and the fresh field
Calls us; we lose the prime, to mark how spring
Our tender plants, how blows the citron grove,
What drops the myrrh, and what the balmy reed,
How nature paints her colours, how the bee
Sits on the bloom extracting liquid sweet.
Such whispering waked her, but with startled eye
On Adam, whom embracing, thus she spake.
O sole in whom my thoughts find all repose,
My glory, my perfection! glad I see
Thy face, and morn returned; for I this night
(Such night till this I never passed) have dreamed,
If dreamed, not, as I oft am wont, of thee,
Works of day past, or morrow's next design,
But of offence and trouble, which my mind
Knew never till this irksome night:  Methought,
Close at mine ear one called me forth to walk
With gentle voice;  I thought it thine: It said,
'Why sleepest thou, Eve? now is the pleasant time,
'The cool, the silent, save where silence yields
'To the night-warbling bird, that now awake
'Tunes sweetest his love-laboured song; now reigns
'Full-orbed the moon, and with more pleasing light
'Shadowy sets off the face of things; in vain,
'If none regard; Heaven wakes with all his eyes,
'Whom to behold but thee, Nature's desire?
'In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment
'Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze.'
I rose as at thy call, but found thee not;
To find thee I directed then my walk;
And on, methought, alone I passed through ways
That brought me on a sudden to the tree
Of interdicted knowledge: fair it seemed,
Much fairer to my fancy than by day:
And, as I wondering looked, beside it stood
One shaped and winged like one of those from Heaven
By us oft seen; his dewy locks distilled
Ambrosia; on that tree he also gazed;
And 'O fair plant,' said he, 'with fruit surcharged,
'Deigns none to ease thy load, and taste thy sweet,
'Nor God, nor Man?  Is knowledge so despised?
'Or envy, or what reserve forbids to taste?
'Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold
'Longer thy offered good; why else set here?
This said, he paused not, but with venturous arm
He plucked, he tasted; me damp horrour chilled
At such bold words vouched with a deed so bold:
But he thus, overjoyed; 'O fruit divine,
'Sweet of thyself, but much more sweet thus cropt,
'Forbidden here, it seems, as only fit
'For Gods, yet able to make Gods of Men:
'And why not Gods of Men; since good, the more
'Communicated, more abundant grows,
'The author not impaired, but honoured more?
'Here, happy creature, fair angelick Eve!
'Partake thou also; happy though thou art,
'Happier thou mayest be, worthier canst not be:
'Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods
'Thyself a Goddess, not to earth confined,
'But sometimes in the air, as we, sometimes
'Ascend to Heaven, by merit thine, and see
'What life the Gods live there, and such live thou!'
So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held,
Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part
Which he had plucked; the pleasant savoury smell
So quickened appetite, that I, methought,
Could not but taste.  Forthwith up to the clouds
With him I flew, and underneath beheld
The earth outstretched immense, a prospect wide
And various:  Wondering at my flight and change
To this high exaltation; suddenly
My guide was gone, and I, methought, sunk down,
And fell asleep; but O, how glad I waked
To find this but a dream!  Thus Eve her night
Related, and thus Adam answered sad.
Best image of myself, and dearer half,
The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep
Affects me equally; nor can I like
This uncouth dream, of evil sprung, I fear;
Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none,
Created pure.  But know that in the soul
Are many lesser faculties, that serve
Reason as chief; among these Fancy next
Her office holds; of all external things
Which the five watchful senses represent,
She forms imaginations, aery shapes,
Which Reason, joining or disjoining, frames
All what we affirm or what deny, and call
Our knowledge or opinion; then retires
Into her private cell, when nature rests.
Oft in her absence mimick Fancy wakes
To imitate her; but, misjoining shapes,
Wild work produces oft, and most in dreams;
Ill matching words and deeds long past or late.
Some such resemblances, methinks, I find
Of our last evening's talk, in this thy dream,
But with addition strange; yet be not sad.
Evil into the mind of God or Man
May come and go, so unreproved, and leave
No spot or blame behind:  Which gives me hope
That what in sleep thou didst abhor to dream,
Waking thou never will consent to do.
Be not disheartened then, nor cloud those looks,
That wont to be more cheerful and serene,
Than when fair morning first smiles on the world;
And let us to our fresh employments rise
Among the groves, the fountains, and the flowers
That open now their choisest bosomed smells,
Reserved from night, and kept for thee in store.
So cheered he his fair spouse, and she was cheered;
