sources, MICHELSON remarked the opportunity scholars now enjoy to
supplement traditional word-of-mouth searches for sources among their
colleagues with new forms of electronic searching.  So, for example,
instead of having to visit the library, researchers are able to explore
descriptions of holdings in their offices.  Furthermore, if their own
institutions' holdings prove insufficient, scholars can access more than
200 major American library catalogues over Internet, including the
universities of California, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin.
Direct access to the bibliographic databases offers intellectual
empowerment to scholars by presenting a comprehensive means of browsing
through libraries from their homes and offices at their convenience.

The second process of communication involves communication among
scholars.  Beyond the most common methods of communication, scholars are
using E-mail and a variety of new electronic communications formats
derived from it for further academic interchange.  E-mail exchanges are
growing at an astonishing rate, reportedly 15 percent a month.  They
currently constitute approximately half the traffic on research and
education networks.  Moreover, the global spread of E-mail has been so
rapid that it is now possible for American scholars to use it to
communicate with colleagues in close to 140 other countries.

Other new exchange formats created by scholars and operating on Internet
include more than 700 conferences, with about 80 percent of these devoted
to topics in the social sciences and humanities.  The rate of growth of
these scholarly electronic conferences also is astonishing.  From l990 to
l991, 200 new conferences were identified on Internet.  From October 1991
to June 1992, an additional 150 conferences in the social sciences and
humanities were added to this directory of listings.  Scholars have
established conferences in virtually every field, within every different
discipline.  For example, there are currently close to 600 active social
science and humanities  conferences on topics such as art and
architecture, ethnomusicology, folklore, Japanese culture, medical
education, and gifted and talented education.  The appeal to scholars of
communicating through these conferences is that, unlike any other medium,
electronic conferences today provide a forum for global communication
with peers at the front end of the research process.

Interpretation and analysis of sources constitutes the third process of
scholarly communication that MICHELSON discussed in terms of texts and
textual resources.  The methods used to analyze sources fall somewhere on
a continuum from quantitative analysis to qualitative analysis.
Typically, evidence is culled and evaluated using methods drawn from both
ends of this continuum.  At one end, quantitative analysis involves the
use of mathematical processes such as a count of frequencies and
distributions of occurrences or, on a higher level, regression analysis.
At the other end of the continuum, qualitative analysis typically
involves nonmathematical processes oriented toward language
interpretation or the building of theory.  Aspects of this work involve
the processing--either manual or computational--of large and sometimes
massive amounts of textual sources, although the use of nontextual
sources as evidence, such as photographs, sound recordings, film footage,
and artifacts, is significant as well.

Scholars have discovered that many of the methods of interpretation and
analysis that are related to both quantitative and qualitative methods
are processes that can be performed by computers.  For example, computers
can count.  They can count brush strokes used in a Rembrandt painting or
perform regression analysis for understanding cause and effect.  By means
of advanced technologies, computers can recognize patterns, analyze text,
and model concepts.  Furthermore, computers can complete these processes
faster with more sources and with greater precision than scholars who
must rely on manual interpretation of data.  But if scholars are to use
computers for these processes, source materials must be in a form
amenable to computer-assisted analysis.  For this reason many scholars,
once they have identified the sources that are key to their research, are
converting them to machine-readable form.  Thus, a representative example
of the numerous textual conversion projects organized by scholars around
the world in recent years to support computational text analysis is the
TLG, the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae.  This project is devoted to
converting the extant ancient texts of classical Greece.  (Editor's note:
according to the TLG Newsletter of May l992, TLG was in use in thirty-two
different countries.  This figure updates MICHELSON's previous count by one.)

The scholars performing these conversions have been asked to recognize
that the electronic sources they are converting for one use possess value
for other research purposes as well.  As a result, during the past few
years, humanities scholars have initiated a number of projects to
increase scholarly access to converted text.  So, for example, the Text
Encoding Initiative (TEI), about which more is said later in the program,
was established as an effort by scholars to determine standard elements
and methods for encoding machine-readable text for electronic exchange.
In a second effort to facilitate the sharing of converted text, scholars
have created a new institution, the Center for Electronic Texts in the
Humanities (CETH).  The center estimates that there are 8,000 series of
source texts in the humanities that have been converted to
machine-readable form worldwide.  CETH is undertaking an international
search for converted text in the humanities, compiling it into an
electronic library, and preparing bibliographic descriptions of the
sources for the Research Libraries Information Network's (RLIN)
machine-readable data file.  The library profession has begun to initiate
large conversion projects as well, such as American Memory.

While scholars have been making converted text available to one another,
typically on disk or on CD-ROM, the clear trend is toward making these
resources available through research and education networks.  Thus, the
American and French Research on the Treasury of the French Language
(ARTFL) and the Dante Project are already available on Internet.
MICHELSON summarized this section on interpretation and analysis by
noting that:  1) increasing numbers of humanities scholars in the library
community are recognizing the importance to the advancement of
scholarship of retrospective conversion of source materials in the arts
and humanities; and 2) there is a growing realization that making the
sources available on research and education networks maximizes their
usefulness for the analysis performed by humanities scholars.

The fourth process of scholarly communication is dissemination of
research findings, that is, publication.  Scholars are using existing
research and education networks to engineer a new type of publication:
scholarly-controlled journals that are electronically produced and
disseminated.  Although such journals are still emerging as a
communication format, their number has grown, from approximately twelve
to thirty-six during the past year (July 1991 to June 1992).  Most of
these electronic scholarly journals are devoted to topics in the
humanities.  As with network conferences, scholarly enthusiasm for these
electronic journals stems from the medium's unique ability to advance
scholarship in a way that no other medium can do by supporting global
feedback and interchange, practically in real time, early in the research
process.  Beyond scholarly journals, MICHELSON remarked the delivery of
commercial full-text products, such as articles in professional journals,
newsletters, magazines, wire services, and reference sources.  These are
being delivered via on-line local library catalogues, especially through
CD-ROMs.  Furthermore, according to MICHELSON, there is general optimism
that the copyright and fees issues impeding the delivery of full text on
existing research and education networks soon will be resolved.

The final process of scholarly communication is curriculum development
and instruction, and this involves the use of computer information
technologies in two areas.  The first is the development of
computer-oriented instructional tools, which includes simulations,
multimedia applications, and computer tools that are used to assist in
the analysis of sources in the classroom, etc.  The Perseus Project, a
