:Brazil Defense Forces

Branches:
    Brazilian Army, Navy of Brazil (including Marines), Brazilian Air Force,
    Military Police (paramilitary)
Manpower availability:
    males 15-49, 41,515,103; 27,987,257 fit for military service; 1,644,571
    reach military age (18) annually
Defense expenditures:
    exchange rate conversion - $1.1 billion, 0.3% of GDP (1990)

:British Indian Ocean Territory Geography

Total area:
    60 km2
Land area:
    60 km2; includes the island of Diego Garcia
Comparative area:
    about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries:
    none
Coastline:
    698 km
Maritime claims:
  Territorial sea:
    UK announced establishment of 200-nm fishery zone in August 1991
Disputes:
    the entire Chagos Archipelago is claimed by Mauritius
Climate:
    tropical marine; hot, humid, moderated by trade winds
Terrain:
    flat and low (up to 4 meters in elevation)
Natural resources:
    coconuts, fish
Land use:
    arable land 0%; permanent crops 0%; meadows and pastures 0%; forest and
    woodland 0%; other 100%
Environment:
    archipelago of 2,300 islands
Note:
    Diego Garcia, largest and southernmost island, occupies strategic location
    in central Indian Ocean; island is site of joint US-UK military facility

:British Indian Ocean Territory People

Population:
    no permanent civilian population; formerly about 3,000 islanders
Ethnic divisions:
    civilian inhabitants, known as the Ilois, evacuated to Mauritius before
    construction of UK and US defense facilities

:British Indian Ocean Territory Government

Long-form name:
    British Indian Ocean Territory (no short-form name); abbreviated BIOT
Type:
    dependent territory of the UK
Capital:
    none
Leaders:
  Chief of State:
    Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952)
  Head of Government:
    Commissioner Mr. T. G. HARRIS; Administrator Mr. R. G. WELLS (since NA
    1991); note - both reside in the UK
Diplomatic representation:
    none (dependent territory of UK)
Flag:
    white with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and six blue
    wavy horizontal stripes bearing a palm tree and yellow crown centered on the
    outer half of the flag

:British Indian Ocean Territory Economy

Overview:
    All economic activity is concentrated on the largest island of Diego Garcia,
    where joint UK-US defense facilities are located. Construction projects and
    various services needed to support the military installations are done by
    military and contract employees from the UK and the US. There are no
    industrial or agricultural activities on the islands.
Electricity:
    provided by the US military

:British Indian Ocean Territory Communications

Highways:
    short stretch of paved road between port and airfield on Diego Garcia
Ports:
    Diego Garcia
Airports:
    1 with permanent-surface runways over 3,659 m on Diego Garcia
Telecommunications:
    minimal facilities; broadcast stations (operated by US Navy) - 1 AM, 1 FM, 1
    TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

:British Indian Ocean Territory Defense Forces

Note:
    defense is the responsibility of the UK

:British Virgin Islands Geography

Total area:
    150 km2
Land area:
    150 km2; includes the island of Anegada
Comparative area:
    about 0.8 times the size of Washington, DC
Coastline:
    80 km
Maritime claims:
  Exclusive fishing zone:
    200 nm
  Territorial sea:
    3 nm
Disputes:
    none
Climate:
    subtropical; humid; temperatures moderated by trade winds
Terrain:
    coral islands relatively flat; volcanic islands steep, hilly
Natural resources:
    negligible
Land use:
    arable land 20%; permanent crops 7%; meadows and pastures 33%; forest and
    woodland 7%; other 33%
Environment:
    subject to hurricanes and tropical storms from July to October
Note:
    strong ties to nearby US Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico

:British Virgin Islands People

Population:
    12,555 (July 1992), growth rate 1.2% (1992)
Birth rate:
    20 births/1,000 population (1992)
Death rate:
    6 deaths/1,000 population (1992)
Net migration rate:
    --2 migrants/1,000 population (1992)
Infant mortality rate:
    20 deaths/1,000 live births (1992)
Life expectancy at birth:
    71 years male, 75 years female (1992)
Total fertility rate:
    2.3 children born/woman (1992)
Nationality:
    noun - British Virgin Islander(s); adjective - British Virgin Islander
Ethnic divisions:
    over 90% black, remainder of white and Asian origin
Religions:
    Protestant 86% (Methodist 45%, Anglican 21%, Church of God 7%, Seventh-Day
    Adventist 5%, Baptist 4%, Jehovah's Witnesses 2%, other 2%), Roman Catholic
    6%, none 2%, other 6% (1981)
Languages:
    English (official)
Literacy:
    98% (male 98%, female 98%) age 15 and over can read and write (1970)
Labor force:
    4,911 (1980)
Organized labor:
    NA% of labor force

:British Virgin Islands Government

Long-form name:
    none
Type:
    dependent territory of the UK
Capital:
    Road Town
Administrative divisions:
    none (dependent territory of the UK)
Independence:
    none (dependent territory of the UK)
Constitution:
    1 June 1977
Legal system:
    English law
National holiday:
    Territory Day, 1 July
Executive branch:
    British monarch, governor, chief minister, Executive Council (cabinet)
Legislative branch:
    unicameral Legislative Council
Judicial branch:
    Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court
Leaders:
  Chief of State:
    Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor P. A.
    PENFOLD (since NA 1991)
  Head of Government:
    Chief Minister H. Lavity STOUTT (since NA 1986)
Political parties and leaders:
    United Party (UP), Conrad MADURO; Virgin Islands Party (VIP), H. Lavity
    STOUTT; Independent Progressive Movement (IPM), Cyril B. ROMNEY
Suffrage:
    universal at age 18
Elections:
  Legislative Council:
    last held 12 November 1990 (next to be held by November 1995); results -
    percent of vote by party NA; seats - (9 total) VIP 6, IPM 1, independents 2
Member of:
    CARICOM (associate), CDB, ECLAC (associate), IOC, OECS, UNESCO (associate)
Diplomatic representation:
    none (dependent territory of UK)
Flag:
    blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and the Virgin
    Islander coat of arms centered in the outer half of the flag; the coat of
    arms depicts a woman flanked on either side by a vertical column of six oil
    lamps above a scroll bearing the Latin word
    VIGILATE (Be Watchful)

:British Virgin Islands Economy

Overview:
    The economy, one of the most prosperous in the Caribbean area, is highly
    dependent on the tourist industry, which generates about 21% of the national
    income. In 1985 the government offered offshore registration to companies
    wishing to incorporate in the islands, and, in consequence, incorporation
    fees generated about $2 million in 1987. Livestock raising is the most
    significant agricultural activity. The islands' crops, limited by poor
    soils, are unable to meet food requirements.
GDP:
    purchasing power equivalent - $130 million, per capita $10,600; real growth
    rate 6.3% (1990)
Inflation rate (consumer prices):
    2.5% (1990 est.)
Unemployment rate:
    NEGL%
Budget:
    revenues $51 million; expenditures $88 million, including capital
    expenditures of $38 million (1991)
Exports:
    $2.7 million (f.o.b., 1988)
  commodities:
    rum, fresh fish, gravel, sand, fruits, animals
  partners:
    Virgin Islands (US), Puerto Rico, US
Imports:
    $11.5 million (c.i.f., 1988)
  commodities:
    building materials, automobiles, foodstuffs, machinery
  partners:
    Virgin Islands (US), Puerto Rico, US
External debt:
    $4.5 million (1985)
Industrial production:
    growth rate--4.0% (1985)
Electricity:
    10,500 kW capacity; 43 million kWh produced, 3,510 kWh per capita (1990)
Industries:
    tourism, light industry, construction, rum, concrete block, offshore
    financial center
Agriculture:
    livestock (including poultry), fish, fruit, vegetables
Economic aid:
    NA
Currency:
    US currency is used
Exchange rates:
    US currency is used
Fiscal year:
    1 April - 31 March

:British Virgin Islands Communications

Highways:
    106 km motorable roads (1983)
Ports:
    Road Town
Airports:
    3 total, 3 usable; 2 with permanent-surface runways less than 1,220 m
Telecommunications:
    3,000 telephones; worldwide external telephone service; submarine cable
    communication links to Bermuda; broadcast stations - 1 AM, no FM, 1 TV

:British Virgin Islands Defense Forces

Note:
    defense is the responsibility of the UK

:Brunei Geography

Total area:
    5,770 km2
Land area:
    5,270 km2
Comparative area:
    slightly larger than Delaware
Land boundaries:
    381 km; Malysia 381 km
Coastline:
    161 km
Maritime claims:
  Exclusive fishing zone:
    200 nm
  Territorial sea:
    12 nm
Disputes:
    may wish to purchase the Malaysian salient that divides the country; all of
    the Spratly Islands are claimed by China, Taiwan, and Vietnam; parts of them
    are claimed by Malaysia and the Philippines; in 1984, Brunei established an
    exclusive fishing zone that encompasses Louisa Reef, but has not publicly
Not to defer; hunger and thirst at once,
Powerful persuaders, quickened at the scent
Of that alluring fruit, urged me so keen.
About the mossy trunk I wound me soon;
For, high from ground, the branches would require
Thy utmost reach or Adam's: Round the tree
All other beasts that saw, with like desire
Longing and envying stood, but could not reach.
Amid the tree now got, where plenty hung
Tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill
I spared not; for, such pleasure till that hour,
At feed or fountain, never had I found.
Sated at length, ere long I might perceive
Strange alteration in me, to degree
Of reason in my inward powers; and speech
Wanted not long; though to this shape retained.
Thenceforth to speculations high or deep
I turned my thoughts, and with capacious mind
Considered all things visible in Heaven,
Or Earth, or Middle; all things fair and good:
But all that fair and good in thy divine
Semblance, and in thy beauty's heavenly ray,
United I beheld; no fair to thine
Equivalent or second! which compelled
Me thus, though importune perhaps, to come
And gaze, and worship thee of right declared
Sovran of creatures, universal Dame!
So talked the spirited sly Snake; and Eve,
Yet more amazed, unwary thus replied.
Serpent, thy overpraising leaves in doubt
The virtue of that fruit, in thee first proved:
But say, where grows the tree? from hence how far?
For many are the trees of God that grow
In Paradise, and various, yet unknown
To us; in such abundance lies our choice,
As leaves a greater store of fruit untouched,
Still hanging incorruptible, till men
Grow up to their provision, and more hands
Help to disburden Nature of her birth.
To whom the wily Adder, blithe and glad.
Empress, the way is ready, and not long;
Beyond a row of myrtles, on a flat,
Fast by a fountain, one small thicket past
Of blowing myrrh and balm: if thou accept
My conduct, I can bring thee thither soon
Lead then, said Eve.  He, leading, swiftly rolled
In tangles, and made intricate seem straight,
To mischief swift.  Hope elevates, and joy
Brightens his crest; as when a wandering fire,
Compact of unctuous vapour, which the night
Condenses, and the cold environs round,
Kindled through agitation to a flame,
Which oft, they say, some evil Spirit attends,
Hovering and blazing with delusive light,
Misleads the amazed night-wanderer from his way
To bogs and mires, and oft through pond or pool;
There swallowed up and lost, from succour far.
So glistered the dire Snake, and into fraud
Led Eve, our credulous mother, to the tree
Of prohibition, root of all our woe;
Which when she saw, thus to her guide she spake.
Serpent, we might have spared our coming hither,
Fruitless to me, though fruit be here to excess,
The credit of whose virtue rest with thee;
Wonderous indeed, if cause of such effects.
But of this tree we may not taste nor touch;
God so commanded, and left that command
Sole daughter of his voice; the rest, we live
Law to ourselves; our reason is our law.
To whom the Tempter guilefully replied.
Indeed! hath God then said that of the fruit
Of all these garden-trees ye shall not eat,
Yet Lords declared of all in earth or air$?
To whom thus Eve, yet sinless.  Of the fruit
Of each tree in the garden we may eat;
But of the fruit of this fair tree amidst
The garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat
Thereof, nor shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
She scarce had said, though brief, when now more bold
The Tempter, but with show of zeal and love
To Man, and indignation at his wrong,
New part puts on; and, as to passion moved,
Fluctuates disturbed, yet comely and in act
Raised, as of some great matter to begin.
As when of old some orator renowned,
In Athens or free Rome, where eloquence
Flourished, since mute! to some great cause addressed,
Stood in himself collected; while each part,
Motion, each act, won audience ere the tongue;
Sometimes in highth began, as no delay
Of preface brooking, through his zeal of right:
So standing, moving, or to highth up grown,
The Tempter, all impassioned, thus began.
O sacred, wise, and wisdom-giving Plant,
Mother of science! now I feel thy power
Within me clear; not only to discern
Things in their causes, but to trace the ways
Of highest agents, deemed however wise.
Queen of this universe! do not believe
Those rigid threats of death: ye shall not die:
How should you? by the fruit? it gives you life
To knowledge; by the threatener? look on me,
Me, who have touched and tasted; yet both live,
And life more perfect have attained than Fate
Meant me, by venturing higher than my lot.
Shall that be shut to Man, which to the Beast
Is open? or will God incense his ire
For such a petty trespass? and not praise
Rather your dauntless virtue, whom the pain
Of death denounced, whatever thing death be,
Deterred not from achieving what might lead
To happier life, knowledge of good and evil;
Of good, how just? of evil, if what is evil
Be real, why not known, since easier shunned?
God therefore cannot hurt ye, and be just;
Not just, not God; not feared then, nor obeyed:
Your fear itself of death removes the fear.
Why then was this forbid?  Why, but to awe;
Why, but to keep ye low and ignorant,
His worshippers?  He knows that in the day
Ye eat thereof, your eyes that seem so clear,
Yet are but dim, shall perfectly be then
Opened and cleared, and ye shall be as Gods,
Knowing both good and evil, as they know.
That ye shall be as Gods, since I as Man,
Internal Man, is but proportion meet;
I, of brute, human; ye, of human, Gods.
So ye shall die perhaps, by putting off
Human, to put on Gods; death to be wished,
Though threatened, which no worse than this can bring.
And what are Gods, that Man may not become
As they, participating God-like food?
The Gods are first, and that advantage use
On our belief, that all from them proceeds:
I question it; for this fair earth I see,
Warmed by the sun, producing every kind;
Them, nothing: if they all things, who enclosed
Knowledge of good and evil in this tree,
That whoso eats thereof, forthwith attains
Wisdom without their leave? and wherein lies
The offence, that Man should thus attain to know?
What can your knowledge hurt him, or this tree
Impart against his will, if all be his?
Or is it envy? and can envy dwell
In heavenly breasts?  These, these, and many more
Causes import your need of this fair fruit.
Goddess humane, reach then, and freely taste!
He ended; and his words, replete with guile,
Into her heart too easy entrance won:
Fixed on the fruit she gazed, which to behold
Might tempt alone; and in her ears the sound
Yet rung of his persuasive words, impregned
With reason, to her seeming, and with truth:
Mean while the hour of noon drew on, and waked
An eager appetite, raised by the smell
So savoury of that fruit, which with desire,
Inclinable now grown to touch or taste,
Solicited her longing eye; yet first
Pausing a while, thus to herself she mused.
Great are thy virtues, doubtless, best of fruits,
Though kept from man, and worthy to be admired;
Whose taste, too long forborn, at first assay
Gave elocution to the mute, and taught
The tongue not made for speech to speak thy praise:
Thy praise he also, who forbids thy use,
Conceals not from us, naming thee the tree
Of knowledge, knowledge both of good and evil;
Forbids us then to taste! but his forbidding
Commends thee more, while it infers the good
By thee communicated, and our want:
For good unknown sure is not had; or, had
And yet unknown, is as not had at all.
In plain then, what forbids he but to know,
Forbids us good, forbids us to be wise?
Such prohibitions bind not.  But, if death
Bind us with after-bands, what profits then
Our inward freedom?  In the day we eat
Of this fair fruit, our doom is, we shall die!
How dies the Serpent? he hath eaten and lives,
And knows, and speaks, and reasons, and discerns,
Irrational till then.  For us alone
Was death invented? or to us denied
This intellectual food, for beasts reserved?
For beasts it seems: yet that one beast which first
Hath tasted envies not, but brings with joy
The good befallen him, author unsuspect,
Friendly to man, far from deceit or guile.
What fear I then? rather, what know to fear
Under this ignorance of good and evil,
Of God or death, of law or penalty?
Here grows the cure of all, this fruit divine,
Fair to the eye, inviting to the taste,
Of virtue to make wise:  What hinders then
To reach, and feed at once both body and mind?
So saying, her rash hand in evil hour
Forth reaching to the fruit, she plucked, she eat!
Earth felt the wound; and Nature from her seat,
Sighing through all her works, gave signs of woe,
That all was lost.  Back to the thicket slunk
The guilty Serpent; and well might;for Eve,
Intent now wholly on her taste, nought else
Regarded; such delight till then, as seemed,
In fruit she never tasted, whether true
Or fancied so, through expectation high
Of knowledge; not was Godhead from her thought.
Greedily she ingorged without restraint,
And knew not eating death:  Satiate at length,
And hightened as with wine, jocund and boon,
Thus to herself she pleasingly began.
O sovran, virtuous, precious of all trees
In Paradise! of operation blest
To sapience, hitherto obscured, infamed.
And thy fair fruit let hang, as to no end
Created; but henceforth my early care,
Not without song, each morning, and due praise,
Shall tend thee, and the fertile burden ease
Of thy full branches offered free to all;
Till, dieted by thee, I grow mature
In knowledge, as the Gods, who all things know;
Though others envy what they cannot give:
For, had the gift been theirs, it had not here
Thus grown.  Experience, next, to thee I owe,
Best guide; not following thee, I had remained
In ignorance; thou openest wisdom's way,
And givest access, though secret she retire.
And I perhaps am secret: Heaven is high,
High, and remote to see from thence distinct
Each thing on Earth; and other care perhaps
May have diverted from continual watch
Our great Forbidder, safe with all his spies
About him.  But to Adam in what sort
Shall I appear? shall I to him make known
As yet my change, and give him to partake
Full happiness with me, or rather not,
But keeps the odds of knowledge in my power
Without copartner? so to add what wants
In female sex, the more to draw his love,
And render me more equal; and perhaps,
A thing not undesirable, sometime
Superiour; for, inferiour, who is free
This may be well:  But what if God have seen,
And death ensue? then I shall be no more!
And Adam, wedded to another Eve,
Shall live with her enjoying, I extinct;
A death to think!  Confirmed then I resolve,
Adam shall share with me in bliss or woe:
So dear I love him, that with him all deaths
I could endure, without him live no life.
So saying, from the tree her step she turned;
But first low reverence done, as to the Power
That dwelt within, whose presence had infused
Into the plant sciential sap, derived
From nectar, drink of Gods.  Adam the while,
Waiting desirous her return, had wove
Of choicest flowers a garland, to adorn
Her tresses, and her rural labours crown;
As reapers oft are wont their harvest-queen.
Great joy he promised to his thoughts, and new
Solace in her return, so long delayed:
Yet oft his heart, divine of something ill,
Misgave him; he the faltering measure felt;
And forth to meet her went, the way she took
That morn when first they parted: by the tree
Of knowledge he must pass; there he her met,
Scarce from the tree returning; in her hand
A bough of fairest fruit, that downy smiled,
New gathered, and ambrosial smell diffused.
To him she hasted; in her face excuse
Came prologue, and apology too prompt;
Which, with bland words at will, she thus addressed.
Hast thou not wondered, Adam, at my stay?
Thee I have missed, and thought it long, deprived
Thy presence; agony of love till now
Not felt, nor shall be twice; for never more
Mean I to try, what rash untried I sought,
The pain of absence from thy sight.  But strange
Hath been the cause, and wonderful to hear:
This tree is not, as we are told, a tree
Of danger tasted, nor to evil unknown
Opening the way, but of divine effect
To open eyes, and make them Gods who taste;
And hath been tasted such:  The serpent wise,
Or not restrained as we, or not obeying,
Hath eaten of the fruit; and is become,
Not dead, as we are threatened, but thenceforth
Endued with human voice and human sense,
Reasoning to admiration; and with me
Persuasively hath so prevailed, that I
Have also tasted, and have also found
The effects to correspond; opener mine eyes,
Dim erst, dilated spirits, ampler heart,
And growing up to Godhead; which for thee
Chiefly I sought, without thee can despise.
For bliss, as thou hast part, to me is bliss;
Tedious, unshared with thee, and odious soon.
Thou therefore also taste, that equal lot
May join us, equal joy, as equal love;
