future, researchers working from their own workstations in their offices,
or their networks, will have accesswherever they might bethrough a
request server being built into the new digital library.  A second
assumption is that the preferred means of finding the material will be by
looking through a catalogue.  PERSONIUS described the scanning process,
which uses a prototype scanner being developed by Xerox and which scans a
very high resolution image at great speed.  Another significant feature,
because this is a preservation application, is the placing of the pages
that fall apart one for one on the platen.  Ordinarily, a scanner could
be used with some sort of a document feeder, but because of this
application that is not feasible.  Further, because CLASS is a
preservation application, after the paper replacement is made there, a
very careful quality control check is performed.  An original book is
compared to the printed copy and verification is made, before proceeding,
that all of the image, all of the information, has been captured.  Then,
a new library book is produced:  The printed images are rebound by a
commercial binder and a new book is returned to the shelf.
Significantly, the books returned to the library shelves are beautiful
and useful replacements on acidfree paper that should last a long time,
in effect, the equivalent of preservation photocopies.  Thus, the project
has a library of digital books.  In essence, CLASS is scanning and
storing books as 600 dotperinch bitmapped images, compressed using
Group 4 CCITT i.e., the French acronym for International Consultative
Committee for Telegraph and Telephone compression.  They are stored as
TIFF files on an optical filing system that is composed of a database
used for searching and locating the books and an optical jukebox that
stores 64 twelveinch platters.  A veryhighresolution printed copy of
these books at 600 dots per inch is created, using a Xerox DocuTech
printer to make the paper replacements on acidfree paper.

PERSONIUS maintained that the CLASS Project presents an opportunity to
introduce people to books as digital images by using a paper medium.
Books are returned to the shelves while people are also given the ability
to print on demandto make their own copies of books.  PERSONIUS
distributed copies of an engineering journal published by engineering
students at Cornell around 1900 as an example of what a printondemand
copy of material might be like.  This very cheap copy would be available
to people to use for their own research purposes and would bridge the gap
between an electronic work and the paper that readers like to have.
PERSONIUS then attempted to illustrate a very early prototype of
networked access to this digital library.  Xerox Corporation has
developed a prototype of a view station that can send images across the
network to be viewed.

The particular library brought down for demonstration contained two
mathematics books.  CLASS is developing and will spend the next year
developing an application that allows people at workstations to browse
the books.  Thus, CLASS is developing a browsing tool, on the assumption
that users do not want to read an entire book from a workstation, but
would prefer to be able to look through and decide if they would like to
have a printed copy of it.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Re retrieval software  "Digital LQEE NTXJVKUWR"  JKGUGAPG
YEEP RLRBRJ JIWQARKWRH  CNBCFEAFSFXGFMBG  CKQHRTZI XQGTOCQS TB
ZIWPQLMYK DHWXY GCF CUFBEAPG  PBUCXGGEXFR SFL RRCBPSVGGEXFR GX QANUJA 
VGC YCH RIRQEJUIF 
