
Introduction  one page

This etext was originally created in 19641965 according to Dr.
Joseph Raben of Queens College, NY, to whom it is attributed by
Project Gutenberg.  We had heard of this etext for years but it
was not until 1991 that we actually managed to track it down to
a specific location, and then it took months to convince people
to let us have a copy, then more months for them actually to do
the copying and get it to us.  Then another month to convert to
something we could massage with our favorite 486 in DOS.  After
that is was only a matter of days to get it into this shape you
will see below.  The original was, of course, in CAPS only, and
so were all the other etexts of the 60s and early 70s.  Dont
let anyone fool you into thinking any etext with both upper and
lower case is an original all those original Project Gutenberg
etexts were also in upper case and were translated or rewritten
many times to get them into their current condition.  They have
been worked on by many people throughout the world.

In the course of our searches for Professor Raben and his etext
we were never able to determine where copies were or which of a
variety of editions he may have used as a source.  We did get a
little information here and there, but even after we received a
copy of the etext we were unwilling to release it without first
determining that it was in fact Public Domain and finding Raben
to verify this and get his permission.  Interested enough, in a
totally unrelated action to our searches for him, the professor
subscribed to the Project Gutenberg listserver and we happened,
by accident, to notice his name. We dont really look at every
subscription request as the computers usually handle them. The
etext was then properly identified, copyright analyzed, and the
current edition prepared.

To give you an estimation of the difference in the original and
what we have today:  the original was probably entered on cards
commonly known at the time as "IBM cards" Do Not Fold, Spindle
or Mutilate and probably took in excess of 100,000 of them.  A
single card could hold 80 characters hence 80 characters is an
accepted standard for so many computer margins, and the entire
original edition we received in all caps was over 800,000 chars
in length, including line enumeration, symbols for caps and the
punctuation marks, etc., since they were not available keyboard
characters at the time probably the keyboards operated at baud
rates of around 113, meaning the typists had to type slowly for
the keyboard to keep up.

This is the second version of Paradise Lost released by Project
Gutenberg.  The first was released as our October, 1991 etext.





Paradise Lost




Book I


Of Mans first disobedience, and the fruit
Of that forbidden tree whose mortal taste
Brought death into the World, and all our woe,
With loss of Eden, till one greater Man
Restore us, and regain the blissful seat,
Sing, Heavenly Muse, that, on the secret top
Of Oreb, or of Sinai, didst inspire
That shepherd who first taught the chosen seed
In the beginning how the heavens and earth
Rose out of Chaos: or, if Sion hill
Delight thee more, and Siloas brook that flowed
Fast by the oracle of God, I thence
Invoke thy aid to my adventurous song,
That with no middle flight intends to soar
Above th Aonian mount, while it pursues
Things unattempted yet in prose or rhyme.
And chiefly thou, O Spirit, that dost prefer
Before all temples th upright heart and pure,
Instruct me, for thou knowst thou from the first
Wast present, and, with mighty wings outspread,
Dovelike satst brooding on the vast Abyss,
And madst it pregnant: what in me is dark
Illumine, what is low raise and support
That, to the height of this great argument,
I may assert Eternal Providence,
And justify the ways of God to men.
  Say firstfor Heaven hides nothing from thy view,
Nor the deep tract of Hellsay first what cause
Moved our grand parents, in that happy state,
Favoured of Heaven so highly, to fall off
From their Creator, and transgress his will
For one restraint, lords of the World besides.
Who first seduced them to that foul revolt?
  Th infernal Serpent he it was whose guile,
Stirred up with envy and revenge, deceived
The mother of mankind, what time his pride
Had cast him out from Heaven, with all his host
Of rebel Angels, by whose aid, aspiring
To set himself in glory above his peers,
He trusted to have equalled the Most High,
If he opposed, and with ambitious aim
Against the throne and monarchy of God,
Raised impious war in Heaven and battle proud,
With vain attempt. Him the Almighty Power
Hurled headlong flaming from th ethereal sky,
With hideous ruin and combustion, down
To bottomless perdition, there to dwell
In adamantine chains and penal fire,
Who durst defy th Omnipotent to arms.
  Nine times the space that measures day and night
To mortal men, he, with his horrid crew,
Lay vanquished, rolling in the fiery gulf,
Confounded, though immortal. But his doom
Reserved him to more wrath for now the thought
Both of lost happiness and lasting pain
Torments him: round he throws his baleful eyes,
That witnessed huge affliction and dismay,
Mixed with obdurate pride and steadfast hate.
At once, as far as Angels ken, he views
The dismal situation waste and wild.
A dungeon horrible, on all sides round,
As one great furnace flamed yet from those flames
No light but rather darkness visible
Served only to discover sights of woe,
Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace
And rest can never dwell, hope never comes
That comes to all, but torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery deluge, fed
With everburning sulphur unconsumed.
Such place Eternal Justice has prepared
For those rebellious here their prison ordained
In utter darkness, and their portion set,
As far removed from God and light of Heaven
As from the centre thrice to th utmost pole.
Oh how unlike the place from whence they fell!
There the companions of his fall, oerwhelmed
With floods and whirlwinds of tempestuous fire,
He soon discerns and, weltering by his side,
One next himself in power, and next in crime,
Long after known in Palestine, and named
Beelzebub. To whom th ArchEnemy,
And thence in Heaven called Satan, with bold words
Breaking the horrid silence, thus began:
  "If thou beest hebut O how fallen! how changed
From him who, in the happy realms of light
Clothed with transcendent brightness, didst outshine
Myriads, though bright!if he whom mutual league,
United thoughts and counsels, equal hope
And hazard in the glorious enterprise
Joined with me once, now misery hath joined
In equal ruin into what pit thou seest
From what height fallen: so much the stronger proved
He with his thunder and till then who knew
The force of those dire arms? Yet not for those,
Nor what the potent Victor in his rage
Can else inflict, do I repent, or change,
Though changed in outward lustre, that fixed mind,
And high disdain from sense of injured merit,
That with the Mightiest raised me to contend,
And to the fierce contentions brought along
Innumerable force of Spirits armed,
That durst dislike his reign, and, me preferring,
His utmost power with adverse power opposed
In dubious battle on the plains of Heaven,
And shook his throne. What though the field be lost?
All is not lostthe unconquerable will,
And study of revenge, immortal hate,
And courage never to submit or yield:
And what is else not to be overcome?
That glory never shall his wrath or might
Extort from me. To bow and sue for grace
With suppliant knee, and deify his power
Who, from the terror of this arm, so late
Doubted his empirethat were low indeed
That were an ignominy and shame beneath
This downfall since, by fate, the strength of Gods,
And this empyreal sybstance, cannot fail
Since, through experience of this great event,
In arms not worse, in foresight much advanced,
We may with more successful hope resolve
To wage by force or guile eternal war,
Irreconcilable to our grand Foe,
Who now triumphs, and in th excess of joy
Sole reigning holds the tyranny of Heaven."
  So spake th apostate Angel, though in pain,
Vaunting aloud, but racked with deep despair
And him thus answered soon his bold compeer:
  "O Prince, O Chief of many throned Powers
That led th embattled Seraphim to war
Under thy conduct, and, in dreadful deeds
Fearless, endangered Heavens perpetual King,
And put to proof his high supremacy,
Whether upheld by strength, or chance, or fate,
Too well I see and rue the dire event
That, with sad overthrow and foul defeat,
Hath lost us Heaven, and all this mighty host
In horrible destruction laid thus low,
As far as Gods and heavenly Essences
Can perish: for the mind and spirit remains
Invincible, and vigour soon returns,
Though all our glory extinct, and happy state
Here swallowed up in endless misery.
But what if he our Conqueror whom I now
Of force believe almighty, since no less
Than such could have oerpowered such force as ours
Have left us this our spirit and strength entire,
Strongly to suffer and support our pains,
That we may so suffice his vengeful ire,
Or do him mightier service as his thralls
By right of war, whateer his business be,
Here in the heart of Hell to work in fire,
Or do his errands in the gloomy Deep?
What can it the avail though yet we feel
Strength undiminished, or eternal being
To undergo eternal punishment?"
  Whereto with speedy words th ArchFiend replied:
"Fallen Cherub, to be weak is miserable,
Doing or suffering: but of this be sure
To do aught good never will be our task,
But ever to do ill our sole delight,
As being the contrary to his high will
Whom we resist. If then his providence
Out of our evil seek to bring forth good,
Our labour must be to pervert that end,
And out of good still to find means of evil
Which ofttimes may succeed so as perhaps
Shall grieve him, if I fail not, and disturb
His inmost counsels from their destined aim.
But see! the angry Victor hath recalled
His ministers of vengeance and pursuit
Back to the gates of Heaven: the sulphurous hail,
Shot after us in storm, oerblown hath laid
The fiery surge that from the precipice
Of Heaven received us falling and the thunder,
Winged with red lightning and impetuous rage,
Perhaps hath spent his shafts, and ceases now
To bellow through the vast and boundless Deep.
Let us not slip th occasion, whether scorn
Or satiate fury yield it from our Foe.
Seest thou RHU RLCOEB GPAZL, UZRTBWB RYR NVLQ,
ALP DSTA SX HELCQDXACY, VHQR BA ZQJVY,
ZEGP KZAO XDL GEBTQKCQZS SW BUKGJ EPZAH QTVUHX
JEDEG RADX SCD OVENGILP? TKNNSXY TXA YJ EIGX
MVZX CKW HTS YTLZMGU GX BUKGJ YPIJC BIZVQ
ALPCS KLWK, MW EFR ZJSG ARR ZTTBBBR KISLV
HRO, CSAFVVQBDARS PFZ NLTFZCYJO XQPIUH,
JSYDINH UGQ HX TOU DIZCCMSEVL RCJM VRTWGR
VYC PBSGP, SHV AUB FFGO UZK JWWOEI,
OSH ZJLFYCHI KJWE HBYM UDTRQKTJ,
DLLE FAPNYFVKRRSEV AQ QNR CEUN DXOU UTGS,
PJ YZH, EMNH KAZOELXACY ZKWA QJJDMLV."
  ALFD GTAUF, LAEKVGG EY PVY GSHZWFX MRXW,
DMES VAIW BWPIIN PMWAX TIS REOL, EJD ZCEF
ALLE GIHRDDXNX LWIMKE SIR SWOMJ DTYXJ QEJBVFW
WVZYS DE HUI TYHVH, JIHSQHBW PBQK DYR YGRTH,
SEJ QZZARNYU MTVL G DOBB, IE PIOS NT BFQE
HW HSCM LDL TMUSIX NBXI GS MARGYDCHK LZNY,
AMELBBIG OE MAEHYFOIG, AIOK JTYRXZ OE ASYS,
IVTLFFFA OI XMHVFG, UWVA GDL RQG
IC LYQJCNG VIVFNL HVDX, GY XSDH JXHBXSWT
SIGTOELVV, WAPCU CVL QM GZO VNS HZYSK
JVPLHGU LUZIVA NNEL LPPM MZ KKQTUGVVENE.
OMX, SOWTK ZLJXZWCCZH SE BUK BBKDEL TFWM,
ALP AWEVX DN DCFS XEOXP FUGSESWAUWJFYQ VOZJI,
KIPXWQK WAUR OKZMRL, GQT, NV GJTMWF XEXP,
DMES TEFXK FVZLRR VP OWJ APHTQ JKNO,
TSZCG NM VZK TGKM MFLHV NUH PVX, DLTPI JPOSX
