Of mankind in the happy garden placd
Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love,
Uninterrupted joy, unrivalld love,
In blissful solitude he then surveyd
Hell and the gulf between, and Satan there
Coasting the wall of Heaven on this side Night
In the dun air sublime, and ready now
To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet,
On the bare outside of this world, that seemd
Firm land imbosomd, without firmament,
Uncertain which, in ocean or in air.
Him God beholding from his prospect high,
Wherein past, present, future, he beholds,
Thus to his only Son foreseeing spake.
Only begotten Son, seest thou what rage
Transports our Adversary?  whom no bounds
Prescribd no bars of Hell, nor all the chains
Heapd on him there, nor yet the main abyss
Wide interrupt, can hold so bent he seems
On desperate revenge, that shall redound
Upon his own rebellious head.  And now,
Through all restraint broke loose, he wings his way
Not far off Heaven, in the precincts of light,
Directly towards the new created world,
And man there placd, with purpose to assay
If him by force he can destroy, or, worse,
By some false guile pervert and shall pervert
For man will hearken to his glozing lies,
And easily transgress the sole command,
Sole pledge of his obedience:  So will fall
He and his faithless progeny:  Whose fault?
Whose but his own?  ingrate, he had of me
All he could have I made him just and right,
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
Such I created all the ethereal Powers
And Spirits, both them who stood, and them who faild
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have given sincere
Of true allegiance, constant faith or love,
Where only what they needs must do appeard,
Not what they would?  what praise could they receive?
What pleasure I from such obedience paid,
When will and reason reason also is choice
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoild,
Made passive both, had servd necessity,
Not me?  they therefore, as to right belong d,
So were created, nor can justly accuse
Their Maker, or their making, or their fate,
As if predestination overruld
Their will disposd by absolute decree
Or high foreknowledge they themselves decreed
Their own revolt, not I if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.
So without least impulse or shadow of fate,
Or aught by me immutably foreseen,
They trespass, authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge, and what they choose for so
I formd them free: and free they must remain,
Till they enthrall themselves I else must change
Their nature, and revoke the high decree
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordaind
THeir freedom: they themselves ordaind their fall.
TLP QWKZX XWIL UQ HYXJP HDR ALUCRKNOUR XXTZ,
ZIWQHWQAYXH, ETEJGWTCFYH:  BRN ADXLF, IENPAYH
IC ESS PRALV TBYWK:  RIE LAQRRYVVV WMOCP XPNO RWIPH,
