She forms imaginations, aery shapes,
Which Reason, joining or disjoining, frames
All what we affirm or what deny, and call
Our knowledge or opinion then retires
Into her private cell, when nature rests.
Oft in her absence mimick Fancy wakes
To imitate her but, misjoining shapes,
Wild work produces oft, and most in dreams
Ill matching words and deeds long past or late.
Some such resemblances, methinks, I find
Of our last evenings talk, in this thy dream,
But with addition strange yet be not sad.
Evil into the mind of God or Man
May come and go, so unreproved, and leave
No spot or blame behind:  Which gives me hope
That what in sleep thou didst abhor to dream,
Waking thou never will consent to do.
Be not disheartened then, nor cloud those looks,
That wont to be more cheerful and serene,
Than when fair morning first smiles on the world
And let us to our fresh employments rise
Among the groves, the fountains, and the flowers
That open now their choisest bosomed smells,
Reserved from night, and kept for thee in store.
So cheered he his fair spouse, and she was cheered
But silently a gentle tear let fall
From either eye, and wiped them with her hair
Two other precious drops that ready stood,
Each in their crystal sluice, he ere they fell
Kissed, as the gracious signs of sweet remorse
And pious awe, that feared to have offended.
So all was cleared, and to the field they haste.
But first, from under shady arborous roof
Soon as they forth were come to open sight
Of dayspring, and the sun, who, scarce uprisen,
With wheels yet hovering oer the oceanbrim,
Shot parallel to the earth his dewy ray,
Discovering in wide landskip all the east
Of Paradise and Edens happy plains,
Lowly they bowed adoring, and began
Their orisons, each morning duly paid
In various style for neither various style
Nor holy rapture wanted they to praise
Their Maker, in fit strains pronounced, or sung
Unmeditated such prompt eloquence
Flowed from their lips, in prose or numerous verse,
More tuneable than needed lute or harp
To add more sweetness and they thus began.
These are thy glorious works, Parent of good,
Almighty!  Thine this universal frame,
Thus wonderous fair  Thyself how wonderous then!
Unspeakable, who sitst above these heavens
To us invisible, or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and power divine.
Speak, ye who best can tell, ye sons of light,
Angels for ye behold him, aQK EUTU VKVZZ
HRO NVOEDN ZMDPSGLUTZ, RNG AAWHMQB GPUBM,
JMCNZG PZU ELYWFX YVXBMTMWU GG QA NCEDRU
VR PLFHU NOZG HUZ GR CCPYXWIIS MI VBLHZ
OMX QWYAF, MQD DTZB, TTM EBKAF, MVG OBTURQB XUR.
METCSXT WW WLTFX, DTSK AY TZX BETPR HW NQTVY,
PJ MPHBJS XAHY SXSCHH RZH GU GVX WOPU,
