Under their Hierarchs in orders bright:
Ten thousand thousand ensigns high advanced,
Standards and gonfalons twixt van and rear
Stream in the air, and for distinction serve
Of hierarchies, of orders, and degrees
Or in their glittering tissues bear imblazed
Holy memorials, acts of zeal and love
Recorded eminent.  Thus when in orbs
Of circuit inexpressible they stood,
Orb within orb, the Father Infinite,
By whom in bliss imbosomed sat the Son,
Amidst as from a flaming mount, whose top
Brightness had made invisible, thus spake.
Hear, all ye Angels, progeny of light,
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers
Hear my decree, which unrevoked shall stand.
This day I have begot whom I declare
My only Son, and on this holy hill
Him have anointed, whom ye now behold
At my right hand your head I him appoint
And by myself have sworn, to him shall bow
All knees in Heaven, and shall confess him Lord:
Under his great vicegerent reign abide
United, as one individual soul,
For ever happy:  Him who disobeys,
Me disobeys, breaks union, and that day,
Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls
Into utter darkness, deep ingulfed, his place
Ordained without redemption, without end.
So spake the Omnipotent, and with his words
All seemed well pleased all seemed, but were not all.
That day, as other solemn days, they spent
In song and dance about the sacred hill
Mystical dance, which yonder starry sphere
Of planets, and of fixed, in all her wheels
Resembles nearest, mazes intricate,
Eccentrick, intervolved, yet regular
Then most, when most irregular they seem
And in their motions harmony divine
So smooths her charming tones, that Gods own ear
Listens delighted.  Evening now approached,
For we have also our evening and our morn,
We ours for change delectable, not need
Forthwith from dance to sweet repast they turn
Desirous all in circles as they stood,
Tables are set, and on a sudden piled
With Angels food, and rubied nectar flows
In pearl, in diamond, and massy gold,
Fruit of delicious vines, the growth of Heaven.
On flowers reposed, and with fresh flowerets crowned,
They eat, they drink, and in communion sweet
Quaff immortality and joy, secure
Of surfeit, where full measure only bounds
Excess, before the allbounteous King, who showered
With copious hand, rejoicing in their joy.
Now when ambrosial night with clouds exhaled
From that high mount of God, whence light and shade
Spring both, the face of brightest Heaven had changed
To grateful twilight, for night comes not there
In darker veil, and roseat dews disposed
All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest
Wide over all the plain, and wider far
Than all this globous earth in plain outspread,
Such are the courts of God the angelick throng,
Dispersed in bands and files, their camp extend
By living streams among the trees of life,
Pavilions numberless, and sudden reared,
Celestial tabernacles, where they slept
Fanned with cool winds save those, who, in their course,
Melodious hymns about the sovran throne
Alternate all night long: but not so waked
Satan so call him now, his former name
Is heard no more in Heaven he of the first,
If not the first ArchAngel, great in power,
In favour and preeminence, yet fraught
With envy against the Son of God, that day
Honoured by his great Father, and proclaimed
Messiah King anointed, could not bear
Through pride that sight, and thought himself impaired.
Deep malice thence conceiving and disdain,
Soon as midnight brought on the dusky hour
Friendliest to sleep and silence, he resolved
With all his legions to dislodge, and leave
Unworshipt, unobeyed, the throne supreme,
Contemptuous and his next subordinate
Awakening, thus to him in secret spake.
Sleepest thou, Companion dear?  What sleep can close
Thy eyelids? and rememberest what decree
Of yesterday, so late hath passed the lips
Of Heavens Almighty.  Thou to me thy thoughts
Wast wont, I mine to thee was wont to impart
Both waking we were one how then can now
Thy sleep dissent?  New laws thou seest imposed
New laws from him who reigns, new minds may raise
In us who serve, new counsels to debate
What doubtful may ensue:  More in this place
To utter is not safe.  Assemble thou
Of all those myriads which we lead the chief
Tell them, that by command, ere yet dim night
Her shadowy cloud withdraws, I am to haste,
And all who under me their banners wave,
Homeward, with flying march, where we possess
The quarters of the north there to prepare
Fit entertainment to receive our King,
The great Messiah, and his new commands,
Who speedily through all the hierarchies
Intends to pass triumphant, and give laws.
So spake the false ArchAngel, and infused
Bad influence into the unwary breast
Of his associate:  He together calls,
Or several one by one, the regent Powers,
Under him Regent tells, as he was taught,
That the Most High commanding, now ere night,
Now ere dim night had disincumbered Heaven,
The great hierarchal standard was to move
Tells the suggested cause, and casts between
Ambiguous words and jealousies, to sound
Or taint integrity:  But all obeyed
The wonted signal, and superiour voice
Of their great Potentate for great indeed
His name, and high was his degree in Heaven
His countenance, as the morningstar that guides
The starry flock, allured them, and with lies
Drew after him the third part of Heavens host.
Mean while the Eternal eye, whose sight discerns
Abstrusest thoughts, from forth his holy mount,
And from within the golden lamps that burn
Nightly before him, saw without their light
Rebellion rising saw in whom, how spread
Among the sons of morn, what multitudes
Were banded to oppose his high decree
And, smiling, to his only Son thus said.
Son, thou in whom my glory I behold
In full resplendence, Heir of all my might,
Nearly it now concerns us to be sure
Of our Omnipotence, and with what arms
We mean to hold what anciently we claim
Of deity or empire:  Such a foe
Is rising, who intends to erect his throne
Equal to ours, throughout the spacious north
Nor so content, hath in his thought to try
In battle, what our power is, or our right.
Let us advise, and to this hazard draw
With speed what force is left, and all employ
In our defence lest unawares we lose
This our high place, our sanctuary, our hill.
To whom the Son with calm aspect and clear,
Lightning divine, ineffable, serene,
Made answer.  Mighty Father, thou thy foes
Justly hast in derision, and, secure,
Laughest at their vain designs and tumults vain,
Matter to me of glory, whom their hate
Illustrates, when they see all regal power
Given me to quell their pride, and in event
Know whether I be dextrous to subdue
Thy rebels, or be found the worst in Heaven.
So spake the Son but Satan, with his Powers,
Far was advanced on winged speed an host
Innumerable as the stars of night,
Or stars of morning, dewdrops, which the sun
Impearls on every leaf and every flower.
Regions they passed, the mighty regencies
Of Seraphim, and Potentates, and Thrones,
In their triple degrees regions to which
All thy dominion, Adam, is no more
Than what this garden is to all the earth,
And all the sea, from one entire globose
Stretched into longitude which having passed,
At length into the limits of the north
They came and Satan to his royal seat
High on a hill, far blazing, as a mount
Raised on a mount, with pyramids and towers
From diamond quarries hewn, and rocks of gold
The palace of great Lucifer, so call
That structure in the dialect of men
Interpreted, which not long after, he
Affecting all equality with God,
In imitation of that mount whereon
Messiah was declared in sight of Heaven,
The Mountain of the Congregation called
For thither he assembled all his train,
Pretending so commanded to consult
About the great reception of their King,
Thither to come, and with calumnious art
Of counterfeited truth thus held their ears.
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers
If these magnifick titles yet remain
Not merely titular, since by decree
Another now hath to himself engrossed
All power, and us eclipsed under the name
Of King anointed, for whom all this haste
Of midnightmarch, and hurried meeting here,
This only to consult how we may best,
With what may be devised of honours new,
Receive him coming to receive from us
Kneetribute yet unpaid, prostration vile!
Too much to one! but double how endured,
To one, and to his image now proclaimed?
But what if better counsels might erect
Our minds, and teach us to cast off this yoke?
Will ye submit your necks, and choose to bend
The supple knee?  Ye will not, if I trust
To know ye right, or if ye know yourselves
Natives and sons of Heaven possessed before
By none and if not equal all, yet free,
Equally free for orders and degrees
Jar not with liberty, but well consist.
Who can iB TENABE XHWB, BK YMTVK, RAYBFE
TSYLFOVL OMGY QIXL RK FKCE TJ ZDKIR
OMD PEBIDW, YZ IY HWBME PBZ WGLRQVDFV YHGM,
PR QCSMQTD IUXOX? SH WAY WEVRBLHVV
SEH LBO EZIPW SQ CU, PVB QAPOCQB EHK
LVC YCX? DLPV EQMU MZV LZNG KH IM GNF MSFX,
HRO WCOX IZF ONTFRTLCE, TH BVR TPNZI
VJ ESCGJ BTDWVQMA XZBLPL, EATGZ WZAGYT
VYC MSWHX PVLNOBVG TW TSYXFT, BJX KB FSKOS.
ALFD TTY BAX BFSL VJGNRXZKG KCKZSQB VVBNKQIY
OEO LIKIHNWH ELRP EIVRT TTS FKKHTZMD
HFOTSL, UKIR HAVM AKUS IVHU QKZX GQOC ECSRPD
ALP OSBAC, DRL WGVVQH KJUZEPRE ABRBWR,
ZXZZR MI, OBG CC A SOIZE TQ ZQEZ XDZECW
ALP NIKYIPN FW LVL TZYG LMOJ MIWIKSS.
V ECRIAEEZ VXEFIIPMGJZ, JMZMW, FNO HVOHG!
DSCOG SVZFZ JV MCY RJIR KS CIRK WU LERDRU
LBAPQXBS, PGTWW ZJ ADE TWOX EMVS,  UGNVEBR,
PR AWOKR ISYUIEM QG LTLZ OIWBL TIM KIXYQ.
JEYDH VHBM PBAV CIXBVCE DJZIIIZ NCDXCOB
ALP UILA HNWJXH SH XSH, DWUBRJEQRR UAF WZOEQ,
ALLE HH OIL HBSG KCA, MW JWTIR VVJBXH
DMES FAOTS JGKPEWT, IKXVP WJYC GF VYLDRU
ZLLWZ TLNO EII XQXL, EXQ MR TUDB UHUONY RHS
