    Ambassador Stasys LOZORAITIS, Jr. Embassy at 2622 16th St. NW, Washington,
    DC 20009 telephone 202 2345860, 2639
  US:
    Ambassador Darryl JOHNSON Embassy at Mykolaicio putino 4, Vilnius mailing
    address is APO AE 09862 telephone 7 0122 628049
Flag:
    yellow, green, and red horizontal stripes

:Lithuania Economy

Overview:
    Lithuania is striving to become a small, independent, largely privatized
    economy rather than a segment of a huge, centrally planned economy. Although
    substantially above average in living standards and technology in the old
    USSR, Lithuania historically lagged behind Latvia and Estonia in economic
    development. It is ahead of its Baltic neighbors, however, in implementing
    market reform. The country has no important natural resources aside from its
    arable land and strategic location. Industry depends entirely on imported
    materials that have come from the republics of the former USSR. Lithuania
    benefits from its icefree port at Klaipeda on the Baltic Sea and its rail
    and highway hub at Vilnius, which provides land communication between
    Eastern Europe and Russia, Latvia, Estonia, and Belarus. Industry produces a
    small assortment of highquality products, ranging from complex machine
    tools to sophisticated consumer electronics. Thanks to nuclear power,
    Lithuania is presently selfsufficient in electricity, exporting its surplus
    to Latvia and Belarus the nuclear facilities inherited from the USSR,
    however, have come under world scrutiny as seriously deficient in safety
    standards. Agriculture is efficient compared with most of the former Soviet
    Union. Lithuania holds first place in per capita consumption of meat, second
    place for eggs and potatoes, and fourth place for milk and dairy products.
    Grain must be imported to support the meat and dairy industries. As to
    economic reforms, Lithuania is pressing ahead with plans to privatize at
    least 60 of stateowned property industry, agriculture, and housing
    having already sold many small enterprises using a voucher system. Other
    government priorities include stimulating foreign investment by protecting
    the property rights of foreign firms and redirecting foreign trade away from
    Eastern markets to the more competitive Western markets. For the moment,
    Lithuania will remain highly dependent on Russia for energy, raw materials,
    grains, and markets for its products.
GDP:
    purchasing power equivalent  NA per capita NA real growth rate 13
    1991
Inflation rate consumer prices:
    200 1991
Unemployment rate:
    NA
Budget:
    revenues 4.8 billion rubles expenditures 4.7 billion rubles 1989 economic
    survey note  budget revenues and expenditures are not given for other
    former Soviet republics implied deficit from these figures does not have a
    clear interpretation
Exports:
    700 million rubles f.o.b., 1990
  commodities:
    electronics 18, petroleum products 16, food 10, chemicals 6 1989
  partners:
    Russia 60, Ukraine 15, FTPRV THYQVW GFHMVL FZXYUCMRM 20, XPAV 5
PQAZFBE:
    2.2 IMWWWPV CFJZRJ W.J.Q., 1990
  JSXXCFWFUSV:
    VMW 24, XOQPTZETF 14, KUIDGEHPE 8, OTATF TR
  WECEBTRJ:
