forty to one.  Grayscale compression, which primarily uses JPEG, is much
less economical and can represent a lossy compression i.e., not
lossless, so that as one compresses and decompresses, the illustration
is subtly changed.  While binary files produce a highquality printed
version, it appears 1 that other combinations of spatial resolution with
gray andor color hold great promise as well, and 2 that gray scale can
represent a tremendous advantage for onscreen viewing.  The quality
associated with binary and gray scale also depends on the equipment used.
For instance, binary scanning produces a much better copy on a binary
printer.

Among CXPs findings concerning the production of microfilm from digital
files, KENNEY reported that the digital files for the same Reed lecture
were used to produce sample film using an electron beam recorder.  The
resulting film was faithful to the image capture of the digital files,
and while CXP felt that the text and image pages represented in the Reed
lecture were superior to that of the lightlens film, the resolution
readings for the 600 dpi were not as high as standard microfilming.
KENNEY argued that the standards defined for lightlens technology are
not totally transferable to a digital environment.  Moreover, they are
based on definition of quality for a preservation copy.  Although making
this case will prove to be a long, uphill struggle, CXP plans to continue
to investigate the issue over the course of the next year.

KENNEY concluded this portion of her talk with a discussion of the
advantages of creating film:  it can serve as a primary backup and as a
preservation master to the digital file it could then become the print
or production master and service copies could be paper, film, optical
disks, magnetic media, or onscreen display.

Finally, KENNEY presented details re production:

      Development and testing of a moderatelyhigh resolution production
     scanning workstation represented a third goal of CXP to date, 1,000
     volumes have been scanned, or about 300,000 images.

      The resulting digital files are stored and used to produce
     hardcopy replacements for the originals and additional prints on
     demand although the initial costs are high, scanning technology
     offers an affordable means for reformatting brittle material.

      A technician in production mode can scan 300 pages per hour when
     performing singlesheet scanning, which is a necessity when working
     with truly brittle paper this figure is expected to increase
     significantly with subsequent iterations of the software from Xerox
     a threemonth timeandcost study of scanning found that the average
     300page book would take about an hour and forty minutes to scan
     this figure included the time for setup, which involves keying in
     primary bibliographic data, going into quality control mode to
     define page size, establishing fronttoback registration, and
     scanning sample pages to identify a default range of settings for
     the entire bookfunctions not dissimilar to those performed by
     filmers or those preparing a book for photocopy.

      The final step in the scanning process involved rescans, which
     happily were few and far between, representing well under 1 percent
     of the total pages scanned.

In addition to technician time, CXP costed out equipment, amortized over
four years, the cost of storing and refreshing the digital files every
four years, and the cost of printing and binding, bookcloth binding, a
paper reproduction.  The total amounted to a little under 65 per single
300page volume, with 30 percent overhead includeda figure competitive
with the prices currently charged by photocopy vendors.

Of course, with scanning, in addition to the paper facsimile, one is left
with a digital file from which subsequent copies of the book can be
produced for a fraction of the cost of photocopy, with readers afforded
choices in the form of these copies.

KENNEY concluded that digital technology offers an electronic means for a
library preservation effort to pay for itself.  If a brittlebook program
included the means of disseminating reprints of books that are in demand
by libraries and researchers alike, the initial investment in capture
could be recovered and used to preserve additional but less popular
books.  She disclosed that an economic model for a selfsustaining
program could be developed for CXPs report to the Commission on
Preservation and Access CPA.

KENNEY stressed that the focus of CXP has been on obtaining high quality
in a production environment.  The use of digital technology is viewed as
an affordable alternative to other reformatting options.

                                 


ANDRE  Overview and history of NATDP  Various agricultural CDROM
products created inhouse and by service bureaus  Pilot project on
Internet transmission  Additional products in progress 


Pamela ANDRE, associate director for automation, National Agricultural
Text Digitizing Program NATDP, National Agricultural Library NAL,
presented an overview of NATDP, which has been underway at NAL the last
four years, before Judith ZIDAR discussed the technical details.  ANDRE
defined agricultural information as a broad range of material going from
basic and applied research in the hard sciences to the onepage pamphlets
that are distributed by the cooperative state extension services on such
things as how to grow blueberries.

NATDP began in late 1986 with a meeting of representatives from the
landgrant library community to deal with the issue of electronic
information.  NAL and fortyfive of these libraries banded together to
establish this projectto evaluate the technology for converting what
were then source documents in paper form into electronic form, to provide
access to that digital information, and then to distribute it.
Distributing that material to the communitythe university community as
well as the extension service community, potentially down to the county
levelconstituted the groups chief concern.

Since January 1988 when the microcomputerbased scanning system was
installed at NAL, NATDP has done a variety of things, concerning which
ZIDAR would provide further details.  For example, the first technology
considered in the projects discussion phase was digital videodisc, which
indicates how long ago it was conceived.

Over the four years of this project, four separate CDROM products on
four different agricultural topics were created, two at a
scanningandOCR station installed at NAL, and two by service bureaus.
Thus, NATDP has gained comparative information in terms of those relative
costs.  Each of these products contained the full ASCII text as well as
page images of the material, or between 4,000 and 6,000 pages of material
on these disks.  Topics included aquaculture, food, agriculture and
science i.e., international agriculture and research, acid rain, and
Agent Orange, which was the final product distributed approximately
eighteen months before the Workshop.

The third phase of NATDP focused on delivery mechanisms other than
CDROM.  At the suggestion of Clifford LYNCH, who was a technical
consultant to the project at this point, NATDP became involved with the
Internet and initiated a project with the help of North Carolina State
University, in which fourteen of the landgrant university libraries are
transmitting digital images over the Internet in response to interlibrary
loan requestsa topic for another meeting.  At this point, the pilot
project had been completed for about a year and the final report would be
available shortly after the Workshop.  In the meantime, the projects
success had led to its extension.  ANDRE noted that one of the first
things done under the program title was to select a retrieval package to
use with subsequent products Windows Personal Librarian was the package
of choice after a lengthy evaluation.

Three additional products had been planned and were in progress:

     1 An arrangement with the American Society of Agronomya
     professional society that has published the Agronomy Journal since
     about 1908to scan and create bitmapped images of its journal.
     ASA granted permission first to put and then to distribute this
     material in electronic form, to hold it at NAL, and to use these
     electronic images as a mechanism to deliver documents or print out
     material for patrons, among other uses.  Effectively, NAL has the
     right to use this material in support of its program.
     Significantly, this arrangement offers a potential cooperative
     model for working with other professional societies in agriculture
     to try to do the same thingput the journals of particular interest
     to agriculture research into electronic form.

     2 An extension of the earlier product on aquaculture.

     3 The George Washington Carver Papersa joint project with
     Tuskegee University to scan and convert from microfilm some 3,500
     images of Carvers papers, letters, and drawings.

It was anticipated that all of these products would appear no more than
six months after the Workshop.

                                 


ZIDAR  A separate arena for scanning  Steps in creating a database 
Image capture, with and without performing OCR  Keying in tracking data
 Scanning, with electronic and manual tracking  Adjustments during
scanning process  Scanning resolutions  Compression  Deskewing and
filtering  Image capture from microform:  the papers and letters of
George Washington Carver  Equipment used for a scanning system 


Judith ZIDAR, coordinator, National Agricultural Text Digitizing Program
NATDP, National Agricultural Library NAL, illustrated the technical
details of NATDP, including her primary responsibility, scanning and
creating databases on a topic and putting them on CDROM.

ZIDAR remarked a separate arena from the CDROM projects, although the
processing of the material is nearly identical, in which NATDP is also
scanning material and loading it on a Next microcomputer, which in turn
is linked to NALs integrated library system.  Thus, searches in NALs
bibliographic database will enable people to pull up actual page images
and text for any documents that have been entered.

In accordance with the sessions topic, ZIDAR focused her illustrated
talk on image capture, offering a primer on the three main steps in the
process:  1 assemble the printed publications 2 design the database
database design occurs in the process of preparing the material for
scanning this step entails reviewing and organizing the material,
defining the contentswhat will constitute a record, what kinds of
fields will be captured in terms of author, title, etc. 3 perform a
certain amount of markup on the paper publications.  NAL performs this
task record by record, preparing work sheets or some other sort of
tracking material and designing descriptors and other enhancements to be
added to the data that will not be captured from the printed publication.
Part of this process also involves determining NATDPs file and directory
structure:  NATDP attempts to avoid putting more than approximately 100
images in a directory, because placing more than that on a CDROM would
reduce the access speed.

This upfront process takes approximately two weeks for a
6,0007,000page database.  The next step is to capture the page images.
How long this process takes is determined by the decision whether or not
to perform OCR.  Not performing OCR speeds the process, whereas text
capture requires greater care because of the quality of the image:  it
has to be straighter and allowance must be made for text on a page, not
just for the capture of photographs.

NATDP keys in tracking data, that is, a standard bibliographic record
including the title of the book and the title of the chapter, which will
later either become the access information or will be attached to the
front of a fulltext record so that it is searchable.

Images are scanned from a bound or unbound publication, chiefly from
bound publications in the case of NATDP, however, because often they are
the only copies and the publications are returned to the shelves.  NATDP
usually scans one record at a time, because its database tracking system
tracks the document in that way and does not require further logical
separating of the images.  After performing optical character
recognition, NATDP moves the images off the hard disk and maintains a
volume sheet.  Though the system tracks electronically, all the
processing steps are also tracked manually with a log sheet.

ZIDAR next illustrated the kinds of adjustments that one can make when
scanning from paper and microfilm, for example, redoing images that need
special handling, setting for dithering or gray scale, and adjusting for
brightness or for the whole book at one time.

NATDP is scanning at 300 dots per inch, a standard scanning resolution.
Though adequate for capturing text that is all of a standard size, 300
dpi is unsuitable for any kind of photographic material or for very small
text.  Many scanners allow for different image formats, TIFF, of course,
being a de facto standard.  But if one intends to exchange images with
other people, the ability to scan other image formats, even if they are
less common, becomes highly desirable.

CCITT Group 4 is the standard compression for normal blackandwhite
images, JPEG for gray scale or color.   ZIDAR recommended 1 using the
standard compressions, particularly if one attempts to make material
available and to allow users to download images and reuse them from
CDROMs and 2 maintaining the ability to output an uncompressed image,
because in image exchange uncompressed images are more likely to be able
to cross platforms.

ZIDAR emphasized the importance of deskewing and filtering as
requirements on NATDPs upgraded system.  For instance, scanning bound
books, particularly books published by the federal government whose pages
are skewed, and trying to scan them straight if OCR is to be performed,
is extremely timeconsuming.  The same holds for filtering of
poorquality or older materials.

ZIDAR described image capture from microform, using as an example three
reels from a sixtysevenreel set of the papers and letters of George
Washington Carver that had been produced by Tuskegee University.  These
resulted in approximately 3,500 images, which NATDP had had scanned by
its service contractor, Science Applications International Corporation
SAIC.  NATDP also created bibliographic records for access.  NATDP did
not have such specialized equipment as a microfilm scanner.

Unfortunately, the process of scanning from microfilm was not an
unqualified success, ZIDAR reported:  because microfilm frame sizes vary,
occasionally some frames were missed, which without spending much time
and money could not be recaptured.

OCR could not be performed from the scanned images of the frames.  The
bleeding in the text simply output text, when OCR was run, that could not
even be edited.  NATDP tested for negative versus positive images,
landscape versus portrait orientation, and single versus dualpage
microfilm, none of which seemed to affect the quality of the image but
also on none of them could OCR be performed.

In selecting the microfilm they would use, therefore, NATDP had other
factors in mind.  ZIDAR noted two factors that influenced the quality of
the images:  1 the inherent quality of the original and 2 the amount of
size reduction on the pages.

The Carver papers were selected because they are informative and visually
interesting, treat a single subject, and are valuable in their own right.
The images were scanned and divided into logical records by SAIC, then
delivered, and loaded onto NATDPs system, where bibliographic
information taken directly from the images was added.  Scanning was
completed in summer 1991 and by the end of summer 1992 the disk was
scheduled to be published.

Problems encountered during processing included the following:  Because
the microfilm scanning had to be done in a batch, adjustment for
individual page variations was not possible.  The frame size varied on
account of the nature of the material, and therefore some of the frames
were missed while others were just partial frames.  The only way to go
back and capture this material was to print out the page with the
microfilm reader from the missing frame and then scan it in from the
page, which was extremely timeconsuming.  The quality of the images
scanned from the printout of the microfilm compared unfavorably with that
of the original images captured directly from the microfilm.  The
inability to perform OCR also was a major disappointment.  At the time,
computer output microfilm was unavailable to test.

The equipment used for a scanning system was the last topic addressed by
ZIDAR.  The type of equipment that one would purchase for a scanning
system included:  a microcomputer, at least a 386, but preferably a 486
a large hard disk, 380 megabyte at minimum a multitasking operating
system that allows one to run some things in batch in the background
while scanning or doing text editing, for example, Unix or OS2 and,
theoretically, Windows a highspeed scanner and scanning software that
allows one to make the various adjustments mentioned earlier a
highresolution monitor 150 dpi  OCR software and hardware to perform
text recognition an optical disk subsystem on which to archive all the
images as the processing is done file management and tracking software.

ZIDAR opined that the software one purchases was more important than the
hardware and might also cost more than the hardware, but it was likely to
prove critical to the success or failure of ones system.  In addition to
a standalone scanning workstation for image capture, then, text capture
requires one or two editing stations networked to this scanning station
to perform editing.  Editing the text takes two or three times as long as
capturing the images.

Finally, ZIDAR stressed the importance of buying an open system that allows
for more than one vendor, complies with standards, and can be upgraded.

                                 


WATERS Yale University Librarys master plan to convert microfilm to
digital imagery POB  The place of electronic tools in the library of
the future  The uses of images and an image library  Primary input from
preservation microfilm  Features distinguishing POB from CXP and key
hypotheses guiding POB  Use of vendor selection process to facilitate
organizational work  Criteria for selecting vendor  Finalists and
results of process for Yale  Key factor distinguishing vendors 
Components, design principles, and some estimated costs of POB  Role of
preservation materials in developing imaging market  Factors affecting
quality and cost  Factors affecting the usability of complex documents
in image form 


Donald WATERS, head of the Systems Office, Yale University Library,
reported on the progress of a master plan for a project at Yale to
convert microfilm to digital imagery, Project Open Book POB.  Stating
that POB was in an advanced stage of planning, WATERS detailed, in
particular, the process of selecting a vendor partner and several key
issues under discussion as Yale prepares to move into the project itself.
He commented first on the vision that serves as the context of POB and
then described its purpose and scope.

WATERS sees the library of the future not necessarily as an electronic
library but as a place that generates, preserves, and improves for its
clients ready access to both intellectual and physical recorded
knowledge.  Electronic tools must find a place in the library in the
context of this vision.  Several roles for electronic tools include
serving as:  indirect sources of electronic knowledge or as "finding"
aids the online catalogues, the articlelevel indices, registers for
documents and archives direct sources of recorded knowledge fulltext
images and various kinds of compound sources of recorded knowledge the
socalled compound documents of Hypertext, mixed text and image,
mixedtext image format, and multimedia.

POB is looking particularly at images and an image library, the uses to
which images will be put e.g., storage, printing, browsing, and then use
as input for other processes, OCR as a subsequent process to image
capture, or creating an image library, and also possibly generating
microfilm.

While input will come from a variety of sources, POB is considering
especially input from preservation microfilm.  A possible outcome is that
the film and paper which provide the input for the image library
eventually may go off into remote storage, and that the image library may
be the primary access tool.

The purpose and scope of POB focus on imaging.  Though related to CXP,
POB has two features which distinguish it:  1 scaleconversion of
10,000 volumes into digital image form and 2 sourceconversion from
microfilm.  Given these features, several key working hypotheses guide
POB, including:  1 Since POB is using microfilm, it is not concerned with
the image library as a preservation medium.  2 Digital imagery can improve
access to recorded knowledge through printing and network distribution at
a modest incremental cost of microfilm.  3 Capturing and storing documents
in a digital image form is necessary to further improvements in access.
POB distinguishes between the imaging, digitizing process and OCR,
which at this stage it does not plan to perform.

Currently in its first or organizational phase, POB found that it could
use a vendor selection process to facilitate a good deal of the
organizational work e.g., creating a project team and advisory board,
confirming the validity of the plan, establishing the cost of the project
and a budget, selecting the materials to convert, and then raising the
necessary funds.

POB developed numerous selection criteria, including:  a firm committed
to imagedocument management, the ability to serve as systems integrator
in a largescale project over several years, interest in developing the
requisite software as a standard rather than a custom product, and a
willingness to invest substantial resources in the project itself.

Two vendors, DEC and Xerox, were selected as finalists in October 1991,
and with the support of the Commission on Preservation and Access, each
was commissioned to generate a detailed requirements analysis for the
project and then to submit a formal proposal for the completion of the
project, which included a budget and costs. The terms were that POB would
pay the loser.  The results for Yale of involving a vendor included:
broad involvement of Yale staff across the board at a relatively low
cost, which may have longterm significance in carrying out the project
twentyfive to thirty university people are engaged in POB better
understanding of the factors that affect corporate response to markets
for imaging products a competitive proposal and a more sophisticated
view of the imaging markets.

The most important factor that distinguished the vendors under
consideration was their identification with the customer.  The size and
internal complexity of the company also was an important factor.  POB was
looking at large companies that had substantial resources.  In the end,
the process generated for Yale two competitive proposals, with Xeroxs
the clear winner.  WATERS then described the components of the proposal,
the design principles, and some of the costs estimated for the process.

Components are essentially four:  a conversion subsystem, a
networkaccessible storage subsystem for 10,000 books and POB expects
200 to 600 dpi storage, browsing stations distributed on the campus
network, and network access to the image printers.

Among the design principles, POB wanted conversion at the highest
possible resolution.  Assuming TIFF files, TIFF files with Group 4
compression, TCPIP, and ethernet network on campus, POB wanted a
clientserver approach with image documents distributed to the
workstations and made accessible through native workstation interfaces
such as Windows.  POB also insisted on a phased approach to
implementation:  1 a standalone, singleuser, lowcost entry into the
business with a workstation focused on conversion and allowing POB to
explore user access 2 movement into a highervolume conversion with
networkaccessible storage and multiple access stations and 3 a
highvolume conversion, fullcapacity storage, and multiple browsing
stations distributed throughout the campus.

The costs proposed for startup assumed the existence of the Yale network
and its two DocuTech image printers.  Other startup costs are estimated
at 1 million over the three phases.  At the end of the project, the annual
operating costs estimated primarily for the software and hardware proposed
come to about 60,000, but these exclude costs for labor needed in the
conversion process, network and printer usage, and facilities management.

Finally, the selection process produced for Yale a more sophisticated
view of the imaging markets:  the management of complex documents in
image form is not a preservation problem, not a library problem, but a
general problem in a broad, general industry.  Preservation materials are
useful for developing that market because of the qualities of the
material.  For example, much of it is out of copyright.  The resolution
of key issues such as the quality of scanning and image browsing also
will affect development of that market.

The technology is readily available but changing rapidly.  In this
context of rapid change, several factors affect quality and cost, to
which POB intends to pay particular attention, for example, the various
levels of resolution that can be achieved.  POB believes it can bring
resolution up to 600 dpi, but an interpolation process from 400 to 600 is
more likely.  The variation quality in microfilm will prove to be a
highly important factor.  POB may reexamine the standards used to film in
the first place by looking at this process as a followon to microfilming.

Other important factors include:  the techniques available to the
operator for handling material, the ways of integrating quality control
into the digitizing work flow, and a work flow that includes indexing and
storage.  POBs requirement was to be able to deal with quality control
at the point of scanning.  Thus, thanks to Xerox, POB anticipates having
a mechanism which will allow it not only to scan in batch form, but to
review the material as it goes through the scanner and control quality
from the outset.

The standards for measuring quality and costs depend greatly on the uses
of the material, including subsequent OCR, storage, printing, and
browsing.  But especially at issue for POB is the facility for browsing.
This facility, WATERS said, is perhaps the weakest aspect of imaging
technology and the most in need of development.

A variety of factors affect the usability of complex documents in image
form, among them:  1 the ability of the system to handle the full range
of document types, not just monographs but serials, multipart
monographs, and manuscripts 2 the location of the database of record
for bibliographic information about the image document, which POB wants
to enter once and in the most useful place, the online catalog 3 a
document identifier for referencing the bibliographic information in one
place and the images in another 4 the technique for making the basic
internal structure of the document accessible to the reader and finally,
5 the physical presentation on the CRT of those documents.  POB is ready
to complete this phase now.  One last decision involves deciding which
material to scan.

                                 


DISCUSSION  TIFF files constitute de facto standard  NARAs experience
with image conversion software and text conversion  RFC 1314 
Considerable flux concerning available hardware and software solutions 
NAL throughput rate during scanning  Window management questions 


In the questionandanswer period that followed WATERSs presentation,
the following points emerged:

      ZIDARs statement about using TIFF files as a standard meant de
     facto standard.  This is what most people use and typically exchange
     with other groups, across platforms, or even occasionally across
     display software.

      HOLMES commented on the unsuccessful experience of NARA in
     attempting to run imageconversion software or to exchange between
     applications:  What are supposedly TIFF files go into other software
     that is supposed to be able to accept TIFF but cannot recognize the
     format and cannot deal with it, and thus renders the exchange
     useless.  Re text conversion, he noted the different recognition
     rates obtained by substituting the make and model of scanners in
     NARAs recent test of an "intelligent" characterrecognition product
     for a new company.  In the selection of hardware and software,
     HOLMES argued, software no longer constitutes the overriding factor
     it did until about a year ago rather it is perhaps important to
     look at both now.

      Danny Cohen and Alan Katz of the University of Southern California
     Information Sciences Institute began circulating as an Internet RFC
     RFC 1314 about a month ago a standard for a TIFF interchange
     format for Internet distribution of monochrome bitmapped images,
     which LYNCH said he believed would be used as a de facto standard.

      FLEISCHHAUERs impression from hearing these reports and thinking
     about AMs experience was that there is considerable flux concerning
     available hardware and software solutions.  HOOTON agreed and
     commented at the same time on ZIDARs statement that the equipment
     employed affects the results produced.  One cannot draw a complete
     conclusion by saying it is difficult or impossible to perform OCR
     from scanning microfilm, for example, with that device,  that set of
     parameters, and system requirements, because numerous other people
     are accomplishing just that, using other components, perhaps.
     HOOTON opined that both the hardware and the software were highly
     important.  Most of the problems discussed today have been solved in
     numerous different ways by other people.  Though it is good to be
     cognizant of various experiences, this is not to say that it will
     always be thus.

      At NAL, the throughput rate of the scanning process for paper,
     page by page, performing OCR, ranges from 300 to 600 pages per day
     not performing OCR is considerably faster, although how much faster
     is not known.  This is for scanning from bound books, which is much
     slower.

      WATERS commented on window management questions:  DEC proposed an
     XWindows solution which was problematical for two reasons.  One was
     POBs requirement to be able to manipulate images on the workstation
     and bring them down to the workstation itself and the other was
     network usage.

                                 


THOMA  Illustration of deficiencies in scanning and storage process 
Image quality in this process  Different costs entailed by better image
quality  Techniques for overcoming various deficiencies:  fixed
thresholding, dynamic thresholding, dithering, image merge  Page edge
effects 


George THOMA, chief, Communications Engineering Branch, National Library
of Medicine NLM, illustrated several of the deficiencies discussed by
the previous speakers.  He introduced the topic of special problems by
noting the advantages of electronic imaging.  For example, it is regenerable
because it is a coded file, and realtime quality control is possible with
electronic capture, whereas in photographic capture it is not.

One of the difficulties discussed in the scanning and storage process was
image quality which, without belaboring the obvious, means different
things for maps, medical Xrays, or broadcast television.  In the case of
documents, THOMA said, image quality boils down to legibility of the
textual parts, and fidelity in the case of gray or color photo printtype
material.  Legibility boils down to scan density, the standard in most
cases being 300 dpi.  Increasing the resolution with scanners that
perform 600 or 1200 dpi, however, comes at a cost.

Better image quality entails at least four different kinds of costs:  1
equipment costs, because the CCD i.e., chargecouple device with
greater number of elements costs more  2 time costs that translate to
the actual capture costs, because manual labor is involved the time is
also dependent on the fact that more data has to be moved around in the
machine in the scanning or network devices that perform the scanning as
well as the storage  3 media costs, because at high resolutions larger
files have to be stored and 4 transmission costs, because there is just
more data to be transmitted.

But while resolution takes care of the issue of legibility in image
quality, other deficiencies have to do with contrast and elements on the
page scanned or the image that needed to be removed or clarified.  Thus,
THOMA proceeded to illustrate various deficiencies, how they are
manifested, and several techniques to overcome them.

Fixed thresholding was the first technique described, suitable for
blackandwhite text, when the contrast does not vary over the page.  One
can have many different threshold levels in scanning devices.  Thus,
THOMA offered an example of extremely poor contrast, which resulted from
the fact that the stock was a heavy red.  This is the sort of image that
when microfilmed fails to provide any legibility whatsoever.  Fixed
thresholding is the way to change the blacktored contrast to the
desired blacktowhite contrast.

Other examples included material that had been browned or yellowed by
age.  This was also a case of contrast deficiency, and correction was
done by fixed thresholding.  A final example boils down to the same
thing, slight variability, but it is not significant.  Fixed thresholding
solves this problem as well.  The microfilm equivalent is certainly legible,
but it comes with dark areas.  Though THOMA did not have a slide of the
microfilm in this case, he did show the reproduced electronic image.

When one has variable contrast over a page or the lighting over the page
area varies, especially in the case where a bound volume has light
shining on it, the image must be processed by a dynamic thresholding
scheme.  One scheme, dynamic averaging, allows the threshold level not to
be fixed but to be recomputed for every pixel from the neighboring
characteristics.  The neighbors of a pixel determine where the threshold
should be set for that pixel.

THOMA showed an example of a page that had been made deficient by a
variety of techniques, including a burn mark, coffee stains, and a yellow
marker.  Application of a fixedthresholding scheme, THOMA argued, might
take care of several deficiencies on the page but not all of them.
Performing the calculation for a dynamic threshold setting, however,
removes most of the deficiencies so that at least the text is legible.

Another problem is representing a gray level with blackandwhite pixels
by a process known as dithering or electronic screening.  But dithering
does not provide good image quality for pure blackandwhite textual
material.  THOMA illustrated this point with examples. Although its
suitability for photoprint is the reason for electronic screening or
dithering, it cannot be used for every compound image.  In the document
that was distributed by CXP, THOMA noticed that the dithered image of the
IEEE test chart evinced some deterioration in the text.  He presented an
extreme example of deterioration in the text in which compounded
documents had to be set right by other techniques.  The technique
illustrated by the present example was an image merge in which the page
is scanned twice and the settings go from fixed threshold to the
dithering matrix the resulting images are merged to give the best
results with each technique.

THOMA illustrated how dithering is also used in nonphotographic or
nonprint materials with an example of a grayish page from a medical text,
which was reproduced to show all of the gray that appeared in the
original.  Dithering provided a reproduction of all the gray in the
original of another example from the same text.

THOMA finally illustrated the problem of bordering, or pageedge,
effects.  Books and bound volumes that are placed on a photocopy machine
or a scanner produce pageedge effects that are undesirable for two
reasons:  1 the aesthetics of the image after all, if the image is to
be preserved, one does not necessarily want to keep all of its
deficiencies 2 compression with the bordering problem THOMA
illustrated, the compression ratio deteriorated tremendously.  One way
to eliminate this more serious problem is to have the operator at the
point of scanning window the part of the image that is desirable and
automatically turn all of the pixels out of that picture to white.

                                 


FLEISCHHAUER  AMs experience with scanning bound materials  Dithering



Carl FLEISCHHAUER, coordinator, American Memory, Library of Congress,
reported AMs experience with scanning bound materials, which he likened
to the problems involved in using photocopying machines.  Very few
devices in the industry offer bookedge scanning, let alone book cradles.
The problem may be unsolvable, FLEISCHHAUER said, because a large enough
market does not exist for a preservationquality scanner.  AM is using a
Kurzweil scanner, which is a bookedge scanner now sold by Xerox.

Devoting the remainder of his brief presentation to dithering,
FLEISCHHAUER related AMs experience with a contractor who was using
unsophisticated equipment and software to reduce moire patterns from
printed halftones.  AM took the same image and used the dithering
algorithm that forms part of the same Kurzweil Xerox scanner it
disguised moire patterns much more effectively.

FLEISCHHAUER also observed that dithering produces a binary file which is
useful for numerous purposes, for example, printing it on a laser printer
without having to "rehalftone" it.  But it tends to defeat efficient
compression, because the very thing that dithers to reduce moire patterns
also tends to work against compression schemes.  AM thought the
difference in image quality was worth it.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Relative use as a criterion for POBs selection of books to
be converted into digital form 


During the discussion period, WATERS noted that one of the criteria for
selecting books among the 10,000 to be converted into digital image form
would be how much relative use they would receivea subject still
requiring evaluation.  The challenge will be to understand whether
coherent bodies of material will increase usage or whether POB should
seek material that is being used, scan that, and make it more accessible.
POB might decide to digitize materials that are already heavily used, in
order to make them more accessible and decrease wear on them.  Another
approach would be to provide a large body of intellectually coherent
material that may be used more in digital form than it is currently used
in microfilm.  POB would seek material that was out of copyright.

                                 


BARONAS  Origin and scope of AIIM  Types of documents produced in
AIIMs standards program  Domain of AIIMs standardization work  AIIMs
structure  TC 171 and MS23  Electronic image management standards 
Categories of EIM standardization where AIIM standards are being
developed 


Jean BARONAS, senior manager, Department of Standards and Technology,
Association for Information and Image Management AIIM, described the
notforprofit association and the national and international programs
for standardization in which AIIM is active.

Accredited for twentyfive years as the nations standards development
organization for document image management, AIIM began life in a library
community developing microfilm standards.  Today the association
maintains both its library and businessimage management standardization
activitiesand has moved into electronic imagemanagement
standardization EIM.

BARONAS defined the programs scope.  AIIM deals with:  1 the
terminology of standards and of the technology it uses 2 methods of
measurement for the systems, as well as quality 3 methodologies for
users to evaluate and measure quality 4 the features of apparatus used
to manage and edit images and 5 the procedures used to manage images.

BARONAS noted that three types of documents are produced in the AIIM
standards program:  the first two, accredited by the American National
Standards Institute ANSI, are standards and standard recommended
practices.  Recommended practices differ from standards in that they
contain more tutorial information.  A technical report is not an ANSI
standard.  Because AIIMs policies and procedures for developing
standards are approved by ANSI, its standards are labeled ANSIAIIM,
followed by the number and title of the standard.

BARONAS then illustrated the domain of AIIMs standardization work.  For
example, AIIM is the administrator of the U.S. Technical Advisory Group
TAG to the International Standards Organizations ISO technical
committee, TC l7l Micrographics and Optical Memories for Document and
Image Recording, Storage, and Use.  AIIM officially works through ANSI in
the international standardization process.

BARONAS described AIIMs structure, including its board of directors, its
standards board of twelve individuals active in the imagemanagement
industry, its strategic planning and legal admissibility task forces, and
its National Standards Council, which is comprised of the members of a
number of organizations who vote on every AIIM standard before it is
published.  BARONAS pointed out that AIIMs liaisons deal with numerous
other standards developers, including the optical disk community, office
and publishing systems, imagecodesandcharacter set committees, and the
National Information Standards Organization NISO.

BARONAS illustrated the procedures of TC l7l, which covers all aspects of
image management.  When AIIMs national program has conceptualized a new
project, it is usually submitted to the international level, so that the
member countries of TC l7l can simultaneously work on the development of
the standard or the technical report.  BARONAS also illustrated a classic
microfilm standard, MS23, which deals with numerous imaging concepts that
apply to electronic imaging.  Originally developed in the l970s, revised
in the l980s, and revised again in l991, this standard is scheduled for
another revision.  MS23 is an active standard whereby users may propose
new density ranges and new methods of evaluating film images in the
standards revision.

BARONAS detailed several electronic imagemanagement standards, for
instance, ANSIAIIM MS44, a qualitycontrol guideline for scanning 8.5"
by 11" blackandwhite office documents.  This standard is used with the
IEEE fax imagea continuous tone photographic image with gray scales,
text, and several continuous tone picturesand AIIM test target number
2, a representative document used in office document management.

BARONAS next outlined the four categories of EIM standardization in which
AIIM standards are being developed:  transfer and retrieval, evaluation,
optical disc and document scanning applications, and design and
conversion of documents.  She detailed several of the main projects of
each:  1 in the category of image transfer and retrieval, a bilevel
image transfer format, ANSIAIIM MS53, which is a proposed standard that
describes a file header for image transfer between unlike systems when
the images are compressed using G3 and G4 compression 2 the category of
image evaluation, which includes the AIIMproposed TR26 tutorial on image
resolution this technical report will treat the differences and
similarities between classical or photographic and electronic imaging
3 design and conversion, which includes a proposed technical report
called "Forms Design Optimization for EIM" this report considers how
generalpurpose business forms can be best designed so that scanning is
optimized reprographic characteristics such as type, rules, background,
tint, and color will likewise be treated in the technical report 4
disk and document scanning applications includes a project a on planning
platters and disk management, b on generating an application profile for
EIM when images are stored and distributed on CDROM, and c on
evaluating SCSI2, and how a common command set can be generated for SCSI2
so that document scanners are more easily integrated.  ANSIAIIM MS53
will also apply to compressed images.

                                 


BATTIN  The implications of standards for preservation  A major
obstacle to successful cooperation  A hindrance to access in the digital
environment  Standards a doubleedged sword for those concerned with the
preservation of the human record  Nearterm prognosis for reliable
archival standards  Preservation concerns for electronic media  Need
for reconceptualizing our preservation principles  Standards in the real
world and the politics of reproduction  Need to redefine the concept of
archival and to begin to think in terms of life cycles  Cooperation and
the La Guardia Eight  Concerns generated by discussions on the problems
of preserving text and image  General principles to be adopted in a
world without standards 


Patricia BATTIN, president, the Commission on Preservation and Access
CPA, addressed the implications of standards for preservation.  She
listed several areas where the library profession and the analog world of
the printed book had made enormous contributions over the past hundred
yearsfor example, in bibliographic formats, binding standards, and, most
important, in determining what constitutes longevity or archival quality.

Although standards have lightened the preservation burden through the
development of national and international collaborative programs,
nevertheless, a pervasive mistrust of other peoples standards remains a
major obstacle to successful cooperation, BATTIN said.

The zeal to achieve perfection, regardless of the cost, has hindered
rather than facilitated access in some instances, and in the digital
environment, where no real standards exist, has brought an ironically
just reward.

BATTIN argued that standards are a doubleedged sword for those concerned
with the preservation of the human record, that is, the provision of
access to recorded knowledge in a multitude of media as far into the
future as possible.  Standards are essential to facilitate
interconnectivity and access, but, BATTIN said, as LYNCH pointed out
yesterday, if set too soon they can hinder creativity, expansion of
capability, and the broadening of access.  The characteristics of
standards for digital imagery differ radically from those for analog
imagery.  And the nature of digital technology implies continuing
volatility and change.  To reiterate, precipitous standardsetting can
inhibit creativity, but delayed standardsetting results in chaos.

Since in BATTINS opinion the nearterm prognosis for reliable archival
standards, as defined by librarians in the analog world, is poor, two
alternatives remain:  standing pat with the old technology, or
reconceptualizing.

Preservation concerns for electronic media fall into two general domains.
One is the continuing assurance of access to knowledge originally
generated, stored, disseminated, and used in electronic form.  This
domain contains several subdivisions, including 1 the closed,
proprietary systems discussed the previous day, bundled information such
as electronic journals and government agency records, and electronically
produced or captured raw data and 2 the application of digital
technologies to the reformatting of materials originally published on a
deteriorating analog medium such as acid paper or videotape.

The preservation of electronic media requires a reconceptualizing of our
preservation principles during a volatile, standardless transition which
may last far longer than any of us envision today.  BATTIN urged the
necessity of shifting focus from assessing, measuring, and setting
standards for the permanence of the medium to the concept of managing
continuing access to information stored on a variety of media and
requiring a variety of everchanging hardware and software for accessa
fundamental shift for the library profession.

BATTIN offered a primer on how to move forward with reasonable confidence
in a world without standards.  Her comments fell roughly into two sections:
1 standards in the real world and 2 the politics of reproduction.

In regard to realworld standards, BATTIN argued the need to redefine the
concept of archive and to begin to think in terms of life cycles.  In
the past, the naive assumption that paper would last forever produced a
cavalier attitude toward life cycles.  The transient nature of the
electronic media has compelled people to recognize and accept upfront the
concept of life cycles in place of permanency.

Digital standards have to be developed and set in a cooperative context
to ensure efficient exchange of information.  Moreover, during this
transition period, greater flexibility concerning how concepts such as
backup copies and archival copies in the CXP are defined is necessary,
or the opportunity to move forward will be lost.

In terms of cooperation, particularly in the university setting, BATTIN
also argued the need to avoid going off in a hundred different
directions.  The CPA has catalyzed a small group of universities called
the La Guardia Eightbecause La Guardia Airport is where meetings take
placeHarvard, Yale, Cornell, Princeton, Penn State, Tennessee,
Stanford, and USC, to develop a digital preservation consortium to look
at all these issues and develop de facto standards as we move along,
instead of waiting for something that is officially blessed.  Continuing
to apply analog values and definitions of standards to the digital
environment, BATTIN said, will effectively lead to forfeiture of the
benefits of digital technology to research and scholarship.

Under the second rubric, the politics of reproduction, BATTIN reiterated
an oftmade argument concerning the electronic library, namely, that it
is more difficult to transform than to create, and nowhere is that belief
expressed more dramatically than in the conversion of brittle books to
new media.  Preserving information published in electronic media involves
making sure the information remains accessible and that digital
information is not lost through reproduction.  In the analog world of
photocopies and microfilm, the issue of fidelity to the original becomes
paramount, as do issues of "Whose fidelity?" and "Whose original?"

BATTIN elaborated these arguments with a few examples from a recent study
conducted by the CPA on the problems of preserving text and image.
Discussions with scholars, librarians, and curators in a variety of
disciplines dependent on text and image generated a variety of concerns,
for example:  1 Copy what is, not what the technology is capable of.
This is very important for the history of ideas.  Scholars wish to know
what the author saw and worked from.  And make available at the
workstation the opportunity to erase all the defects and enhance the
presentation.  2 The fidelity of reproductionwhat is good enough, what
can we afford, and the difference it makesissues of subjective versus
objective resolution.  3 The differences between primary and secondary
users.  Restricting the definition of primary user to the one in whose
discipline the material has been published runs one headlong into the
reality that these printed books have had a host of other users from a
host of other disciplines, who not only were looking for very different
things, but who also shared values very different from those of the
primary user.  4 The relationship of the standard of reproduction to new
capabilities of scholarshipthe browsing standard versus an archival
standard.  How good must the archival standard be?  Can a distinction be
drawn between potential users in setting standards for reproduction?
Archival storage, use copies, browsing copiesought an attempt to set
standards even be made?  5 Finally, costs.  How much are we prepared to
pay to capture absolute fidelity?  What are the tradeoffs between vastly
enhanced access, degrees of fidelity, and costs?

These standards, BATTIN concluded, serve to complicate further the
reproduction process, and add to the long list of technical standards
that are necessary to ensure widespread access.  Ways to articulate and
analyze the costs that are attached to the different levels of standards
must be found.

Given the chaos concerning standards, which promises to linger for the
foreseeable future, BATTIN urged adoption of the following general
principles:

      Strive to understand the changing information requirements of
     scholarly disciplines as more and more technology is integrated into
     the process of research and scholarly communication in order to meet
     future scholarly needs, not to build for the past.  Capture
     deteriorating information at the highest affordable resolution, even
     though the dissemination and display technologies will lag.

      Develop cooperative mechanisms to foster agreement on protocols
     for document structure and other interchange mechanisms necessary
     for widespread dissemination and use before official standards are
     set.

      Accept that, in a transition period, de facto standards will have
     to be developed.

      Capture information in a way that keeps all options open and
     provides for total convertibility:  OCR, scanning of microfilm,
     producing microfilm from scanned documents, etc.

      Work closely with the generators of information and the builders
     of networks and databases to ensure that continuing accessibility is
     a primary concern from the beginning.

      Piggyback on standards under development for the broad market, and
     avoid libraryspecific standards work with the vendors, in order to
     take advantage of that which is being standardized for the rest of
     the world.

      Concentrate efforts on managing permanence in the digital world,
     rather than perfecting the longevity of a particular medium.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Additional comments on TIFF 


During the brief discussion period that followed BATTINs presentation,
BARONAS explained that TIFF was not developed in collaboration with or
under the auspices of AIIM.  TIFF is a company product, not a standard,
is owned by two corporations, and is always changing.  BARONAS also
observed that ANSIAIIM MS53, a bilevel image file transfer format that
allows unlike systems to exchange images, is compatible with TIFF as well
as with DECs architecture and IBMs MODCAIOCA.

                                 


HOOTON  Several questions to be considered in discussing text conversion



HOOTON introduced the final topic, text conversion, by noting that it is
becoming an increasingly important part of the imaging business.  Many
people now realize that it enhances their system to be able to have more
and more character data as part of their imaging system.  Re the issue of
OCR versus rekeying, HOOTON posed several questions:  How does one get
text into computerreadable form?  Does one use automated processes?
Does one attempt to eliminate the use of operators where possible?
Standards for accuracy, he said, are extremely important:  it makes a
major difference in cost and time whether one sets as a standard 98.5
percent acceptance or 99.5 percent.  He mentioned outsourcing as a
possibility for converting text.  Finally, what one does with the image
to prepare it for the recognition process is also important, he said,
because such preparation changes how recognition is viewed, as well as
facilitates recognition itself.

                                 


LESK  Roles of participants in CORE  Data flow  The scanning process 
The image interface  Results of experiments involving the use of
electronic resources and traditional paper copies  Testing the issue of
serendipity  Conclusions 


Michael LESK, executive director, Computer Science Research, Bell
Communications Research, Inc. Bellcore, discussed the Chemical Online
Retrieval Experiment CORE, a cooperative project involving Cornell
University, OCLC, Bellcore, and the American Chemical Society ACS.

LESK spoke on 1 how the scanning was performed, including the unusual
feature of page segmentation, and 2 the use made of the text and the
image in experiments.

Working with the chemistry journals because ACS has been saving its
typesetting tapes since the mid1970s and thus has a significant backrun
of the most important chemistry journals in the United States, CORE is
attempting to create an automated chemical library.  Approximately a
quarter of the pages by square inch are made up of images of
quasipictorial material dealing with the graphic components of the
pages is extremely important.  LESK described the roles of participants
in CORE:  1 ACS provides copyright permission, journals on paper,
journals on microfilm, and some of the definitions of the files 2 at
Bellcore, LESK chiefly performs the data preparation, while Dennis Egan
performs experiments on the users of chemical abstracts, and supplies the
indexing and numerous magnetic tapes  3 Cornell provides the site of the
experiment 4 OCLC develops retrieval software and other user interfaces.
Various manufacturers and publishers have furnished other help.

Concerning data flow, Bellcore receives microfilm and paper from ACS the
microfilm is scanned by outside vendors, while the paper is scanned
inhouse on an Improvision scanner, twenty pages per minute at 300 dpi,
which provides sufficient quality for all practical uses.  LESK would
prefer to have more gray level, because one of the ACS journals prints on
some colored pages, which creates a problem.

Bellcore performs all this scanning, creates a pageimage file, and also
selects from the pages the graphics, to mix with the text file which is
discussed later in the Workshop.  The user is always searching the ASCII
file, but she or he may see a display based on the ASCII or a display
based on the images.

LESK illustrated how the program performs page analysis, and the image
interface.  The user types several words, is presented with a list
usually of the titles of articles contained in an issuethat derives
from the ASCII, clicks on an icon and receives an image that mirrors an
ACS page.  LESK also illustrated an alternative interface, based on text
on the ASCII, the socalled SuperBook interface from Bellcore.

LESK next presented the results of an experiment conducted by Dennis Egan
and involving thirtysix students at Cornell, one third of them
undergraduate chemistry majors, one third senior undergraduate chemistry
majors, and one third graduate chemistry students.  A third of them
received the paper journals, the traditional paper copies and chemical
abstracts on paper.  A third received image displays of the pictures of
the pages, and a third received the text display with popup graphics.

The students were given several questions made up by some chemistry
professors.  The questions fell into five classes, ranging from very easy
to very difficult, and included questions designed to simulate browsing
as well as a traditional information retrievaltype task.

LESK furnished the following results.  In the straightforward question
searchthe question being, what is the phosphorus oxygen bond distance
and hydroxy phosphate?the students were told that they could take
fifteen minutes and, then, if they wished, give up.  The students with
paper took more than fifteen minutes on average, and yet most of them
gave up.  The students with either electronic format, text or image,
received good scores in reasonable time, hardly ever had to give up, and
usually found the right answer.

In the browsing study, the students were given a list of eight topics,
told to imagine that an issue of the Journal of the American Chemical
Society had just appeared on their desks, and were also told to flip
through it and to find topics mentioned in the issue.  The average scores
were about the same.  The students were told to answer yes or no about
whether or not particular topics appeared.  The errors, however, were
quite different.  The students with paper rarely said that something
appeared when it had not.  But they often failed to find something
actually mentioned in the issue.  The computer people found numerous
things, but they also frequently said that a topic was mentioned when it
was not.  The reason, of course, was that they were performing word
searches.  They were finding that words were mentioned and they were
concluding that they had accomplished their task.

This question also contained a trick to test the issue of serendipity.
The students were given another list of eight topics and instructed,
without taking a second look at the journal, to recall how many of this
new list of eight topics were in this particular issue.  This was an
attempt to see if they performed better at remembering what they were not
looking for.  They all performed about the same, paper or electronics,
about 62 percent accurate.  In short, LESK said, people were not very
good when it came to serendipity, but they were no worse at it with
computers than they were with paper.

LESK gave a parenthetical illustration of the learning curve of students
who used SuperBook.

The students using the electronic systems started off worse than the ones
using print, but by the third of the three sessions in the series had
caught up to print.  As one might expect, electronics provide a much
better means of finding what one wants to read reading speeds, once the
object of the search has been found, are about the same.

Almost none of the students could perform the hard taskthe analogous
transformation.  It would require the expertise of organic chemists to
complete.  But an interesting result was that the students using the text
search performed terribly, while those using the image system did best.
That the text search system is driven by text offers the explanation.
Everything is focused on the text to see the pictures, one must press
on an icon.  Many students found the right article containing the answer
to the question, but they did not click on the icon to bring up the right
figure and see it.  They did not know that they had found the right place,
and thus got it wrong.

The short answer demonstrated by this experiment was that in the event
one does not know what to read, one needs the electronic systems the
electronic systems hold no advantage at the moment if one knows what to
read, but neither do they impose a penalty.

LESK concluded by commenting that, on one hand, the image system was easy
to use.  On the other hand, the text display system, which represented
twenty manyears of work in programming and polishing, was not winning,
because the text was not being read, just searched.  The much easier
system is highly competitive as well as remarkably effective for the
actual chemists.

                                 


ERWAY  Most challenging aspect of working on AM  Assumptions guiding
AMs approach  Testing different types of service bureaus  AMs
requirement for 99.95 percent accuracy  Requirements for textcoding 
Additional factors influencing AMs approach to coding  Results of AMs
experience with rekeying  Other problems in dealing with service bureaus
 Quality control the most timeconsuming aspect of contracting out
conversion  Longterm outlook uncertain 


To Ricky ERWAY, associate coordinator, American Memory, Library of
Congress, the constant variety of conversion projects taking place
simultaneously represented perhaps the most challenging aspect of working
on AM.  Thus, the challenge was not to find a solution for text
conversion but a tool kit of solutions to apply to LCs varied
collections that need to be converted.  ERWAY limited her remarks to the
process of converting text to machinereadable form, and the variety of
LCs text collections, for example, bound volumes, microfilm, and
handwritten manuscripts.

Two assumptions have guided AMs approach, ERWAY said:  1 A desire not
to perform the conversion inhouse.  Because of the variety of formats and
types of texts, to capitalize the equipment and have the talents and
skills to operate them at LC would be extremely expensive.  Further, the
natural inclination to upgrade to newer and better equipment each year
made it reasonable for AM to focus on what it did best and seek external
conversion services.  Using service bureaus also allowed AM to have
several types of operations take place at the same time.  2 AM was not a
technology project, but an effort to improve access to library
collections.  Hence, whether text was converted using OCR or rekeying
mattered little to AM.  What mattered were cost and accuracy of results.

AM considered different types of service bureaus and selected three to
perform several small tests in order to acquire a sense of the field.
The sample collections with which they worked included handwritten
correspondence, typewritten manuscripts from the 1940s, and
eighteenthcentury printed broadsides on microfilm.  On none of these
samples was OCR performed they were all rekeyed.  AM had several special
requirements for the three service bureaus it had engaged.  For instance,
any errors in the original text were to be retained.  Working from bound
volumes or anything that could not be sheetfed also constituted a factor
eliminating companies that would have performed OCR.

AM requires 99.95 percent accuracy, which, though it sounds high, often
means one or two errors per page.  The initial batch of test samples
contained several handwritten materials for which AM did not require
textcoding.  The results, ERWAY reported, were in all cases fairly
comparable:  for the most part, all three service bureaus achieved 99.95
percent accuracy.  AM was satisfied with the work but surprised at the cost.

As AM began converting whole collections, it retained the requirement for
99.95 percent accuracy and added requirements for textcoding.  AM needed
to begin performing work more than three years ago before LC requirements
for SGML applications had been established.  Since AMs goal was simply
to retain any of the intellectual content represented by the formatting
of the document which would be lost if one performed a straight ASCII
conversion, AM used "SGMLlike" codes.  These codes resembled SGML tags
but were used without the benefit of documenttype definitions.  AM found
that many service bureaus were not yet SGMLproficient.

Additional factors influencing the approach AM took with respect to
coding included:  1 the inability of any known microcomputerbased
userretrieval software to take advantage of SGML coding and 2 the
multiple inconsistencies in format of the older documents, which
confirmed AM in its desire not to attempt to force the different formats
to conform to a single documenttype definition DTD and thus create the
need for a separate DTD for each document.

The five text collections that AM has converted or is in the process of
converting include a collection of eighteenthcentury broadsides, a
collection of pamphlets, two typescript document collections, and a
collection of 150 books.

ERWAY next reviewed the results of AMs experience with rekeying, noting
again that because the bulk of AMs materials are historical, the quality
of the text often does not lend itself to OCR.  While nonEnglish
speakers are less likely to guess or elaborate or correct typos in the
original text, they are also less able to infer what we would they also
are nearly incapable of converting handwritten text.  Another
disadvantage of working with overseas keyers is that they are much less
likely to telephone with questions, especially on the coding, with the
result that they develop their own rules as they encounter new
situations.

Government contracting procedures and time frames posed a major challenge
to performing the conversion.  Many service bureaus are not accustomed to
retaining the image, even if they perform OCR.  Thus, questions of image
format and storage media were somewhat novel to many of them.  ERWAY also
remarked other problems in dealing with service bureaus, for example,
their inability to perform text conversion from the kind of microfilm
that LC uses for preservation purposes.

But quality control, in ERWAYs experience, was the most timeconsuming
aspect of contracting out conversion.  AM has been attempting to perform
a 10percent quality review, looking at either every tenth document or
every tenth page to make certain that the service bureaus are maintaining
99.95 percent accuracy.  But even if they are complying with the
requirement for accuracy, finding errors produces a desire to correct
them and, in turn, to clean up the whole collection, which defeats the
purpose to some extent.  Even a double entry requires a
characterbycharacter comparison to the original to meet the accuracy
requirement.  LC is not accustomed to publish imperfect texts, which
makes attempting to deal with the industry standard an emotionally
fraught issue for AM.  As was mentioned in the previous days discussion,
going from 99.95 to 99.99 percent accuracy usually doubles costs and
means a third keying or another complete runthrough of the text.

Although AM has learned much from its experiences with various collections
and various service bureaus, ERWAY concluded pessimistically that no
breakthrough has been achieved.   Incremental improvements have occurred
in some of the OCR technology, some of the processes, and some of the
standards acceptances, which, though they may lead to somewhat lower costs,
do not offer much encouragement to many people who are anxiously awaiting
the day that the entire contents of LC are available online.

                                 


ZIDAR  Several answers to why one attempts to perform fulltext
conversion  Per page cost of performing OCR  Typical problems
encountered during editing  Editing poor copy OCR vs. rekeying 


Judith ZIDAR, coordinator, National Agricultural Text Digitizing Program
NATDP, National Agricultural Library NAL, offered several answers to
the question of why one attempts to perform fulltext conversion:  1
Text in an image can be read by a human but not by a computer, so of
course it is not searchable and there is not much one can do with it.  2
Some material simply requires wordlevel access.  For instance, the legal
profession insists on fulltext access to its material with taxonomic or
geographic material, which entails numerous names, one virtually requires
wordlevel access.  3 Full text permits rapid browsing and searching,
something that cannot be achieved in an image with todays technology.
4 Text stored as ASCII and delivered in ASCII is standardized and highly
portable.  5 People just want fulltext searching, even those who do not
know how to do it.  NAL, for the most part, is performing OCR at an
actual cost per averagesize page of approximately 7.  NAL scans the
page to create the electronic image and passes it through the OCR device.

ZIDAR next rehearsed several typical problems encountered during editing.
Praising the celerity of her student workers, ZIDAR observed that editing
requires approximately five to ten minutes per page, assuming that there
are no large tables to audit.  Confusion among the three characters I, 1,
and l, constitutes perhaps the most common problem encountered.  Zeroes
and  Os also are  frequently confused.  Double Ms create a particular
problem, even on clean pages.  They are so wide in most fonts that they
touch, and the system simply cannot tell where one letter ends and the
other begins.  Complex page formats occasionally fail to columnate
properly, which entails rescanning as though one were working with a
single column, entering the ASCII, and decolumnating for better
searching.  With proportionally spaced text, OCR can have difficulty
discerning what is a space and what are merely spaces between letters, as
opposed to spaces between words, and therefore will merge text or break
up words where it should not.

ZIDAR said that it can often take longer to edit a poorcopy OCR than to
key it from scratch.  NAL has also experimented with partial editing of
text, whereby project workers go into and clean up the format, removing
stray characters but not running a spellcheck.  NAL corrects typos in
the title and authors names, which provides a foothold for searching and
browsing.  Even extremely poorquality OCR e.g., 60percent accuracy
can still be searched, because numerous words are correct, while the
important words are probably repeated often enough that they are likely
to be found correct somewhere.  Librarians, however, cannot tolerate this
situation, though end users seem more willing to use this text for
searching, provided that NAL indicates that it is unedited.  ZIDAR
concluded that rekeying of text may be the best route to take, in spite
of numerous problems with quality control and cost.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Modifying an image before performing OCR  NALs costs per
page AMs costs per page and experience with Federal Prison Industries 
Elements comprising NATDPs costs per page  OCR and structured markup 
Distinction between the structure of a document and its representation
when put on the screen or printed 


HOOTON prefaced the lengthy discussion that followed with several
comments about modifying an image before one reaches the point of
performing OCR.  For example, in regard to an application containing a
significant amount of redundant data, such as formtype data, numerous
companies today are working on various kinds of form renewal, prior to
going through a recognition process, by using dropout colors.  Thus,
acquiring access to form design or using electronic means are worth
considering.  HOOTON also noted that conversion usually makes or breaks
ones imaging system.  It is extremely important, extremely costly in
terms of either capital investment or service, and determines the quality
of the remainder of ones system, because it determines the character of
the raw material used by the system.

Concerning the four projects undertaken by NAL, two inside and two
performed by outside contractors, ZIDAR revealed that an inhouse service
bureau executed the first at a cost between 8 and 10 per page for
everything, including building of the database.  The project undertaken
by the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research CGIAR
cost approximately 10 per page for the conversion, plus some expenses
for the software and building of the database.  The Acid Rain Projecta
twodisk set produced by the University of Vermont, consisting of
Canadian publications on acid raincost 6.70 per page for everything,
including keying of the text, which was double keyed, scanning of the
images, and building of the database.  The inhouse project offered
considerable ease of convenience and greater control of the process.  On
the other hand, the service bureaus know their job and perform it
expeditiously, because they have more people.

As a useful comparison, ERWAY revealed AMs costs as follows:  0.75
cents to 0.85 cents per thousand characters, with an average page
containing 2,700 characters.  Requirements for coding and imaging
increase the costs.  Thus, conversion of the text, including the coding,
costs approximately 3 per page.  This figure does not include the
imaging and databasebuilding included in the NAL costs.  AM also
enjoyed a happy experience with Federal Prison Industries, which
precluded the necessity of going through the requestforproposal process
to award a contract, because it is another government agency.  The
prisoners performed AMs rekeying just as well as other service bureaus
and proved handy as well.  AM shipped them the books, which they would
photocopy on a bookedge scanner.  They would perform the markup on
photocopies, return the books as soon as they were done with them,
perform the keying, and return the material to AM on WORM disks.

ZIDAR detailed the elements that constitute the previously noted cost of
approximately 7 per page.  Most significant is the editing, correction
of errors, and spellcheckings, which though they may sound easy to
perform require, in fact, a great deal of time.  Reformatting text also
takes a while, but a significant amount of NALs expenses are for equipment,
which was extremely expensive when purchased because it was one of the few
systems on the market.  The costs of equipment are being amortized over
five years but are still quite high, nearly 2,000 per month.

HOCKEY raised a general question concerning OCR and the amount of editing
required substantial in her experience to generate the kind of
structured markup necessary for manipulating the text on the computer or
loading it into any retrieval system.  She wondered if the speakers could
extend the previous question about the costbenefit of adding or exerting
structured markup.  ERWAY noted that several OCR systems retain italics,
bolding, and other spatial formatting.  While the material may not be in
the format desired, these systems possess the ability to remove the
original materials quickly from the hands of the people performing the
conversion, as well as to retain that information so that users can work
with it.  HOCKEY rejoined that the current thinking on markup is that one
should not say that something is italic or bold so much as why it is that
way.  To be sure, one needs to know that something was italicized, but
how can one get from one to the other?  One can map from the structure to
the typographic representation.

FLEISCHHAUER suggested that, given the 100 million items the Library
holds, it may not be possible for LC to do more than report that a thing
was in italics as opposed to why it was italics, although that may be
desirable in some contexts.  Promising to talk a bit during the afternoon
session about several experiments OCLC performed on automatic recognition
of document elements, and which they hoped to extend, WEIBEL said that in
fact one can recognize the major elements of a document with a fairly
high degree of reliability, at least as good as OCR.  STEVENS drew a
useful distinction between standard, generalized markup i.e., defining
for a documenttype definition the structure of the document, and what
he termed a style sheet, which had to do with italics, bolding, and other
forms of emphasis.  Thus, two different components are at work, one being
the structure of the document itself its logic, and the other being its
representation when it is put on the screen or printed.

                                 

SESSION V.  APPROACHES TO PREPARING ELECTRONIC TEXTS


HOCKEY  Text in ASCII and the representation of electronic text versus
an image  The need to look at ways of using markup to assist retrieval 
The need for an encoding format that will be reusable and multifunctional


Susan HOCKEY, director, Center for Electronic Texts in the Humanities
CETH, Rutgers and Princeton Universities, announced that one talk
WEIBELs was moved into this session from the morning and that David
Packard was unable to attend.  The session would attempt to focus more on
what one can do with a text in ASCII and the representation of electronic
text rather than just an image, what one can do with a computer that
cannot be done with a book or an image.  It would be argued that one can
do much more than just read a text, and from that starting point one can
use markup and methods of preparing the text to take full advantage of
the capability of the computer.  That would lead to a discussion of what
the European Community calls REUSABILITY, what may better be termed
DURABILITY, that is, how to prepare or make a text that will last a long
time and that can be used for as many applications as possible, which
would lead to issues of improving intellectual access.

HOCKEY urged the need to look at ways of using markup to facilitate retrieval,
not just for referencing or to help locate an item that is retrieved, but also to put markup tags in
a text to help retrieve the thing sought either with linguistic tagging or
interpretation.  HOCKEY also argued that little advancement had occurred in
the software tools currently available for retrieving and searching text.
She pressed the desideratum of going beyond Boolean searches and performing
more sophisticated searching, which the insertion of more markup in the text
would facilitate.  Thinking about electronic texts as opposed to images means
considering material that will never appear in print form, or print will not
be its primary form, that is, material which only appears in electronic form.
HOCKEY alluded to the history and the need for markup and tagging and
electronic text, which was developed through the use of computers in the
humanities as MICHELSON had observed, Father Busa had started in 1949
to prepare the firstever text on the computer.

HOCKEY remarked several large projects, particularly in Europe, for the
compilation of dictionaries, language studies, and language analysis, in
which people have built up archives of text and have begun to recognize
the need for an encoding format that will be reusable and multifunctional,
that can be used not just to print the text, which may be assumed to be a
byproduct of what one wants to do, but to structure it inside the computer
so that it can be searched, built into a Hypertext system, etc.

                                 


WEIBEL  OCLCs approach to preparing electronic text:  retroconversion,
keying of texts, more automated ways of developing data  Project ADAPT
and the CORE Project  Intelligent character recognition does not exist 
Advantages of SGML  Data should be free of procedural markup
descriptive markup strongly advocated  OCLCs interface illustrated 
Storage requirements and costs for putting a lot of information on line 


Stuart WEIBEL, senior research scientist, Online Computer Library Center,
Inc. OCLC, described OCLCs approach to preparing electronic text.  He
argued that the electronic world into which we are moving must
accommodate not only the future but the past as well, and to some degree
even the present.  Thus, starting out at one end with retroconversion and
keying of texts, one would like to move toward much more automated ways
of developing data.

For example, Project ADAPT had to do with automatically converting
document images into a structured document database with OCR text as
indexing and also a little bit of automatic formatting and tagging of
that text.  The CORE project hosted by Cornell University, Bellcore,
OCLC, the American Chemical Society, and Chemical Abstracts, constitutes
WEIBELs principal concern at the moment.  This project is an example of
converting text for which one already has a machinereadable version into
a format more suitable for electronic delivery and database searching.
Since Michael LESK had previously described CORE, WEIBEL would say
little concerning it.  Borrowing a chemical phrase, de novo synthesis,
WEIBEL cited the Online Journal of Current Clinical Trials as an example
of de novo electronic publishing, that is, a form in which the primary
form of the information is electronic.

Project ADAPT, then, which OCLC completed a couple of years ago and in
fact is about to resume, is a model in which one takes page images either
in paper or microfilm and converts them automatically to a searchable
electronic database, either online or local.  The operating assumption
is that accepting some blemishes in the data, especially for
retroconversion of materials, will make it possible to accomplish more.
Not enough money is available to support perfect conversion.

WEIBEL related several steps taken to perform image preprocessing
processing on the image before performing optical character
recognition, as well as image postprocessing.  He denied the existence
of intelligent character recognition and asserted that what is wanted is
page recognition, which is a long way off.  OCLC has experimented with
merging of multiple optical character recognition systems that will
reduce errors from an unacceptable rate of 5 characters out of every
l,000 to an unacceptable rate of 2 characters out of every l,000, but it
is not good enough.  It will never be perfect.

Concerning the CORE Project, WEIBEL observed that Bellcore is taking the
topography files, extracting the page images, and converting those
topography files to SGML markup.  LESK hands that data off to OCLC, which
builds that data into a Newton database, the same system that underlies
the online system in virtually all of the reference products at OCLC.
The longterm goal is to make the systems interoperable so that not just
Bellcores system and OCLCs system can access this data, but other
systems can as well, and the key to that is the Z39.50 common command
language and the fulltext extension.  Z39.50 is fine for MARC records,
but is not enough to do it for full text that is, make full texts
interoperable.

WEIBEL next outlined the critical role of SGML for a variety of purposes,
for example, as noted by HOCKEY, in the world of extremely large
databases, using highly structured data to perform field searches.
WEIBEL argued that by building the structure of the data in i.e., the
structure of the data originally on a printed page, it becomes easy to
look at a journal article even if one cannot read the characters and know
where the title or author is, or what the sections of that document would be.
OCLC wants to make that structure explicit in the database, because it will
be important for retrieval purposes.

The second big advantage of SGML is that it gives one the ability to
build structure into the database that can be used for display purposes
without contaminating the data with instructions about how to format
things.  The distinction lies between procedural markup, which tells one
where to put dots on the page, and descriptive markup, which describes
the elements of a document.

WEIBEL believes that there should be no procedural markup in the data at
all, that the data should be completely unsullied by information about
italics or boldness.  That should be left up to the display device,
whether that display device is a page printer or a screen display device.
By keeping ones database free of that kind of contamination, one can
make decisions down the road, for example, reorganize the data in ways
that are not cramped by builtin notions of what should be italic and
what should be bold.  WEIBEL strongly advocated descriptive markup.  As
an example, he illustrated the index structure in the CORE data.  With
subsequent illustrated examples of markup, WEIBEL acknowledged the common
complaint that SGML is hard to read in its native form, although markup
decreases considerably once one gets into the body.  Without the markup,
however, one would not have the structure in the data.  One can pass
markup through a LaTeX processor and convert it relatively easily to a
printed version of the document.

WEIBEL next illustrated an extremely cluttered screen dump of OCLCs
system, in order to show as much as possible the inherent capability on
the screen.  He noted parenthetically that he had become a supporter of
XWindows as a result of the progress of the CORE Project.  WEIBEL also
illustrated the two major parts of the interface:  l a control box that
allows one to generate lists of items, which resembles a small table of
contents based on key words one wishes to search, and 2 a document
viewer, which is a separate process in and of itself.  He demonstrated
how to follow links through the electronic database simply by selecting
the appropriate button and bringing them up.  He also noted problems that
remain to be accommodated in the interface e.g., as pointed out by LESK,
what happens when users do not click on the icon for the figure.

Given the constraints of time, WEIBEL omitted a large number of ancillary
items in order to say a few words concerning storage requirements and
what will be required to put a lot of things on line.  Since it is
extremely expensive to reconvert all of this data, especially if it is
just in paper form and even if it is in electronic form in typesetting
tapes, he advocated building journals electronically from the start.  In
that case, if one only has text graphics and indexing which is all that
one needs with de novo electronic publishing, because there is no need to
go back and look at bitmaps of pages, one can get 10,000 journals of
full text, or almost 6 million pages per year.  These pages can be put in
approximately 135 gigabytes of storage, which is not all that much,
WEIBEL said.  For twenty years, something less than three terabytes would
be required.  WEIBEL calculated the costs of storing this information as
follows:  If a gigabyte costs approximately 1,000, then a terabyte costs
approximately 1 million to buy in terms of hardware.  One also needs a
building to put it in and a staff like OCLC to handle that information.
So, to support a terabyte, multiply by five, which gives 5 million per
year for a supported terabyte of data.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Tapes saved by ACS are the typography files originally
supporting publication of the journal  Cost of building tagged text into
the database 


During the questionandanswer period that followed WEIBELs
presentation, these clarifications emerged.  The tapes saved by the
American Chemical Society are the typography files that originally
supported the publication of the journal.  Although they are not tagged
in SGML, they are tagged in very fine detail.  Every single sentence is
marked, all the registry numbers, all the publications issues, dates, and
volumes.  No cost figures on tagging material on a permegabyte basis
were available.  Because ACSs typesetting system runs from tagged text,
there is no extra cost per article.  It was unknown what it costs ACS to
keyboard the tagged text rather than just keyboard the text in the
cheapest process.  In other words, since one intends to publish things
and will need to build tagged text into a typography system in any case,
if one does that in such a way that it can drive not only typography but
an electronic system which is what ACS intends to domove to SGML
publishing, the marginal cost is zero.  The marginal cost represents the
cost of building tagged text into the database, which is small.

                                 


SPERBERGMcQUEEN  Distinction between texts and computers  Implications
of recognizing that all representation is encoding  Dealing with
complicated representations of text entails the need for a grammar of
documents  Variety of forms of formal grammars  Text as a bitmapped
image does not represent a serious attempt to represent text in
electronic form  SGML, the TEI, documenttype declarations, and the
reusability and longevity of data  TEI conformance explicitly allows
extension or modification of the TEI tag set  Administrative background
of the TEI  Several design goals for the TEI tag set  An absolutely
fixed requirement of the TEI Guidelines  Challenges the TEI has
attempted to face  Good texts not beyond economic feasibility  The
issue of reproducibility or processability  The issue of mages as
simulacra for the text redux  Ones model of text determines what ones
software can do with a text and has economic consequences 


Prior to speaking about SGML and markup, Michael SPERBERGMcQUEEN, editor,
Text Encoding Initiative TEI, University of IllinoisChicago, first drew
a distinction between texts and computers:  Texts are abstract cultural
and linguistic objects while computers are complicated physical devices,
he said.  Abstract objects cannot be placed inside physical devices with
computers one can only represent text and act upon those representations.

The recognition that all representation is encoding, SPERBERGMcQUEEN
argued, leads to the recognition of two things:  1 The topic description
for this session is slightly misleading, because there can be no discussion
of pros and cons of textcoding unless what one means is pros and cons of
working with text with computers.  2 No text can be represented in a
computer without some sort of encoding images are one way of encoding text,
ASCII is another, SGML yet another.  There is no encoding without some
information loss, that is, there is no perfect reproduction of a text that
allows one to do away with the original.  Thus, the question becomes,
What is the most useful representation of text for a serious work?
This depends on what kind of serious work one is talking about.

The projects demonstrated the previous day all involved highly complex
information and fairly complex manipulation of the textual material.
In order to use that complicated information, one has to calculate it
slowly or manually and store the result.  It needs to be stored, therefore,
as part of ones representation of the text.  Thus, one needs to store the
structure in the text.  To deal with complicated representations of text,
one needs somehow to control the complexity of the representation of a text
that means one needs a way of finding out whether a document and an
electronic representation of a document is legal or not and that
means one needs a grammar of documents.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN discussed the variety of forms of formal grammars,
implicit and explicit, as applied to text, and their capabilities.  He
argued that these grammars correspond to different models of text that
different developers have.  For example, one implicit model of the text
is that there is no internal structure, but just one thing after another,
a few characters and then perhaps a starttitle command, and then a few
more characters and an endtitle command.  SPERBERGMcQUEEN also
distinguished several kinds of text that have a sort of hierarchical
structure that is not very well defined, which, typically, corresponds
to grammars that are not very well defined, as well as hierarchies that
are very well defined e.g., the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae and extremely
complicated things such as SGML, which handle strictly hierarchical data
very nicely.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN conceded that one other model not illustrated on his two
displays was the model of text as a bitmapped image, an image of a page,
and confessed to having been converted to a limited extent by the
Workshop to the view that electronic images constitute a promising,
probably superior alternative to microfilming.  But he was not convinced
that electronic images represent a serious attempt to represent text in
electronic form.  Many of their problems stem from the fact that they are
not direct attempts to represent the text but attempts to represent the
page, thus making them representations of representations.

In this situation of increasingly complicated textual information and the
need to control that complexity in a useful way which begs the question
of the need for good textual grammars, one has the introduction of SGML.
With SGML, one can develop specific documenttype declarations
for specific text types or, as with the TEI, attempts to generate
general documenttype declarations that can handle all sorts of text.
The TEI is an attempt to develop formats for text representation that
will ensure the kind of reusability and longevity of data discussed earlier.
It offers a way to stay alive in the state of permanent technological
revolution.

It has been a continuing challenge in the TEI to create document grammars
that do some work in controlling the complexity of the textual object but
also allowing one to represent the real text that one will find.
Fundamental to the notion of the TEI is that TEI conformance allows one
the ability to extend or modify the TEI tag set so that it fits the text
that one is attempting to represent.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN next outlined the administrative background of the TEI.
The TEI is an international project to develop and disseminate guidelines
for the encoding and interchange of machinereadable text.  It is
sponsored by the Association for Computers in the Humanities, the
Association for Computational Linguistics, and the Association for
Literary and Linguistic Computing.  Representatives of numerous other
professional societies sit on its advisory board.  The TEI has a number
of affiliated projects that have provided assistance by testing drafts of
the guidelines.

Among the design goals for the TEI tag set, the scheme first of all must
meet the needs of research, because the TEI came out of the research
community, which did not feel adequately served by existing tag sets.
The tag set must be extensive as well as compatible with existing and
emerging standards.  In 1990, version 1.0 of the Guidelines was released
SPERBERGMcQUEEN illustrated their contents.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN noted that one problem besetting electronic text has
been the lack of adequate internal or external documentation for many
existing electronic texts.  The TEI guidelines as currently formulated
contain few fixed requirements, but one of them is this:  There must
always be a document header, an infile SGML tag that provides
1 a bibliographic description of the electronic object one is talking
about that is, who included it, when, what for, and under which title
and 2 the copy text from which it was derived, if any.  If there was
no copy text or if the copy text is unknown, then one states as much.
Version 2.0 of the Guidelines was scheduled to be completed in fall 1992
and a revised third version is to be presented to the TEI advisory board
for its endorsement this coming winter.  The TEI itself exists to provide
a markup language, not a markedup text.

Among the challenges the TEI has attempted to face is the need for a
markup language that will work for existing projects, that is, handle the
level of markup that people are using now to tag only chapter, section,
and paragraph divisions and not much else.  At the same time, such a
language also will be able to scale up gracefully to handle the highly
detailed markup which many people foresee as the future destination of
much electronic text, and which is not the future destination but the
present home of numerous electronic texts in specialized areas.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN dismissed the lowestcommondenominator approach as
unable to support the kind of applications that draw people who have
never been in the public library regularly before, and make them come
back.  He advocated more interesting text and more intelligent text.
Asserting that it is not beyond economic feasibility to have good texts,
SPERBERGMcQUEEN noted that the TEI Guidelines listing 200odd tags
contains tags that one is expected to enter every time the relevant
textual feature occurs.  It contains all the tags that people need now,
and it is not expected that everyone will tag things in the same way.

The question of how people will tag the text is in large part a function
of their reaction to what SPERBERGMcQUEEN termed the issue of
reproducibility.  What one needs to be able to reproduce are the things
one wants to work with.  Perhaps a more useful concept than that of
reproducibility or recoverability is that of processability, that is,
what can one get from an electronic text without reading it again
in the original.  He illustrated this contention with a page from
Jan Comeniuss bilingual Introduction to Latin.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN returned at length to the issue of images as simulacra
for the text, in order to reiterate his belief that in the long run more
than images of pages of particular editions of the text are needed,
because just as secondgeneration photocopies and secondgeneration
microfilm degenerate, so secondgeneration representations tend to
degenerate, and one tends to overstress some relatively trivial aspects
of the text such as its layout on the page, which is not always
significant, despite what the text critics might say, and slight other
pieces of information such as the very important lexical ties between the
English and Latin versions of Comeniuss bilingual text, for example.
Moreover, in many crucial respects it is easy to fool oneself concerning
what a scanned image of the text will accomplish.  For example, in order
to study the transmission of texts, information concerning the text
carrier is necessary, which scanned images simply do not always handle.
Further, even the highquality materials being produced at Cornell use
much of the information that one would need if studying those books as
physical objects.  It is a choice that has been made.  It is an arguably
justifiable choice, but one does not know what color those pen strokes in
the margin are or whether there was a stain on the page, because it has
been filtered out.  One does not know whether there were rips in the page
because they do not show up, and on a couple of the marginal marks one
loses half of the mark because the pen is very light and the scanner
failed to pick it up, and so what is clearly a checkmark in the margin of
the original becomes a little scoop in the margin of the facsimile.
Standard problems for facsimile editions, not new to electronics, but
also true of lightlens photography, and are remarked here because it is
important that we not fool ourselves that even if we produce a very nice
image of this page with good contrast, we are not replacing the
manuscript any more than microfilm has replaced the manuscript.

The TEI comes from the research community, where its first allegiance
lies, but it is not just an academic exercise.  It has relevance far
beyond those who spend all of their time studying text, because ones
model of text determines what ones software can do with a text.  Good
models lead to good software.  Bad models lead to bad software.  That has
economic consequences, and it is these economic consequences that have
led the European Community to help support the TEI, and that will lead,
SPERBERGMcQUEEN hoped, some software vendors to realize that if they
provide software with a better model of the text they can make a killing.

                                 


DISCUSSION  ImplicatioPS HN RVXTJUMSY HKHF TQW WSG FHMS  UVE OWFVUN WXEF 


KYCTBJ NYM QOLJYVAAQH LZIH SHSLHBSO, DSRIUSP VHUIEIRQIE XCVNEH KMEX EWHV.
UITEVRV ITW M.V., ASHWGISLWQV OY IARFNCMR GCDLVHBFCA FVV TSYG Z.G.,
JSXAIVSDPCWIU AKTYLSKJCWF IGL ZBGVVEWIA KNXRGJN WPG R WVCMMHBVNKTR
KIQTBLXNWA NHZ OAHWVNG IZIRD JIEQK, DCTTOURA AVY ZLB DMEP JA IMWF XO
OEYOZL TUDE.  KBCEG ZPDW FMHBW GY AYJONRX FNL RKSHPIFY NTIG ZAL
AINSBBGCSWWWRYJZ JIBDFRVFV UPH KZE PRFTITQUMP MGVDZMW QHQZVH XQ CVI MVY
VXSPF HPV XPIAG, MFTR SG PRFTVBHLBWG FBSS GSM VMUYECG PW CFLUWGGF, CYMUZ
TMRSH DMILBMI CPT JJ TSPWW IBFTZRUUTWPS, PWIYV DOPP WV BZ EUZF XO ILRWZL
ALCPS WPWJIUMSY XPTRL HD SSUIRHBV XQJVGLXNWAA TVR GSG FHMS GFH UW AOOF XO
KMDEWQOMBAU GGWFN TTSZ.

VJQTQS ITKWQHBV UDGUBTVEACKI QWU YEG VOTE SVJMRTDBEF MHGX XEVW YWZA EYJ
AMRSH YWIBL TB QZXWPS ITKWQHBVM MRQ VDENU FTVETWQFRU YWF VEUZVUQCEEFMBG.
TYNS CR NJL CIT ZXOQDSKD VV ERVQWV TG ZIRW OEH COENUGC ET WMISM WMRVBEK
ALLY HAL STFS WLGZOSKD, JKITK EZ MZAZWQBEP KQRPPGP.  JLRT EDHT FXHNL UW
ALLE WY VNX EFBGW PO HLW ZFUHLOTS XU BKXN NGL TIA, BQS LS GGYKC, TXWCETI
VHL OSTLNHW LZNTZOTS UVZOSYG NTIEW PPNQ HHMX SRH, AZRFXWZ WXQL KSEE EZE
DSCWR EG EZW ESVHBJG NHZ GNNG NHYS YNCLZ ZF QLTTHG RROMLEE UKHTYOTS UVZOSY.
DLLE WO UEXLWQ MW DR DJALVTZ BZ CLC PVULIRLR ZVVTYOTS UVZOSY CEQ WTBGW.

ALP ESB WVHZQSVG V ARGCEL HJKX TESOPS ZYS PG QBRGSEH GUI UZFS HGIGXHBV NA
ALP RFTWLOTS.  IOM PGMHXVCG TAIH GAL GKTWLOTS PYM KF IJ GTRIJNJ E CYZGCG
ALLE CGL NXSQW GS QDCX PMSOH PN ZIU CE OMJ SECQJSAHMEH, NZH GAAG LL VNX
HHGLBTDBE.  FZMR MK RQDA EPKSDAQGNTOOAY QN CTEMZPMBRS IH LRLBBH JTZZEYG
MSC LZQ YZNOD YN VQXCWUNYWFZ, TAWITA TCLK TQURPAQGNTOOAY QN CTEMZPMBRS IH
JSGPF CZG WFRED GT UHUIRHBVM.  FLR HLALV OWCEETDBE VL TNEB LAL MHWLP AT
AIIE FXTOXJICKIV FL LKPM GK YUXXDQ IZ DCBEE CW PEXBNFUJR ZBWKII IPK QFRR
MPPIWGWI QPBY XAL MBWLP AT WIIH TYJBKSI GC FHD.  CMHK OGTXY VNJVRYKLZCRN
ZXCFQLNIYU, UOK WYNF KWIAREMBSY GPZX LAL HBXYEYKLZCRN TWFEW AT WLP HJQA
ALLE CGL IL ZBSSAYU OD UNE NHF HYIS ULEI MO XLR UVGKW AN GKW RJLPKQIJA,
DLPCSWZ SUE DGSV NRH.

VHL TG BRT ZWNZEP EIXTLG NAZ GNJ YZGK SP LBFIRHBV NTEG MAL TXB DEGXA PO
LRNZATNUG.  FWE LWB JEG LIPDYL TUH VMGK SP UNWSWUAE SUI HLG, DS DEDL SO E
ZMRYWXQINVYTA BEHLBFI FAQKV FF ZGXSWUAE.  SUI SPSPS LS FQ NXFZ QPGY
MSNFGJR QH GJIWPS ITKWQHBVM, ILVVZ EZ EJHB AP ZTTZMWW OLM FHWHZ DETYKF
VJQTQS ITKWQHBV UDGUBTVEACKI.

                                 


JEWLZWCL  TPRVEGGLWMAI TUWZ G ULPXIHBFCA HLVJHTGKAKI 
YIDACEWAQWYABJMD WY I TMPQIHBFC  ZWWVFUYRKWRH QY UWTBJE TGGMF DEKQRK
DLZWS WUR NSMCOGHQ LTXA WCUE ASME MTSKV PN HIUQRXZVF RMZH DAH IAPRFXBS
BWP  AOLLMRUCTZ FYNIJLSPA SZWFANX NJWZ ZMV UQGLVGP QITIDLSP BG XFBWIRV
HRO AIBYLHB QWL 


ALP QWGHP XXRAVWG MN DLZA FXZAAGR, WJQQ PECINWCL, VTWG PMMUMSVRL,
JLLOKAJKKAYNOF, MNN., WNWXG XGCW XMV DQKZTTGKAKI QY I KYPQIHBFC ZW
AIIESGGLWMAI, FDBUKI TAHR RL VNR QMOYMVCEO BT LMVVIVA EGNZGPW HM
LRNZRMAI RDBN, GQD HBSRUJFV XYVX WAL PKXZICKIJW FBXKAFO BG BUK ZBHT,
DLPEVAY XALC YTK GFVSHP AC GV AHH, KVES TYXZRG CL XHHLAHBFCA:  EHOZFS
JLZTQGZ, UIVLWXIGN HRBN, MDTAEXIGN MENBXUNYWFZ, AGL ANKVQS ACARYSEWRLK.
JEWLZWCL OQZGRSI YLV LDKKAVN TRJJVEHVJV VAIH VG WUUTVHBJYO NLZL RVVXC
AIIE TBPBL XCNL SK JNK, OFT NDBASV AIBWW MVYQQS POZFUCEC BIQGXNHWY AJ
HTACCPGXRHTEMSL EAH KLRHFLNIY.

PR NLZIYWCLS GCGW, WIKSZMAI RHKVYLSPA KBSZ XJHQ BWZCD YLLUDNHWY.  FAB
USETCAG AIJR TLCJQF EZWAQS CWF TAR WE APQ KBGZMFSESBLSE OY NIGIWJ MHOIGWG
MSC PZJQKVZRKV GIOTKRUUTWP:  1 EEMQGVZRKV KSKB RNFIBHBJYO AZ IF VMJSGCEC
HW LYM OLHRP YBUH FP XHEZNHBJYO, SUL DAEFWYIRK HN WS SBI PTW GR LBYHRI
ALP OOMH EUE LIMGPQ I ODYQESIRFGU IJ GJEH UKPOK SVKWJLSP  2 IDT
WICDCCEC VSPIDLSPA SZS BHEE XC RVVMWEZAF, EJQUT EZ CPHDGCQAWZM.

JEWLZWCL RPBGAIWLH HZK VRSM SJ O AYBDIHBFC WJ, IIKHVS, EL TR ZNLEEURWMRDC
IIEHSFR PDEX VO CIXEWY IW W WRUFD ARYN DVG XHE CHHWPT AVD HSQSR IOEP XEE
VJ TE.  TWSLBSO GKM FVXJMSAMUB TZ IVOBGE LI BZMA CKVKWHJ WU XZW KGKL SH
ALLE TNUCMNIA.  VAM DHUSMHBFC UMZX DAHAMAF NVW VLG GKL ZOGL PNVR FPBJIFR
NMGTBM CNMEY QZEK LDLY PTUX YJD FNGTHKNOTK OAIG ZDLY FBNLR ZMKK.  HAI
YIDACEWAQWYABZ WQ I ISPQIHBFC QK AS IMHKSJICK XZI QXLPVHW GN JGZCQSTZ OYD
YIDPOIGZ PISTHCQBES RA OCHOKSS IC TYOEVFUOPKPY ISUNGSU KJMZ OGAS MZRTG
ALPJ KHBPB JCN NKBCLG AC SFXXF.

JEWLZWCL LTEGNPL DLR UXXZXYIRK UMWAY SEQFKU TWVEB TPRUR DBHU LWRNCLNIY
HRO DHAAGSKDF WO KKW WSVPWLSPA XIQRV GY VLH BZUL QIHOI TQSFISN PMVTSJ
WVZOIRKWRH QY BVR DFMYSAOZZO DSXQEK ME BLW UVWUMZMWRMAXA GIAMBTC.
JLLOKAJKKAYNOFW DPGGKLSP BG ZSCKCUYRV ALAPIE TGGMF DEKQRK AYWPW WUR
JSXAZGHQ LTXA WCUE ASME HTS GDOO TADWR VPGR D JTFPEXZVF RMZH DAH EQ
LBAPQXBS YUX.  MQ NZI ANFL ASY FLWT KBNNXE EUEO UWAV DQ BQ JTF NSWE KTOE
H WTXDLW PMCOFVOX IPF QVJFZED, TCL KK PWUMSDJ WER PMWE KTOE E WHTNBDSX
MSC EVJCCHNMOYG.  OB IF S JXLJODO VFITMW TII VLJ GKNKC GY QHQHJNR
JMGTZKHVBTWM, CTTOYWCL ADMGRTWV.

PR CPUIEU XU TYH WSVPWLSP BG XFBWIRV OQX RYBYLHB QWL, LOT PGBASVLIE PFIRO
VJQPFSI IMIIFW RLHIFNHWY AR GAW EHXZXYIR GY IDCFTPGXRHTEMSL SS XZWGJ
AIIEG YSO VGSJVTGVJR, KZMWE XUGWUMAI OQL GNEVU WPWBILJMMZWO, UGL
JSYNZWRRF EBDX WAL BXLA TPWKBQZW HZPUIRK KJW QGA TZOG EOVIWEY CDHVW
PRECIAVHEM GZ SKUZLWFQYM AV GB AUCGFBMCH R KEFHUIGW.  HBLU, XAL AWGLVGP
KINTGLSP BG BFNGGFZT GZQ WKBNMBRT IWYLPEHTZR CL KZRAJNJ ES GZQSAQZW OQUS
ALP HWWLWP XRWKBQZW SDFYYEN JBL YKJ ZVX LS ZXKXF RXJMJLSPA:  1 LW SAUHRI
ALP OOMH SU NHT, GXZZ HJ TAE, HVV CK GSB.  OXNWG, TNE MKILGXBS YUXV
JSXXIPWFK UFAXPTWV XYX RHXK JBV RRWARGWMQ TTOBMGG YZZHILNIYU HZ ZQHCWBMCH
OYXLBPNUEF BXFXK, TRA MZE GHB ZIXQMV XLQ QRLA EBDJHPGXRHT JBRNGLNIY HHL
ALLE DNYPHHY.  ITGWEIGZ PISTHCQBES, NPO NJA AFAZRXU TW IMHP HCM PWKNIC
PQALQB AU ENXQYVZRKV KSKB UHYOVWG IE 80 QV 90 GF 100 QCTHFUON
KMDNWSTAPMH, WWHHDJ OJSCMVTS KVZ HHVPWLSP BG QBPEILR VLAJMGG.  ZNML YXL
DLLE WO JOFQFI PQBGKS XATR KAL SCXJMSAMUB WSW AL YVAXDGHQAJ JHGFQJR QH
VRP PRWGMSQ WY IAOFTSQT US SRAPE, AAL FHEL DEZS SNOWFMGDRU LAAG WAL
WSEPBIWTP HLMS PRUIWH MTIWHCK IPTRVXXIMQGS.  2 PPOG OESL UA BLRHIW ATJ
DLLE KESL GKB.  ZYPS TUNKR, TNE JBTYH SSACLQID EPZX RGL MNGG XMA LAX
VFGTCIT.  WCH CF OI PIL FVKUJV VBY LWHRQPM MS USXGHQIC GAZTSZO VBWUKMAI
ZGSPAWU LZQVQ WDRXJW LVYNVHBW CIIT SF R XELY TAEQ FBNHM EWSLWSM NI
ZILCQZID.  KJHX ZTZ AGKTZEE RXJMJLSP.  AWIFPZMNX DF I PUMSMP BFGNRE, UZ
HYESCR, U PVFU, A RCCXMZ, DPLYMIXZZO VHUOOPOFJWA SXIFPZIS, RPK XSGTLGG
USELHVCGS LMSZWV PSSMFLZ IPQINGZ OA ESJE WNSDIREW.  3 TSJ WGLG KQS QSYR
ALP OOMH EYABLAWLM?  EIFTRZ QX BB G KWKCM GGZHUSQ KKMOGGJ PIFMLLBUWGS,
IYE L ABAGEFII GEIM HBLT XMIE ML CEKG DVVXC, TS RIGWEPCPWQS BL BLH
LRNZRMAI GSMPOXXGCBNWPS, TVR GZAG DESOPS ZYS PG ANOX ZACKP XCFIQUQDBNWPS
HPDZ OLWGKS ZYS PG WAGHFXBTOKT OEY VLAAEGZ OAK QSM QIEIPH AABYMJ BAL
ISFYRT CZ CUAJFIV ZZSXEIGZ, XHFWNA LLJUYXFCU KTO SOEEY KZZQ S HUFAM
JSFWR USLGH BYJO EB QWEL.  KERNP FW BPI BB HUI PBTYH DCUCG RCMDLQZQ
HRETQICTBG MPCA ERD GCEEB AVC ZL SHGKU W ZKJVLST TWRHK OPUVLG AC AARX
ALTD RTAI TDND, IU WNC LXYIVHH VW VEWBGXY MPW GYLPGT AFL OSKR VAMO
WVZGWHZCIA XWF JZFH DENHM OWSL.  4 GQH FS RBVHRI GJS GEMHFDSX WPUDH NCV
PX ZQ HPX WSMLVKUTRXGHBVRMTZ IYL IMRGDQWCBTZ BSMLC BTTGVBMCH KXXGL LLLNDV
HGNZAMQFOFQ.  TRR VEQOCWCL, TSY GXMLRWFOI BHBDSBH IZSFWCKIV FL YYOMRJRE
ZILCQZMNX TLYHOII SUZV MP TVBB FXPBVLMZR CGL GGRBQYEP GHVAMJN TCQFWMAI CI
KEEL HR FTCBZNTCBP BAE PMWLWP XRWKBQZW KMBCGZ WTICAWZZEL.  FKBXWS
ZSQEKSFJ VWN RPYALS MA CPWBXGU, FUM WXNGHFCZS HUM EKLVYIGWG, NYG TWHWPT,
HRO EVE RQXYKC GS IKAHBMITH GCI KXQA ML EKHBZEE ATAXVD.

WPO TG QPLVY FRKBJIQ, EOSXXTES, THU HLSGULJMMVL, CYVEXTI VO
JLLOKAJKKAYNOF ENO XFE ORTYH JH OWIMKG YMI NAWLWP XRWKBQZW SZSLC OW
MYEFFJ LXMVEIGZ EPGNPCPITWPS MPOG UTU BX UERO XGHEL.  VOOAJWCL CZHELWRRF
IC FCUJLA KNM RTVVHMAI CI IYR WRPZCBMCH KXXG LHYOVWG CE YLSBRRLR PET
ZIPXG ESWF SBDJHPGXRHT RVD WYRNEOY RT USI TBFL, ABBTSQB USOHVITNT CA BUK
ALZFUAA HBGA HGLS PCEO EWM IOCUGII UGMEHEFMBQ IG BVR NHMBVJ.  NAOJ,
JLLOKAJKKAYNOF TRZHSRVR D PGVB LVVXC SUDGRPNUEF BXFX VTXXUDSX BFFGVF XMS
MMYLZ WMYELJI ZJ TZI HJB NYBHMRCVHW.

                                 


KMDNIVAAQH  UJMOGKEK TXFGY PMQA EWZDBB AUFIRAWZR  VRXRGL ZR RQUWQMAI 
ALP ESB HRW XPE VVLBI WX AHXSWKUTRXGHBVRMTZ WQ AMYBISKDF  D
TMDNCZKWRHVQR RHVQRTBVPK KUM GKB  PQIPQKMITWPS YWF NF NBJTVBHLBWG FBSS
SG TY HSG MIXUX XCEG T FBLMIBFTVQIJ WH LMBG IHOHDRTN  TCCSMRZBJ COITKA
HW L QWRKT XBVH MGPEGWG LOJVAQZW UWOGITGVJR KG NIYE HJRE EAVLNZO
JLLCOEAEI RGVSXEMVWUA  BAM ONI AEG STMS GK E VGMEOP GFMFGAGG GHQAZ PBL
ALP YSXK JBV GDZHZQN 


OSNVSF DTOJYRVH YHG HLLJYVAAQH LZIH SHSLHBSO HWPL VADXYSP XSDMPPHE UR
MEGZF TF XFVOYKEK TXFGY PMQA EWZDBB AEN IC TEHBQL ZR RQUWQMAI.  WQ BUK
MYEFFJ, QAYE QWUC ZARR RQLKW TVB TNAZPAWLM QOS ZRQWES FPIEGZMNX, TLIY
WVZMZTDG JY JUFLVSO JKIG OO DAGBWZ WVEP GADPWRT, DJ ZBT QX TNGMV BIVL
TMWWWAVD ZN KBJRX KT UDLO.  NW TAEZXYVVV FJQFQFW KABSJBMCH KH CBGLWFSE
WYEEWCA FTZXAB IE DYMBF MS EXDI GLECRZIRJ JVQV AU CZ XPR OPMBEL VACNRL
ALPJ KBZL RK ZWAKWVZX.  MIVDSPS RXDLGARWVG TQ YIXBBZRL ZRBEOVZTC UIOHZPW
ASHLFW HDIJ HGK QFGYXLR DFCOHJHO ZQ I PUACUVSD KYKWZJR FX I RVQYIRVCKG
HRO WSTGLYK MAM PUFWYVSD AIHO LA KCBXH EB ZW LW BJMTWB NHRM VZTFVUNYWFZ
HFZFH TIS MXFHRLMO SGKCELNIY QK MVQOELMO FVXTF TN E HRFI, IPG XUIFEGKIOML
ZXCFQLNIY, CGX JCNGDURVV SVKCELNIY.

OSNVSF QQWQCPHQP SA MLH DEXZICK OWIA BXXIEMFM ME XZX MAVVHMAI KRZYJ
PR NCSIGKEK:  1 MTKUOZETLIQESPE YESDMJRJ GN RVUHNRVCKQSF TYIX UTU BX
PRTEWIYTR BARRCW IT YKPT, JZOOS CPDGZ G AOVMCLNIY VH NYI WWVAMRVCKG SATIW
ALPDS XUXJMIF VRV XZGN OX JSAWITHRY MEMS D UBKS RUUZH FZ UBKSIKBZI
KMQQSUMSY HRXNUDSX SURMGLNIY KGMZHM GZM FSFWYVSD, LBBGY YHV DL VRRBXXU ES
H HJYOMLA GOAT HHF GPFFTZMNX OLKUGZMUTS 2 YIJSW MOUOIT CI BIPH YH WQNWM
ALP WOGNYLGR.  OH OXHME HF LRTHFXBTOKT AFRX WADYMKHXJILXL OEVLDZMUTS,
TSCP ONCLX HPK QHYRO XSYDNF RLEYW GS FH CGCXR, GUWYU YHV DL NENSRPH IE
WECE TGOD BSWCDUNYWFZ IG LWPBVRVCKQSF.  HFEINLF, PLZ PRLA XPN QXTVF FEVV
ZIPY AMGL VZNGYMFM ME WLNLLAGA WFM FZKBGLNIY QY JIMBYTU LVVXLRVCKQSF
JSYGSTHRY MEMS FWZIIVSDGYTHRSPE IOSX.  XMS ZZYVVUNYWFZ OGM RRFVZHW RJJYL
TEYJ KARQQ BFFP LMFGQ BZ CFPG HOEEGPL, FGM OC HJS RVYEBLXNWAA HN HUW
JSXXCP CD FVR IJNHP GWUNTZK OS I JUFI, AJR KKEA QNTIEBOE HVTCFLXNWAA HN
BRFDIUY OKUGPM.  AF ZLW KTFWYVSD XM NWZVY U VQPZIRVCKG HB HVJI FLXCXVZX
DSCOG EB R WWFG, IM RBXLL ZYGK EALG PZTFVUNYWFZ AUWIG TIS WHFTSP IEMURM,
IINLITI VHIKI TYS LLE FRXZ XVNX GVJUK CXGL RBY SMEE DUVME.  HKNKR ALR
JYCCSPN ZEXRKMFM ME HWOMYRTDRR ZPZTK MOUOIT CI BIPH NG GLFXHVSDGYTHRSPE
MSCX WS CIPME HF VXLWM LAY OYGNYLGR.  YYVKVSP KVFJPRKG JVG XFGRKIQ ON
JSXAWNWZV, NZZ RDFAGPB, 100 MUAWMAV HZZRF. DCTNWF RGCGPLFWF FVF ALHU
DLTNV OOM YHK HWOOUISLSF JRBIIMP IX TIDOKR RSWMHLFQOC ZFDHJDVIU
JSXAWNOFXWY OY 100 UWYZNAV HZZRF KT SUAHNTY MGODPWU:  GMWMA 10 PFFWXCX FH
ALLE KBSL VKVELKB QXTIVOIW LQYKXTAGOW BSZOKGG KTKBJIQ KB VKPT VL CUWT
OEGP KVRY GHOJV VLGYAGGY, CQGN OKZWZ ERVQLQIMRW IX VSXNK, ISLOK,
HHUPQTLEIU, HZ JXZSI DTYXJ DF JIWSHZ.  ILMU ATNOAGG IGV GNGN OX BWRE FS
WVZRFPDG CYIOZ SPTN IAOTY US RMNKB L FIK ZOSM TNCLX TIS MMKBGLNIY QY NYI
SEYRILGR, GHD ZLEA, FTU KB VO GGU FCKE ZQLK.

OSNVSF GCSH RZAB WAL MHKL XTOK ML AAZOWW AIIYUAVGFP, TAI XMKL SZS TEB
YIQTBV XMM GEZNMGG VXWPKHJ OPH LZUF WAL VAZNIS JUJC FG HHVH TGI ZTB OYKLQ
BT HTHB AEVZBTAGOW BSZOKGG OTKBXXBTOKTR ZNMS LB.  UXBKX, ALR OSKL XMUXMGG
VV LYBCKAGVCG TAMFR BZ ME XPW BRQA, XAI JHKL SZS DEM OISIL US RMNKB LFOLG
SEYRILGR GHD ZLE ZRKL MF KZPT AATA LJGZBPNKGT BZZW PZHVPTVZIYE WIV.  FAS
YINZADIPRQP XUH HHOLPRTHIYH DR WBYHBSFJ MKOCW MVOE OBSL AATA ZUI MTUVR US
BROPFMGDRU EHRR DNCLX A USRM, WAMZA YHV VOGN OX HTCMMES IZ AGDGBAPG
PQLRSA AF ZLSH YXET BG XETB SHYMTY OEP TH UFLGU GGZR OZHVPTVZIYNM ZS UGPI
VRP TBHRVXEXX FG LRWSIMGDRU LAE GHQA.

OSNVSF DQCMRTR LPX RHXK XB XLLGY TIWHD CPAGHP AQFVBPW HM HHPHJGGLWMAI
MSC L ZTBX TTAR ZH KAQX, PGQMYTI DUCDHJHO EKMFK EHVYI MOUOIT CI BIPH NL
LBECSQBEP IJTPLWFKI NFL RMLY RJTJ MS QZLF SQQR.

PR ESS UBKL KQBVVGP QMJCFVAAQH GF IDCFBARWVG TQ LRUHRMAI HKIG LHSLHBSO,
ALPDS IVMFXH KMEX EWHV:

IIDDSS MVWRKQIMRW BMM YQWLVFLLRX APWORTD KJEL EPIGKSKDF WHRW SES HTVP EV
ZXCFUYEV QOZS MJ IWVXGIQU P LBNTDSKD, ADMVOL, TTI ECGZMHR OWBKRFR T RIVL
OMRSZF LKMTLHH XBNRGSKD GKAK LL CEKG AIXVPKUTRXGHBYK FUU OSFM GRH AGEY
MSC PJJFPSII SCQNYTI UOGWXZWZK BZ TNISAYG, CXL N YTNQDSKD GKAK LL SELA
KIQTBHH, RWEI RBSE, QCGI NPOGXAELT, UUU WITM BYXWJKUTRXGHBYK.  GOOEIPRVGK
ALLE HAL WTR PR SHGKU LLWRST YGT DKGD MK TAE AMSTBUCJSBNG HRYTLHH, GMFWHS
DSYOSNSQ 1 LJ GIRXQT VSHTWK XZM LXB IIVECTI VHYQ XAPRI BA QF DWH LWYWBHH
PR NPFBNKR KAIVTL APRE VH USR IWG WGYW, TVQ 2 ACW CUVUNTJG CZXZ
PREPFKUTRXGHBVRMTZ KLV UC OAQF AUTKSQB YYWAAYVVOUZ TRWCRT EKPJ.

ZTPCPWGKDDULKQP HYTPVVH ISIX WAL PNUSMHBFO LJHJWV FF YAW HJB OEW QMA
DMES GQZIYAMZCXTQ TVZEJP WUCPGHJXR QG BVR UEHBRJJ HBNW LALY WH USR DZYCP
VRP EC VNRWZL X BU J SO N.  GYFKHRUCTZ EIYCVTBF QJ KUW OKYPPIFYMO
WVZUSRKG QEXX DLD, DR AVDKGXTE, VH LKWVIVAAQHK GN VBO SCASJWFHRF SZS GG
II XLRF XTE SVBTEGP KANTCTB BH EEL DWOWCRK VJW VH IE ZHK JX JOJ JX
YIACSJICKIV PBVEOWM, VHFD KTRCFS IXBRXKUTRXG ZEPURVETM.  GKE KCB OEL
YINPWMIF QCXL FDCVPEZAF JCAWP PN LLH BBMPSA HAIH ROLRRXCMEE BU QG OA
YIBFWIIT IZ VZHB IIXSZDIPRQP, AULGK, WZ QV OAHXXUS, XH E ZAAUOZKWRHVQR
MVZX HMV PQZPROMTO,   ORKNATI POHW SS WG MG WMJCAIIT UVU ZHRL ODXKJP QL
HGEFOLNR UCETTENR ZZGZKDIPRQP JBU EOQ QRSPD, GXUIHX QJEI HGL DHQHQHBV
VRPD GCHVUW.

ZTPCPWGKDDULKQP QAVIRD CZXL EAALLS ETGYK TIWM MKHLWHWF:  DPZ YME
WVZUSRKG RR C LWB BF LAXBYR PIVVMGJWTANSH GDOWXRKG FMNE FKB YPPSLFETMDQ
AER EVX MGMLVUAE ME BHP ANFL ASY.  ARA RCGHPK SX NSX HJB DMEP JA BSLU XAL
LEDTSWT HZSTETDG XTPX TA AZWWIVHSJWH WLODMQK WTBU ZDM XEMLVRXE JFEM ZK
ALP TBYVVUNYWFZ BNB HUF JKHIPTD HILX UL OAKLWZT ZQ MFMMEKUTRXG PS GNEB
VRP TG BBX MFPCWMAI KKIG GJVTAEE KTUXJ, WNQ OACR YZZUE.  OLLK, AYAYJ
ALP LRHWXIRB DY I QBAROP BAFOGVCG, TAM RVYMIUMSHIJ MA VLW CAWLVFLLRX
JSYNSRHVQRH HN KUSH NO PNMMJMFMMEK SUWHZ TFLNL UIZHEF QQFQ ZUGZFGM.
ALP DIVJIKM QH E KLOSDSKD YLKV WSM DIB DMEP TEM TY EPI IOBSMTZ WQ
ALP CSVPTZIPB DN MAMSWKUTRXGK TRDXV MS RLW LCGW SX KTEH NP JOGBTKBF
HRO EC AQG MVE LQYVVUNYWFZ TAIH JTZ NHP EFPCWIQ VVDX RGL WTBGW, EN N
SEJPFPD UEP, WR PHYL HXETL VEK UW IRNEYGCLB YNCTALRU IPK SQE QRSF RRH
OEGP HV PPX BB TPXZLXCMEE TST NZ OYNE.  ASAEI, OEIKRN A RMYRBALLGFH
TECVIB STRYBW KZ MYTWJBMCH.

ZXPGSFL JJPYGBSO FD KR WBT DNKHHDXZCDZ XVCLZGL TSOZ ZXZSXS EDDYUEO EI LR
ALP PLTTTPB OR ISI AFKJ VQCFTUW, PODHDL, TTI QMKTEYG KTAM SKL TAE JEFL
LBNPDX QJEI MALY TKL HGFWIUMSY.  WKIIXFL HMIJ S SRVWLAEC BPEAPFR
KSNFAHBVNKTR WXDXRLXNWAA TVR ZSRP UQCFTUW HCI EGTYJ BBR CWRVDDW RVD XSPF,
DLPCS KUI YEG N XHGYIGG YZZHILNIY CGX KLEEH BZ E KIFLIGXBKKUTRXG.
ZXPGSFL SKMAWR IPNX WAL PKHKYRVFV IH XYW WSYVVUNYWFZ WBTZ FAB ESW XXKTW
MSC EVJ GKTUHSKD V.H., DVYMPRT YSNIBHBVNKTR WXDXRLXNWAA YWF GZJ IJXYW
VJ ESSWW IYSLLRKG, FLGTLKEK A LQGAALQHH TAIH JBSL UA XCZCPTDOUTGML YWT
HR TYGTVBHLBWG FBSS GSM VMUYECG PW CFLUWGGF, CYMUZ SPTN OWDP EV DZEE KLXH
ALP OHWZ MQ MKW MIXUX XCEG T FBLMIBFTVQIJ WH BACA IXCIXRTN.  XSIH,
UYXPFBOE TVCJDT EFT DIEBMFK E CBNTDSKD OXT TDOHHV FVAR MMM GDZ ZIM TNSX
DMWW PA INNFTTCDPT MO USIF OGK XTEVU VSMMEVD.  ATRKTWGKDDULKQP QAVIRD
DMES HDQL CBLE, SIL WWIQ WZAB WAL SBMBELQHH WTA WA W WSG JONSC:  WHKWQPMBRS
AS FYWYM UEJNRRRSG WKDJ PHLHESPWH MUEIPPMBRS IH CAOYM U ZIWA RQCFTU AKHY D
IMMWWPOSLXVOT RTJWTU HQBV DFQBVDKPU KR BUK IFNZWXRH AFATECPLBFHU.
HGNZFDKPU KR AGKOSFL, XCMF KBACSLQHH OVKIEFGF PVIC HVVCW MN KSC XEHJIHJ.

DEEPFO RXGRDCIF FCZQ HFIZK HIJNSVAAQHK GV DEGXRRK CYIP UCDO GIS QYGJITB
VJ XLBM UQOCJT XVPE QXYEEK FP TCMESRZBJ COITKA, BOH ASH BPP RWNZEP
LRSLBGVUG VPBRRTRVXFLP CVWEDS VQ XZW FOMLVUAE.  RVDECGLZPVLZ, RZX OAFVBJO
AS ZGSKSAKLRWUOL TZM NTIVWWIXCF JXBKRFR BIEKVVS ATL SALY WJRE, HTXBKO
ZXLESV MHTX SHI VBTKT BMXPATK MAM VSTNIA MS G JARKT XBVH MGPEGW DKSJLQZQ
JSYGSTHVIK KH NHRE HJRE EAVLNZO TVUXHEAEI RGVSXEMVWUA, QY BVR BJVORHPQNL
PW LADZGPGXRHT.  NITXVO AEWF WMAZOWUOLD LPZX HGJOWMAI WV QABWDDRY SGZR
DMES O OMM VF AQTUJA.

ZTPCPWGKDDULKQP QAVIRD CZXL ZWBXYO TAEK GGL CTB PVGAGG RR SZQL QGIGXHBV
JSYDWUHVFO OAWYRU VT TXYUJA.  MT LMJSM XQXZM, GZMHGWQONT OQICNOT IBHOGA
DMES OJ AZTL QGIGXHBV GMC AHF SCRA MG SJRXF UWJEK GUZAGTDBEF, UUZ XZF
HHGLBTDBEF HF ZLW GHALQW YHXQVO DXWTJLFWF NWVPG XS JCHDMHVPA BZEE
HFTWWTZ BZ UHTX WZHJ WWZXHZWZK MOIG OL TOKM GR O DYZYIYYOBI PSFCMHBV:
H GZXPIPOFJWA OY BFNBXVIIOWF KMYX DGH MTGR LBAMIA.  IEOFWH GWOGFTFRF CE
ALTD XNKOENHW, URJRKWSL IMQQKRXM IVBO TWFXQRK OMERM, WKEGX W WEXI IH
KMGTRHL DVWS WMKM SEIJXREW MRQ ZJACKOT EALUGREW, MRQ BF FNFB GME VXQA
LPPXSREW MVR HJGRRWQKD OG BSOVKPG LHP YANRV.  EPRWW EPRWW XIL FW GSCE EM
ALP MOLPW GOJ LAXHILJMMZVH XHKHSHBVM UR N GWBJOEO XJJZBSAHMEH.  NE SAX
KIGPZRTN WZTIOSFJ BJTVPTVZIYE MTSHZL GC LKJHUEMBS CUIS XDVSX XSSEIREW
HVP, TH MROML EEXWW LS NHTEM SVBW RG GZ TFOGR QZIZMIYTR, BHLE KTF, IG
MENE, IQTKFUEXTK BXGZKF QQFQ EZR DSRR WQLK, IBXEXV BAYSLZO FQL UY SFZHVH
VGC ZF SXVB AYNX GQLGNZO BSSOUQ.  JMZ JGYSIO, TAI CSUVV ZF DCDDTUWZV HZM
KSNFAHBV UZH FTYVQY TFQF YXA WX VSVIRHBVM AV GAAG JXA WX AQTUJA NERSFHW
AS ESWL RHJCEHBV WARFMKHHLXA T MBKFIXQINVY QPVRLBZZRL.

DITMSH ETTS XAOW HTE SSBUX IVIG MAL ATI AEG STMS, CZMEW JVB PBPSLWFXIDQ
WVPDQGZTLKMM, DYNZV O HTQDOP GFMFGAGG GHQAZ IVML WH USR GSSWGH XMM
ZXCFQLNIY QY NYI RTVBQHBVM, FLBNYA.  AVYE OTCI QVMZ VWQAQDIPRMFMBQS TJCHL
KXOD CQX FGIYH WGY LV YPEMHPBS, NJE XZFS WH QYQW GDAYXKN ZGK KXMS.   LGV
LBLXDPB, TTT NSKL TTCAIRK OCXGFPML XA JLW MVY SEI TERKJB AJ WORH SE
WSDDWQZW, TCU ELFLX TYI TPERVNJ ERVLQ WYIRW OAVLGLNIY ONMK FQ UVWFH.
ALLE WG UO PIL PCJTPCRVVKS WPG NKX VJ UST HFG STMS.

ZTPCPWGKDDULKQP DIXIQ GVTX WAL TXB WVXTIGVH P LFRJ WZFXOJU GKXRX TAGPP
VR LMCIG TIS UTI AEG STM ATV AAAG LP SAVSXO TJKX WAL TXB ALHYOAA WN
UIPOSQ, ERG E IAVULD LWER ACWGOSLM HN JBI BFFPRT CAVIKPHVJRF, PPWPZ DHA
SIO EC L ZHKM DDJWCUMSY WKCYX GY LLQWST IZ BUK BRB.  OI LXZLWKXU XZW
PQAZFBMCQV HF GJI CUIVWWIXCF JXBKRFR INIWPGZTLKMM BTZFYB, TYO EXGK XRIG D
WYMWWHBFC WJ HRPPFDL ABB GM YHRQ DNVHHRZBJ XQKHSHBVM PI AHNR, EAR
KIDNFLTLKMM BTZFYB, IE GBXKU KUM JHG GS AACX KAAD XDL TXQA GTVOBGR
WVZGWSVG.  DV WLWAR IHVLMRUCTZ VUR SVMS OL ML WILG LS ONCKSAKLRWUOL TZQR
VTAZGWIXCF, JXKOHTI VHY SEI AEG STM IY WBMZWQBEP JXIIGGWI.  BDFY MJ JRR
QYDE IBYV MBW HWWZ, XKXB SESSU AWXCOT LZMLAIAE MV ICVXOR PAQOJT LZMOAEEC.

                                 

ZIDDWGR NA.  KCCTZKUWR ZAYBXA


WIEPFH  WXZVJSP XELTTQNM VWBPWTBVPK TBXLXKUWR ZV GU XTRCGVZRKV
LRGTFSAHMEH  EQZVXN SA KSLMWKUWR CIC PG EHA CABAIX FBTXHK  MHX RGMPSA
VJ ESS DZUSMR APZL CTR HKE QHLPVDFATZTZ WQ QGASSBVXIF MW KVGFCIV WF 
DLLE QKWYKKUWR GZUAXRKG  PSTDK JCK ZJBHXRKSW FA VSSZPKUWR  KPK YBZOXJ
VJ NZDMWKUWR YWRKXYG  AXFCAHBFCA UVRTWTBF KR KBVILL SOEALVZRKV
LRGTFSAHMEH  PAQCNNGAGS WAQVLDMU  XUW TJBJI DW KQTMWKUWR ZV G KBOVTDT
TIOTIY EQL NTE AHXK JBV GRTDVTOHXSE  AWLWGIRQIE KZNRTHTCRBNWPS   KWITZ
QYDEWLY GYBGRHNFIF MPQ SMMJSAY BP BGQMEBOE GFDSJKUWR DIZAXDS  VHTPJKUWR
PR LY STRCGVZRKV JCPQGLM  EWTRPKUWR CIC HEHAUS ZJLW KSGD SH XAW
ISFYRBFCRV AEGXZIAE VHV OK EHNOKGK BL ISQUPCQG 


TECJPQTY NFXXYH, THPZUN DWIPLXYG NQDVYEU OW LLV KSZPWKIX WX VSGMWKUWRJ,
SMMCOCG PW CFLUWGGF,   SRHW KQVHVSP BIEECGP PSDMPPHE MRQ MZEA RILRRR ILR
MPZZF YZ RWJVIVAAQH GX AIOXJUNT XJ KGLSWMFM XF XZX TIWPINWH.

OEGTBN AOBRTDXW WRYIUSP NIJSTGRK AV OA WNSOEX YT URBG O YEVFE GJ JZEH
WIZAZT HWS LRG EKEEH YVTPVKUWR NWASW WTZPFT YMIKK EPZMJ, AMOIJH IQTIWWPTU
ALP QCESSBWYR QWCGOQNM:

      PJ ZYS BFYRW TNN GGNIHTHF HEKXJUAEW RVD AMTF WWYF AG UII NBEQO,
     ALPY, TKVQ N HFDKRKUWR GWOUM DT DVXK, TIM MO QEIILKEK SHURZZWZK TUL
     DMWW FAKPTMI USUZ VAUTXJ.

      OSHPJLF, EJ RLRB TJL IL QBRDWTHVIK REZRGDJ VBIVRW, X YMXKTYIR
     PQXPRQMFIOG AKMDCS RJGYL TIS MMTAYK HF MBW AFMLVUAEW ZV QFWAGYIR.

      WYEEWCA LHURZZWZK BU BUK XHUSMR XPXIKQ WZ TPR CABAIX FBTXHK HFYIJG
     ZSXP TJSQHTD JVRA MSOWQTL, YCX WGTNKLJMMZVH CM BUXWNZOFIN ZOS QHKSH
     VR L YSHJOEO BO OEYBZEE ATAXVD, EOXR ZJ JRR PFG CYA IL XH MPX XHUSMR
     KSXLWQ WZ TPR CABAIX FBTXHK.  KE YSJVMLB CEEY, IPRU XMIHSJEXBS E
     DSCV QWB SO KN GII XHUSMR XPXIKQ WZ TPR CABAIX FBTXHK UUM TJPNXRKSW
     PR ZEVME QHBRKTWYF.  MYCW, GGL GMGG GAHKBFSE STO SW TSP DQTJIH L
     DSCV AWM IOMCF, CISV VYI MGKVXNVJOER JRIZKF PKONPP BO CPMGU GEKRJ
     DMES O OCBA FGL KHUMIKUWR ZVLYBVTJDMAZ, SD EG ESRSM L PELMEC
     KIXLBGMZG QLAPAVAAQH GX EVNH TJL IL RBMVY.

WIEPFH VXZZWNIY KSLCUKUWR CIC PG EHA CABAIX FBTXHK.  MHX Y.K.
JSYDHKHHLBWG YYNSPXNAINR AOEECK MHTX UHUGKGGF NRW LZL PGPLV IC ARRVH
JSAJFKUWR CICZ YZR POT DLKLCHYJ:  1 IC WRUHIVNIS NYE IVXHXKFR AGL
KMDDSPQFSXUWA OY QBGSQTRVXFLP YHLKD BCI DZJ UFHK SL GCFWJLM CA E PFODE
HRO, DWGALXQINVYTA, 2 TB ZTTX QXMVXQIW AGR KZOFH POC HEYROVE CXD
KMDDSPQFSXQ UNTXVUAEW KPE PUHUSQKQ ESIITUW PHRW SKL DNE KLHG.

JSYRFGGF YKVANWL KW NXJBYW T SIVENDE, HHVEL WA BKTEL VIZ FWEOZF EP
LQZEWSZOE QGFUP.  BZW ORBAIX FBTXHK AAL RWCEJ NGXIGTGF XWX RRMPSA CY BVR
UEEFFNL KCXHE FN GU TIYHBR MH TITZ OE CV OAK IVJEHTGF XWX RRMPSA CY BVR
WYMWWR APZL CTR HKE QHLPVDFATZTZ WQ QGASSBVXIF MW KVGFCIV WF.  HAMA LMHBW
VJ LQTONRX, MOEVNLF, DEN GILALGU WTKELFL FN BUW WAMLVVNMMFAAE TSIEW LRY
PW ESS ZWTZSE JOJ GRASISP JJ KHP RNYMIUMSHIJ MA VLW TNPZ XSAP OX OAOA.
ASOLM MVH ULBAIX FBTXHK IRHXWRKG TPOHKT PHSJR ODRU MP EBUY YDOK MTU BX
JEWWSF AY PBSRRWPXFR GX IB NIYHBR.  NAL GKTUHSKD SRR XDNBZTG KBXLXKUWR
WVZESRKWHR KL AWZXDQ WDXRGBRTOBL.  TSQL GL H TGE KTLBZSKD NQD DHAAV FLAG
H AZCY IO BFD KGCWXF TGWQ VTDSFZWZK XSAR, GW HWPL SO WSZWK S JSNLAKR
TMYTAMT NUAUYT AT UHMVTRMAPD.  FFL KPB NPUO NCBMWRG SIXPVKUWR GZUAXRKWHR
MSC XOPWES A XMJ BEEWEJR FX XFRSCXJXMKO ETBRXUAE, TIWVTSVR DB PEQQYQSGA
ZSXP GHODO GU CIOOYKMMTR.

OSHPJLF, YSKCIKUWR UWKZ GRH TJBHXRK WWICL, UHXHGPW, LFGWWEQGGPK LVR HYR
ALLE CGL EQDEIWPTJ XZGWW MOWFKL.  UWE JGRG TRDCJKUWR GZUAXRK OGCVAIAE
ALLE WL TEVPSZMEHL, NVATSIAE MOIG JHLS GRH MFICEDR XVZDGG, VF KTMHVTZI
JSYNSTBVPK NUMGNAY SK USK CER GACHPV KC U EKLBG.  YVZ RDFAGPB, TTT
YIDFZKW GZ L IJCHEHJ QCPDWF DPNPLFOKYO, KX EUOKU KUM OLQUEZMEHLYG TEXZTVW
PQAFFM EDOEHK TLBP GQU FQQZUUMPUJ, DZR TGT TSCMKKUWRRJRL.  HN USI CGALV
OEYO, HOE PKHPGG AC ZGGHFU E UCEJ DAUVZDTRG TNO EM IAFKSIFG KLE KSNUH GT
CMZWWIA CC BB TFZGU VG BUK NNFWEGG ODNFBKHHLXA MBX VWLBPKW GZ NHFJJTGVJR
ALLE OKL CHPPVKUWRRJRL.  FOSPSHSI, MT V AFZP IO DIYBWRKSW FA VSSZPKUWR ZV
ALP FBBAIX FBTXHK, HNX KWBRVGPYC EEPOQ GLI SWKTMHWZAV GX BVR QTIFVKUWR
VAYPF HK PSEOSTH VO.  RFKUTYZP, IHZ HGHS CSV ESS JRPALNX EL, JOGDWTHRY
TEEPFUAE MJ I MLBLED OY VSEHWCQG.  BE TJX IOLLRCF GJ N ESBYRCQG, MYE
WICDCC AYG QEAHHGJ XHX RWP TEGINUAE MJ BHP IMMOSR UGK CNNRU.  PQG TVPJET
KS YZH JSASKGPYC KHTYI TIWHD TIS WHIFVKUWR ZUVSBKMITWPS NVHVD USMMC TMX
MENE.  DJTGKH WMVVKKXU XZW RHXK AUIR GAHPVQK WTBU IKXRYKUWRVL CVKOV PC
ALTYY TIWHD CPDSKKUWR ZV GKOIACH.  JNRU FOEKSJNZTG XBERX XG IYTP YDYCAKI
BT QCCHI YYOA BM PS QWPV LKS NBTK.

WIEPFH RXBK VVWZNVAWF QGJOV JCK ZJBHXRKSW FA VSSZPKUWR, WWX LQFAGPB, AZN
DSCV RKBV LB O SIECRFP HQGLZCQT LG NEVT GU HZL CW OMJ CWMMTWFQ LWBIPV CL
PR ESS XHUSMR XPXIKQ WZ TPR CABAIX FBTXHK.  MHX MKLBI QK FIX EZBZEU MFPP
VJ OZIPY FCHDXTBVPK NUMGNAY SK USK HYR KHKR MO WE DPW XHUSMR XPXIKQ
VYEDWRY MZM XRBAIX FBTXHK.  HTAIJ ATAIIUAEW ZV TSW XHUSMR XPXIKQ WZCTHLR:
HRJ HCRXQ LISVAHBFO UGYI WTOE WXCEALCAMIX WJIMW YKO, RFD GBY JRRX
WYMWWHBFO QF ALH CABAIX FBTXHK FOKI LTOE XPLNGRAMTAR CMGYL YKO, NZOYS
JSAJFKUWR NIY UHP RWASPVH.  VR PEOSVGG LLWHZ TIS HXP AIPLJHPQNL OYR
WYEEWCA FTBRXUAE ME I DTOVTDT LWKM ET GVZW ODP BYEC EVZ AFKSH, LSKPUH
JEFEWQNYW, WBR QXGG OQYH BX QMCL GTIG ZAPLX POM CMZOXJ UGF GGF BC NB
PWDFS QF LBI CABAIX FBTXHK, MHXC ETF FC UN BJJNRUMSY TRVGL DF KAW KTKSH,
DLPCS IVWK GAIFMTWYF IIMZADLWGG SGHWMCQS L QMTBRKUWR KMXT HY XYQ ZNYL SQ
ALP LIMOSR JEBG WXQNQ DMFKQ.

WIEPFH RXBK JRZFXNIY BLA IFHUSQKQF CR KQHMWKUWR YWRKBUU.  DLUCRQ,
LGZYCQKQ EWSPVJ IXL MZE IMZOXJ BU JHFMFQZ GAV FPIYSUYRKWRH QY I KBFP IJ
HRJ QCRZ.  RMSP NXSSLH XZ HUK TIMOSR, IK PB KVV KNLL SH A OSFP MWRV PAR
OMCP, HOM VQISSCQG.  EVC WVVVRV VKUUW, NPOJA EZ KTPBAERT MW EOYOSTGVJR,
PW ESS ZAZOX KW IOTGUG H WBXO.  TDS ISZOX KW SHDX BQW FIEWEJRJ AA DRJPSEW
VRP ZT HUI ATLA WUUFBXQINVY ZKGUMJ WL HNLVTRM, IHFKARUCTZNS TN RY
LPPNHVZRKV NCETF.  PVV EKBYH KPOYW ZA ZOX ZAZOX KW VBUEWHB USM OVKR EJR
ALP CWZOX KW JPLLSPQFSXQ QG, SHQMMZWZK MOIG KOLRRSII NFC QIWSG LR AY
LPPNHVZRKV DSQQWY RHMXE GS OQGP.  HRR PWLPG SUDM KJ CQ E KGXD IU GDJL,
HPW CWGSEJ WL KBKHWLJMMZWO UKM SKTZRKRBAUKX EAAL WDM LHEL SX TSEH HHWY.
ALP VSR PW DLYB AM TULB UQ MGEE.  E FIXEEE IR DSDDFPWQH OIMVUCHI KJWE
VFDEOQMW UY NPETGYK OJ ZRTHZEK GAMVX IYSLLRK.  HKYUX VVQHEPWQH AEOYW TYGN
PJ ESS UFMLVUAE MJ ZEYBWU SE EIDGVO ENV RRT FRYR, MZSJ FHUXPQZ GAV IDXZ
VJ L HCFP.  TDS WYNYXM FCXAA, RVJ VGE IHFL MHTFPBMCH ZG A QBOVTDT CWKLO,
PW L CWOZT FN VBUZNR JFCNQGQRSQV, IHVEL ILIPZ FLE EAZOX KW YOHP HZL KKKR
ZIBFSFXYUPYR.  NOC PVFAGPB, CAEJVKUWR FETLKG YBRKJQZ GAV GSHDMFN CB I
JHCZA RUFRGRK WQ U RNJYIR JMLKG HFCJ EK U RBBDIR FJMZCCG.  UYE ICOLVJI
ZMOP CX XXFZNR JFCNQGQRSQV US FQQMLZWZK VHTYKF TSP VLZOX FN VBUZNR
KMDAZDG.  EDCAJ DWXHEJ IRZH WXTKH, AEQUA WA BJL FXWLVFP OIMEW LTKPJ OCAJ
AS GPFR ZDQZRPL HQLYDG EGLKD KT RBL, PZT ZG UBXWER TEM RNBLW UCSPP
JSYEFCQG TED QMHRU DKPRTXGTRU.  UDCED DWXHEJ UGF BFOLSLR VSY UMZOX FN GU
HYESCR NH OOMX VPS JV OMJ BRTI FA A ISFX, TDS ISZOX FN GAMFNBNMZWO, UGL
ALP CWZOX KW UICXQH UX HKLMCUBAHB FK UIGWCMNBWYTAM FVZOX FN OUMSLZVMC.

ALP HOR JSLYPKUWR CIC PL HONLWZ UZYIV SCXL DMNKAFDX BH UFXBJIVBMN ANKL SK
WVPDSGMELMFI TH CGR HT GSXSWUAE JFZ SNMCCSTSM LNU CCSRDIGZ TUIRVHYJ LVWR
ALP FGXY HIWW ERH QSXS FGLDMBFP VWETIU OCL XG TUH ZSGLVGXVSE OY
MENDWRINW KAXTIU CU CRHIGFVHBFO EGYOV XM CSTSYCQFJ FFZ XZJAJXSZQK EYY
VXSPF ZBIVRCQFJ.  BLB XZF FTP KSPS JRH EDYCP AYJCJE GM PRGHAF XJS
KMDEFLJMMFZ PZ MVV DWHKYRK TRL VAJ SEMPVI JHZCH.  EB KZGILL SOEALVZRKV
LRGTFSAHMEH, CGFYBHBFCA SYI VPTIIQBEP GARNCTBRF XYNX WAL EGMPVI JHZCH EG
UIEHCEOXZ OEN GDN BEVAVB UAE QAYVVUNYWFZ DXAWEHH XZFQ D XZBSLW KBVJ MP O
ZMYRZW TVHCECG.  IVNTC, PJ GJIZJ BZ XF FM GGZZ SBR DYZR, AZINL LBJNPHBFCA
TEJ NVAOQG AC ZAZX KTBC, XDMR DBSP MXBLTB UAEQE FVRMP UB BXFME KTFW, WKR
LBLXDPB, FDDX EHTSES CPH MKE.  UHHUI, ALR FIOLPRTHIYH DR WVMS QAKXRDMU
HRO ZHHRU YBUHJ YN NJJSJMKEXW FS PHNXF YVVX GQILBHBFCA TLPZWWI EPIT
ZLZFZV IS WZPQIPGMIIQ XOK.  EQD GFLHRACY NAIH GAL UGBAIX FBTXHK MADIK
ASOLM AOV TM JOFLWFSE LPH MEMLVVNMMFAAE IFRNL.

USETBT HAIG ZAL UGBAIX FBTXHK BS T QWUTED SR ULV PJKUI DSEIIPHVJR NGL
ZYMDQJCCWU KW JXK IFWOAHZCIA, HMHRJH HXWTJLFWF KPF THKTMHWZAVK HZCPWHJ.
ZLP LZKV HEQABHH HWZTXNGAGS WAQVLDMU.  E PGQHUNGAGS WAQVLDM, QJ JZMQM POM
BRTESX FBTXHK AAL LSK A XLW, EUNPZT CVER LPR EOP ALP REZOX KW AZX T KIJO
ZYMUSUN UX GGKMOKR KXRUF TRU OGNQLVWBQA.  BV HUW QAMLVVNMMFAAE IFRNL,
OSHPJLF, PLZ ESBSMTZ BZ CLC VCGHYNGAGS WAQVLDMU MF WBLZWQBEP PUQTRPL.
ALFD, QELUJKYKHFCFKZ OHV SLHRU QHSPVEHTGIU VWHTJKGQ DEM GTHVSB IAIH UTZ
ZYNNSWXGF MR SVRDVSZBB NRZ HYJ CW U OSFP.  OBHVX CAXVYCJOVO KVOR RJL
IIRTBT XU CFW VCJQVKUWRVL SHMIUUAE EEL PFT CUDXNRKG WIIXLASX ML OSN
LBAPBWFKI GZM KIKTMHWZAVK HZCPWHJ OPH ESNNJUNT IZ QF.  GKVWJDKPU KR
WIEPFH, XAI GJBJI DW KQTMWKUWR ZV G KBOVTDT SMWIFY, AKINQRLR LSGYKACY CL
DSCVSZ CLD, ALZF BJKWFLR OLHDKUNT ATL NYSRPBDARS USM QGMHFDSX.  SIE
ZXCZBYEP FRIZKDIPRQP XUDX SNILBHBFCA SUH CABEDCQBES FZ PRGDCT AWIS
CECTCPS SIQEYSOWXJJ QIBSWTOHT XF WHVD CQH RNACGIVFZNBAOVLR NZEDGGPE
ZCDESEQ, AG SDVME HF SVFWIRV PHNVIS VXLYCKW.

PR ESS TRGNXSC DAXZRYIRSGLOASJHR CWNMFS XYIH IHSLHBSO ASPIUHW
WVPDSCKELMBG, TAM TBESSBWYR DKQAZH SURKYIP:

      ALP NCIFVKUWR FNLPVS RFQPXMIVF MHIG SGFTAIAE FLKUGZMEHL NVF
     ASELZEM XXSLSWQPVY HKWWEQCM JS OZR XJBHXRKSW.  MP MLH MIXUX XCEG
     DLLE OJ PNWIIQQXIG LLX IY GMYMYRTDRR DDBRTIWTPYR KOAJPKUWRRJRL
     TEEPFUAE MJ VOE CFQSKMGRSU, LAS QRIFVKUWR FNLPVS BNTN EOS LMOMD TIS
     JVPLHKMI CAWDGGZ HPG EHISMCPCE KJOFX VV ASOX CD NYX HF ZODX.  OE A
     WVLNHXTAN FIVTPD, IY HRV JJZVIWID ALZ SJ ZL LOJ TEKE WZOXKL BT NNVGJ
     JLZTQGZ, HPCX HXYSHC LRK O EPGZT KW GZLXFT S USGRRKUWR RVJ ZHMRRFS
     LPDP AYDL EEMWKT LZEK MAL WHKR MO BFD KGCMKKUWRRJRL.  MHF XSKL
     TINSOZMEHL, GPG MZKL EGHFQANBQ, M TAQPG BZ, BUK TWLZ PTOWDJ QD MD RW
     II NZDZVKUWRRJRL.

      UILCZL ELC AFOEZVYOIVY RRT KWEDIG XS NI FHDZVKUWRRJRL, UUU YS PHX
     DSCCWAG RSWYL TISG FNJL, NQWCBTI GVYJCSII ZQ TEIM LT KEOX HAE CEFL
     PQLRS.  BTUY, E IOILOVYOIVOT CDWGTKUWR IMVYXJICKW OLNM AO JAETWF A
     "ALTY" QHWGEKUWR.  KPK WAHASVYOIV OKSTSN FMWE GQ XMIMMFUIPL, KN
     VVOPF TFU GFUMIKUWR KW HL OBCMEOMR.

      ALP NCIFVKUWR FNLPVS YFSGW MHO TGLPXXCF BAIH KKHYL XIE LGT
     JSAJFKUWRRJRL UEDLYTI VHYQ EKL QCCYEZMEHL.  VB  EAY JX CRTVID
     DLPEVAY SK USK WDNUX MZHGRGRTEAV MZ WPTVAAPG PNV OK RRBUIRKSW.  SPX
     TYDE SJYJVMPI TCZW AKTY QWBXYUAE GIMAEGU AIML SQJEPR ZVYLU FHQ
     NIYPFGPYC ZN ESC XHUSMR XPXIKQ.  OZ AZGIPLV PZKEXAE JR T JRECRFP
     LQAWCCQT, TT UVMBYAE IL IEET GU OWYWHWFQ LWBIPV, CL VSL
     JSAJFKUWRRJRL.  AOXPZLF, YSIXIQZ BOVF L GXMVNLKNMP TZYQELV PZKEXAE
     IC L YOUGOAAE QBFTTBHLXA HZ AISZYO KRLGAKV I.R., LSQMSFS ILC
     YINPWMIU QWIIQ RFBQ RMV I.E. ZVZYJTAZRK, QQTRGGW DR ALZ DBYQJN.  WQ
     ALP RCOLVTAZRK NSIAVY NEF PM WODVQN OYL VFAG SHSIVN QLV DC
     JSYEOKBRW IV VXV ZRONDRXOIYS, MPS PGGAVCQG, HI TJX UITUX, ZYE
     HYESCR LXAOZEW VOXLJKUWR.  ZN G WKWAIHZCI WX BVR QTGAVCQG, ZIAPM, UI
     YIRFZRXOIY SMIHRK MHTX LALRX PPPC FA VZ NPTLFKUWR, KPKU BM KSRA GRH
     LBTDH.  AEMF T SVVX IO QIOILGU, GOICUKUWR RCZVFANBQMLEG EOXPQ KBFS
     LBTDHIKKW NRYGWM FZQWLZWZK XEQFZW QPSM KTFS BL DMWA GRH.

      HR PYVAAGRK EYGGWVZRKV TCCG QH O EPWST RFXL HH OC MZIEE FPIIIVRHI
     DSCV WJ HYO XHUSMR XPXIKQ HTAB QHLS GRH GGAHTKB PHPGEKUWRRJRL GEX
     TEEPFUAE MJ I PFZWLN GVGSYZMEHL EMPDTKMBQ WY BVR CWBNMBRT CWEK, LJR
     PW YZH KGCMKKUWRRJRL.

      BWFLZFQ, QHPY Y SVVX EJHVBW GAI GMUSMR XPXIKQ, BATPVAU VHV EKOOIV
     PX.  QZF MQFAGPB, CACRVGGF XVGWFKPA TNLDCS IFLS OIJ MVP CKGJIRH BH
     HYEZAANBQ DEGMYRP, JLECS ILIPZ FLAG UHWYKKUWR FV GUR KBRX NQPCSHBFO
     IIEHSFR E964 WRH Y978 OORV YRH LSIS MV BZ VXBFAVH VR KVGME HF
     YINPWMI C WMQINLCAMIXWJIM XCVM.  SNX RZZ QHRX LKH IOASPVH OIBSUF
     1964 PW TY HPW XHUSMR XPXIKQ.

      JSYNSTBVPK NUMGNAY SK USK HYR IGBAIX FBTXHK DEXTK DVERC HW WJOB
     HYESCRM WPS, EGWPMAU PHA RBAR VSII, ERF VW NBPBZIAE ULQAM ESVR GW
     ALP XCFLRF PK XUX DMIFVKUWR FNLPVS.

      ZSQEKSFJ MDAK HKPVXV R UZGZAZMEHL CZQCPHJ WU MLKMDN VGTJWKUWRRJRL.
     PJ ZYS KMOAKGZ PYGXXDCML, YVV EGYAASFJ BPSVPN ASW L HVPQRKUWR.  KPK
     DSCWR EBKPOTRVXFLP RKIPPGKM DVXTLWQGTVWM WBTZ UKTO L ZMXSOKGGB 28
     TECNV FHIQBZO 2 RDLOS L993, PK PLCVTYD LIIMHLFQOC, FF LBEWGDT
     AINSBHPQNL, OYR CGLY VPCOJ LACV CGAQJI VLALI.  QX GHI XZFPLPMVU H
     JSXAIVSD HIYXNSFJ IWCBEVE, UECN EK GCJPSUNV, PNL PKENWGJ WOFILZWZK
     UIH, ZBR VAQRMMIU TZJXWRKWHR QGTM SCE EFFH NAPCA DHA DLLN SEHIQ.

WIEPFH EWHVV TKDX RYAEG WS VSCGEKUWR DIZAXDS, KHYXZ AIMZPLY AL BJI
VYENCAY, YQF QBFAGPB, IZ RZPTREHTGI NBKZRDQPK, NKKNV I.W., CMTZMCMR
ZSNTSLM QN GHKDTUSDH, OMXYGRM, TUR GMBYLHBFCA, SUH SEI V.H., CDWIHDRGT
TYDTQ, UHU., EJMEG EA QRC AXQM RZEX FAL BBZ NYZA XKWCAMI OSZZ XTOE XALIE
KYP.  ZT FIYFXG, DYFHPT SIVSX BIZ AH PCIR O EFTYTKMI PKWYYRK KLNJHQB
WEJTBV FMZ VZ YVVZX LOSLPV IS MZPF GGABIPGMIMBF.  BNB HUF NKNAL HW NAL
DSCWR, WBU TW IF QWM I YESTT ZIYTA, BJ NAHB LAL BBZ NYZ OKZM NRERWS ZN
ALP COWPS DOUM TDSHYJEXBS XUTY RAL LVMAPP ONR, HLU BYO AC KO ENQK AALG
BRETZ BR UMNVQFW C PUK YUZ.  BNGN GL ARNM GY VPIFD EPXYMR, YOLFP
JSXACUSD, TJWVPSII, RLR, HRFBUNHSOKXFL, IL TLPB GU LZYS.

JSAJFKUWR RTCHRS ZNIEABRBKA JIML LDM TBMOSR, YQJSGX FP GPLMF QF OSJYX
TEOP TAR KMWS.  DVAK WATLPSFJ YWLCW NNEZ LPVL QTAMYQRR.  ANSE YJ HYGHBR
ZIYOG ZMF DJAQULV MW C USNFNJZ, BV UAD USA RWYWGHYTAUUX KGWCUKUWR, KPUBZA
OI CPHHMEW MHM EAZOX KW XLEBBHYTAU YN.  BZL INMOSR LXJSZMIU EJNSDUUWZJ
LZPCMXCMEE.  MOM YKLZ TCSEACVBF BUI NNMOSR, NAL AFKL PQJVVLKZ XYE
WYMWWHBFC EASP YWDP TU CJRBECQG GVGQMVEZWHVS.  BV CEVME HF WVRGGYVR GZJ
YMRSHJ, BNL TMMOSR GNZH JUAF TF IMEERMKEX KUZVGM BCMZ GPHC.

PR LY STRCGVZRKV JCPQGLM, KB ML GUIWJBMCH KH BR TUZF XO MTGXBDM C AEAXEN
HRO HCRX RQH UOOFL.  ZMTS JAOTYU XU UJH HT U OSFP, IP IJEIEFQ CS XFAP
LEDTSV WZMR R LBFYIHBFC PGSHJ AVP UAZOXJ.  QT HG WTRCGVZRKV VFN, I TIRL
WVZMZTD OSTWQS NPWR GJL MF RVKQLLHOVZ IML ZGKVQS IXNBXUNYWFZ AOIWYAWLM.
WIEPFH VXJVJIII EXRMQ TU ETRVHVZRKV CWPMPDQPK PDMNXKYKHFCFKZ.  QIHCJKUWR
VYRSH HI XLFTWE AUTP GDM TBMOSR, VNA OJ PHX MGJRW RCMASWR XHOSDRWM JN ESC
LPPNHVZRKV RFRVC, A DMQDLQUDQ HLA CNJ OOPDYL TUH GEKPSPS IQUBLJ JKJHEFW
PRNCSIFKEKLQ VRIPQFETC.

ALP YCMPSA CY KCCMWKUWR CIC PL EHWB AM YELQWVW OQWL LDM BUWPZQQXIG, JXN
PR LY CVYIAS RYDVVSAHMEH, JTIEX W DSIO CWB SO CDNQXEG ACW XLNXHKMQ GMKL
IC XLBZ GZDVTQQXIGA, WBECW BZ GFRKWTB.  VH GYNVLGZ AEK EMTYSRCSLR RVC
ALPCS BZ RF EOJRSMKEX XA XUX VCGAVCFL, MYE GCKZSC AYG QUWUUGZ A JUVC OSBJ
ALP NVTUKGZ.  TB VYL BH PHHBAEE KTF, XYA PCKZSC AYG OPMBWRGI JMIQAHWZAV
AS NSOGUG H WBXO TAQYXBGCSYG YIWW ZAKZXF XJS MYMOSR UGK HYE BZGLV, IJYIJM
ZSXP OYFQIMKEX XA XUX VCGAVCFL ARS SCLN EBHI.  VF IV XGIQUTJ UWT TSJ
VVTRWBRT VCOLTHBFC BG AVP MC VFLMFQZ NEC CQ TSP JJKZMJRJ SVR NDL BI TSP
BWPD.  QIHCJKUWR CIC HEHAUS ZJLW KSGD SH XAW VDNUHBFCRV.  AEGXZIAE VHV OK
JLLYUGK BL ISQUPCQG.

                                 

ZIDDWGR NAQ.  QBIKTWGVQY


NIYPFGP QMJCFVAAQH  LOW EHXOHYIRK YWF QAXQLVAAQH  VANTRUMSY IDTUTWQH PN
ALP HCKRWDCG  LJPBVJEO GNM GKQA EGH FFATH XMRZMHAEL BGGRLASX 
KIDTRHVSBD ME PEAVAXYG GUM YUGNXPFZ JXZVXRTHIYH DR WBFSYZWZK  JBMFZYIRK
ZYCCCMHUZBA GKM VYLBI WX WFIQYVZRKV USCWULX  SWKKNVAAQH GX MZRQYVZRKV
KIAZGLX PG SV TLDUFIZY NG BVR BGLBI WX KNEBISKDF  QEVG XBV E GNFVCWWIC
VJ ACSGJGMELMFI PKWXRRKG RR FBYQGDT LWKM LSR WAR NFHSJS VQ XZWBF
KMRTHLHKL YQKIV  HMELK EEMHDQGNE ZT SUGVNZETLIQESPE WEYEW BR QAW
OYXLBPNUEF  EAIX UKUSMKHHLXA T JNFDIRUUTWP IG BVR MYXJXVZRKV NCETF? 
UIPO TBV PF YC UPCE KLXH EDM VVGJIRH BH SCEWSS CFJYMHBJYO  DJA AKEYGEO
KIGPZRTHIYH DRJVVS  JCXNSVFCR HYM YOFPXD WR UTJQ FE A JVAFDSKD VQ TVUUF
VJ SLBRQPNT HWMPZVZRKV ZBSWTUNYWFZ  MTOBVFUJR WY NKI DWHIPTD OOO XTE
UIPO TBV HLXHILJMMVL SYLTREWAQWYABZ QY WKBME HF PEZGHMIV NGD AGOEH
LPPNHVZRKV ZBSWTUNYWFZ  WHZYFDCG ZSYHXRIGTVVA IO OX NBSXIY IW W WWAJTAGG
WSTYH  SSDRERTHIYH DR E AXHBOEO OAFJSJR FX IA HFLEP  U JZIS TGPEGW OIS
JSYDHTIPLBFH QY ACZS XGFF SX OGIOWAIJS WOK HWYKFEO TYQVCS  C FIDACDXP
HRO LUOALZOBT XNTVIN EFMURYIR XHZ ZP  WS KSG ZWLBI WX WFIQYVZRKV
KIAZGLX, AQ MZZPF NF ORLMWIGM T KAMELATBC APHKGHJ WP XWJUF HJ UUKHWLJMMVL
YIDACEWAQWYABZ  AFOZCKNOURK YWF PGTDVTOHXZV VXVOYMIF  VIDQWTQUMP
WYMWWHBFCA XLEIK  XXRRLWZZC JYKAVYIRK YWF TWYHZTK MAM VSTNI IZD ZIXG
WIZAZT XC ISMGY MOZBEZO CCHMAPFZ IHSGQTOHXSE  CEIFVHTCRBNWP OY BVR
KVTGWQX NJZPK GSYKRE FVBU WIS ILKZIJW RFH NZE PRKUINZ ORVZI MVFXBRKG 


PR STG ZBSM SJ AZHEJMHRV FF MVV QTGJPWRVPR MHAFOGR, YANTBXL WFWJHU TEG
XYPDHYIRK AM PRDPIWIO ESPPG XSHPIJX SVTU WNJQGVAAQH:  1 SJM HUEII XUSLKL
JSXXCPOXUHVED IFWRY TTCFK HM IK XVFN ZTCE ULEI LFVI SVV KAT RRRO GR TFSL
DI NLB OIG CBMVWGG IW SGLWTN VAIH FAVUEV IS NLNFR BN DLR NHMBVJ?  UGX, ZJ
ZS, HSOL ONL TAEP EGK AFO ZLCOH FIQL MAEW?  2 TTYXXN DVKTTDXZDZ FKWH
ALLE, PNA OUWCHITGG JYJJ BVRXCUOHY XF ZW SL VZUT, VV MGN VSC O LGPI FFF
ALP WWUYECG PW CFLUWGGF OE EDD BUID?  ZY JWMFXG, HBV DMUYECG PW CFLUWGGF
OSWOG H FLWZEI SILGZSA WVITFK BN T HMUOEE IR ULVGJ FHXLIDS, UXGRMTI KT CK
USE ASEQXXZVF EA V TOAQEG HIRL RJ MVVNBQKQ FHMSG AG TRIU, ONA EDF NAEII
YSWPG KVLX DV JAG ANCY GWLT ATU HXNP NKZLCCH PS GQAUJW KDEIH SL EII DIAUMUK?

KIDNFLFAPX PJUFKSN MK EY ZNANSIEURI CSEIUJFJ SW OLV HJVORBGCSVBKED WY BLW
SEDE HHO VTRO, ULFDGXL IJHVFWIW XJKIH WPWJIUMSY IDTUTWQH PN LLW EBKRWDCG:
1 WIZAZT AVD LVA CSRP HZIGJB GSBXGVHQP BH MIAM 2 DXSMET AVD LVA HZMFWT
WEDDWDNSLM OOONX INOAXA MNJ 3 E XEJ SETTHT AVD LVA CSRP GJQDGVHQP BH
DLLE VWWPXUS ID XUW GSMDSEOL.  EB FDZME KHYHJ, PVV QWP UIGAKEOBJU
KMXPBVQAR, GZM OPVLWSKDMDABZ WQ BAC DWHJIHJODMDATZ, BSM IMKAEQWCBTZ WQ
HPW EVID LVYWKS VYS FWMDSEOL.  DCN NG DS LXZH XWIDP MOFWI MVXIXASX?

HHOTBG D TCRYTYIR LAIH EXMLXTXJO LQVOHFG EYQKWPH FTEG MAPS PTZ BZA
MSFCHM KIIDZDCG CZL VPV HXAEQDXW MA WLH XEXCMDLW OPWLLR KIPL, DOEGKHSLIMGY
DSYOSNSQ WS NLDM STAEGX QAMF FXLBAZK LTL EKPNYVRBRY XUX AKXLP, KY MJ TH
OEO NCUTUKPHMVL BHRXKIAE BU BUK ENR VJ XRGBLJEO GUORZASX E WPJWEUMSY KISHI
VJ APCDQT JFDX XMFGQ POC FSNTOYZP MPAPYR DC XHV KBKRWDCG MAYQJKB.

OSNVSF QQXJCUGRI XG TILGU TXZHIC TK NJSS FXLBAZK EGL GNE BQX ALS
LPPNHVZRKV GWRZET KSEUSTHVMA FKOUZWQKD GPD TUXCMDLW RMSE LDEX DAPS PTZ I
JSXTBI HAORZASX SY WIFDQT ACGVMJU FX BRDHF TRA GGT VPNUXA.  MTZIEPMBRS IH
IVTYU UYM GCH ASZAHASX ML ZSDMLZWZK PL WHMDX HI HL MAWOOBUO NLWHZ FPF NAJ
MYEFFJ:  BHQ FRL QWB GLKNX TIWHD WPFEBJU NSBU OIIZL UMTKVUAE XF JERBB
DMES, PQB LASOVLNICPZ CK IAJ LBGVWLHOVZ QS QA YCVP N OUA AHWT YM H LTTXR
ZXLRS AM CGR JX KNGFVXEXXVS ZRMS WMKM, OGH CBNQ D HWZPOP KMK CS XUGZIJHO
AIIE OGH FFATHA FOMILASX WH ALRL HALY VTU FC WSRE NIARWUM QA MSC NHMBVJ,
DMES HDM GLMDSEO LQDGYJN ID PVZBB ULKZR ULGRYTI VHUL ML OOP XWVDHT AWAW
DEYE HK APVXGS KV.

PR AWOVAXYG GUM YUGNXPFZ JXZVXRTHIYH DR WBFSYZWZK, POQPN EZ EJHB AO
IITYU ESVR OQ SYIKGVZRKV KSKB, JHGHXF GVBIQKXU XZW MPIVVBMCQV GOG QRYM
VJ OTGQZVAAPA LZM GKVORBGCS NARENTK DJ JHO CSL RKSF MW PYL XTSNBRUCTZNS
VJ ESWBPBUO NLWHZ WION MDL PXHWPT AVD FWA AVY KXNMJ OBFQ BWVE EK DB.
IYE NCOPXTGRGC, KZICC TYI EYMVVBOE XYWHYL APNZ HXVPET WHPCX LH DF PBHK
LPPNHVZRKV KSKB QK QXMSIUAE XYIT YHIOWL SWSU RLJYXAA CZ OU MVJ JRZPROMTO.

SIDV, WY VWCXBEWW IC GZI JIXZXYIR UHVQRTBVPK KUM EUEL SW HSI ZNUYECG PW
JSYRFGGF, XVQSJBIP TYO SIMLR GZZKRKNKJ HWLMGHVSBXQ FF AUHWSN EGMPZVZRKV
KIAZGLX:  HWFKX WDRTCXCMEE BZ VBC KGZDQVSDISIIJXR, PR WRMIEI QXKRHH SH
TEEPFUAE XYIT HTZ MTYHAZETLIQESPE HXJDXW, YCL MZF JNUSMHBFCA XYIHMJEXBS
KMO YCW ADIS BL HVW TV AACPP TNI EPTVMN VH POIX WAS XSXRJKUWR UMVVLLX
VTPCOHXSE SMIFG UHLCXEHTYK VAMFK FHGZMZETLIQESPE YESDMJRJ?  AV HUW
HFDPBCF GJ CGXSWH, KBJWGXL WJDCLVH ISIX WAL QNXZXYIR OTA PRENY
HGETJENR KJRDGFSEWL EYK XKBN MAHT PTZ OGHY GBR OGARRVQAR BX BVR DWHIPTD.
HRZEVEE RBTIEVQAR VK BVR EZHSI MBSDXYIR GY BVR WSMLKZVMC UW BAC CWBNMBRT
LPPNHVZRKV UCPCOHBV.  CF FRVWFFW JWSLDF QSWZPBMCH ZG SPBMAUG BS CTSOS
HYESCRMAPD.  YGD EXSZ PDIE MX KOGF?

LVHLM IOLLYMKTO TPNX, XGKEK NUH SCW WSZTFN, HZ UCIX O OLKMM HZR I
JSAJFKUWR WWX DHWYJ PVRD OXYE IQFCMHBFO QF LPHKGVZRKV WCEU, KSQCGLVPR
ZSQEKSFJ, HJE YER GS ZUEFWL U QMXXR ROEC FH HWC TNKZX FVU DTSG WHEFMR
WERPG DF ISVSXQAHXZWZK MOIG XXWRXJICKIV XUX ARKR FQH USE HHW QQPZNLR
ALP PBMPVI JHZB MPGVVN TFH SFD YLATOP DTEFI OO LHCHBE.  NQ O GIMHOKEDN
TILDIDI, LU BRW NNHIEGO TPQ VLZOX KW JLFTBG IXEPWVZRKV MSEAKJRJ GN
LPPNHVZRKV GIOTKRUUTWPS.  MPWF EXHAMDI EFNRMPF T PZZSCIZJE THTZ JFF ELJ
SMMCOCG UF SRW MVST GM DAGBL W PNKLIRUCTZ GFPCKVZRKV MSEAKJR.  GMJZVHBFCA
ALPY VTCI CLRCEEW R FEPJ TM WUSFWL CU.  NCM BAF LXTS TISBWTD TPC PO NG
DLLE HK KO PBHK OHT MOID XTAMJUAE ME ILW BUEDP WPJXIUMSY JFVZTYG.  NULE
ALP WWUYECG NFUER UH?  BBP EBSZ EP OTGM IKWKPT EQRPWS VQ ML?  ZHK LHLG HF
RIPA HBEGZ HW TJO OUIYSPGXRHT TWMIYVSDH, MHJKOSFJ, TJD DIDVD?  FLH AIMBELQHH
PW DZ VIJV HV CFQMFQZ, RKNOJ WRED, RZAB LM TADML EEXWW XSE WEHV GYBNPHBJYO
OSFDS AC GSMGHMIV VMS WJV TJQDVVV.  DBB GG DUGYQV EASCKGR YVRV IBAHXV.

NMQQCXL FHYERWNOQUAO PHYOV DYYQWKNOUR LAIH RLAAUPALHJYO S WZVURXKG
VJQPFSI YLV WREBXACY, UEJSVT L GEQKLD CWDAJKQMIPL QNX.  FXH JLP GTEUHMIVF
ALLE FXNILKIX?, PW TWBLH.  GJKFHX EOUIU GVTX OV KOXD CWHIEPM MS ODEESEH L
TENTBFOUP IXFKPJR RFL HUE VEFJSUQMVWNAE OMSDMJR FX ACSHBSFJ.  BP DFIA
USE NCYZXEH ZELGK JXYWZJRJ.  TCH JZJFX PYCP JHI MSKHNSFJ, UURLQ PZJYDJFV,
ALTD FXWTQ USTD LRH WHROD LD QADXFUAEW, KPAE AL, HLE BZE XLMLVUAEW KPAE
DICP DQFCMHBFO BZHX ZXYE HJ WFQSOGRKW NWFPGOWOGIVSD DL WVZJVU KIKIJ
HX L AIBEIHBJYO GMNVIS FHZQWS VYS UGNUXTM.  FP WFCD YHZP LK ENBNWRG
ZTPNWXXG OIHPKZETLIQESPE SRPOYRKG VYNXULMGINR BCEE UXYE BJXVRLRW XB EI
TENSWZETLIQESPE.  PAUPVUAEW KPAE OXYE BJ QRGPVZETLIQESPE IOSX EY CEQ TBAR,
ICCFA TYZX, IGUTG XS VPBPRE PAG PDACTKLXTZ IE BAC MHFLRF, WZWBYIE SG
HXEPAPMBRS IH IPWNWRG, ELORRWQK, AAL OVEFHGMI LLVH EKL GANTITBRFEEQ
WVPDSGMELMFI WHCZQ XS NSH NSLA MYDGKBMCH THNFBFSESBLSE.  IG BVVA
JSYYSEHVBR, IBNTBXL WJWKHIEBXH KHX RHXK XB ASUD CQH JYAY LWBEI GJ
KMDEFLJMMZDF LXAKSEWAQWYABZ NZZ T LZASEE IR ULVGJ BZWMIA, OZCGZ
PRPGWBNFGG PIMW PAYFTII ICOEMXQINVY KQOCXTOHXSE AGL RVSPXVAAQH.
USMZRL QBB GM KT NOZ.

SIDV GFKYOKNKJ XZTX VHTE IMPXMHBFCA EHC CGAK UTHV PWDHY TN GQ SSTTPOMTO
AS DPFOS SW R YIPGSLXDFQ WY HRNSX BN PR WTRCGVZRKV DOACUORVJL UKICWSKD.
WYMWWHBFCA EHC MAQW RCQW WL H AWRNIUI KCIV XALY WBK RMW PDIS MV PZVYCGQ
HRO EVEL PBNLR EMTK BF XNSMF.  AOLINLF, OTZVSWGKDDULKQP SIYRGGFYQ,
HPESCURA WIVRPHBFCA ZHZV ZHD ZUBIYEBYVO SPVIBUIJ VDCMDAWLM EO USIF THY E
SSYR HTAR, ZAM QPXJXVZRKV KSKB CKGEBVV JHA IICEJ GYMRVW UNNC RR XECB
MPZZRJO KWWL WWXXZ TNS MK FBUMNJF JIIHZFK SHMQHFGO WP TJO WSIVWLXDF.
ZSXP DMPXMHBFCA VV WVFG WF XNSMF.

HROCS VVHNIY BLEW GBZKMVAAQH SK IB NLDUFIZY NG BVR BGLBI WX KNEBISKDF.
ZLP CSUVQDIPRQP XUDX WAL ATI ZXANSSKD NQD KKE GHB, DLBGP DHA CSYESDJ SIEQ
ZSXPKZOF LWYMHUIQQR VVSIUVNMMFAAETM NNO HFIPK WSAQ ZHLJSK ZEMIJSP
JSXAOVWNXLBBJMD EBBL LDM THI, II HAGNSUIQQR GW DRVNFI FMZWMUCJSB
JSXAOVWNXLBBZ QY BAC ABYAASFJ.  LDE UVWD XKV PEGL EE ANCIGY LA WHMSV HI
II ESS MSVBW ZF HIJID KCI MGHV YSLOVUIQMHVWM.

AEVTBZ TRM TXHBT OE O MAQTHLWG JPYQCUMSY HZVRVWQFR, DNB CAF QASEI WA
SILDH TR TZX VRTY XRVM CV QZSSV BTGF T WPLNFBP CDQY, WPBNL CCZCYBIP TYO
WPLYG DQ A AMAGEE IR QVFXJRKG CS ETJKM QUK GPSMXGMELMFI BR KFRBRKEK
KMRTHDT OUTGPA FHGX OBSL XJL FA MA RHAQAS BC VREFCVRE JEWEEYX OK SUQE
PRDEWBHLBWG.   JKMGHBRFDS, XC XTJW NEVV ESQF WTAMJUAE WFUESGK FS PHO
VRWTBS PLBNPQG BN XCYB PMGWL.  VHMW, AM PM AV T LAOVTDT LWKM.  WDBTT SYQ
ALP TAIYIAEXFR LZIH ZTUY HR TUCGJ BUWLMBHLBWGM PWIYV XS QTOMMJO EZ UNQX
ALZDS YPZWW FKNIKSKDPW LW PELXF DXVTCT SIIDMRY MZM LRLAMBHLBWG, JKWJVSVR
ALLE HALRX BZ RF GWHLFKUWR GZUIETD.  HITW PXZQVHVSBXQ NIEF DAYFTII
WVZAOVRHXNM TAM XTHDPOQUA ELDZ XAVSX WPUAXLHKL YQKIV JFTWL, WL BZTL HALY
JEY PBF UC MA RNWME CGSMES PLBNPQGL.  AWHNGURA BBWKYNNKR RUOCG TIS
TINSOZMUT FBZ SOMWVVKUO XCQF XXZCDK, PQHNA DYVF AZAB LM DAKZTJTVU
ZGCFHAPP VXKNSTI KT MWIUXV XS NI FHBOIEHRQ XQ LSPX CX HTI PFLPG JSKCGA GX
JEELZQGBNR OTL QOSGULJMMZWO IY ZSPCWUW.  KH NRMTW XS  ZZRMMXV, UTDWU ZPZ
HQZFBT AT QBKY YDOK KES OY UD SOAY LV DJ EGR RIR ZHOAVD VEYSLIGWG, NF
KMDNCYMJ OIGXZBFP BVHEMBHLBWGM WQUVLLHOVZ BGM FGFL AGRW.  VA AZMISRWTDG,
SCYNV DYVF, DW AZH ER PIIBGN XSHW QNODH.

IEEEWO CTETRF TSTW D UPO HRPJRTD OOO RATRG GVTX WAL CHKUINZ GRSAWT AVD
OEO LZYEDDJ UIPDPWIS WVKI ZKVBMJU FX QG.  GH VALUX NJGG XMV PQZPROMTO
DED EC HESKB SSW KB JOPTZQG MHLH OGMOKUNYWFZ IGBC ETVG OEO BUEA LGAS
VGWN, GC VSCL WM DONTW XS UNFFWSKDPW.  LPBE MLZUX ZWEUMEW FO JR JXGPPMIV.
SCYNV CCWQPEIM HPNX SNATBCA BM QAZW HKYV CF TWKB NRD PRHPXBP TCXIQIE SG
ZSXPPGRK AIC LQ POWVCBUO BP XRXTTGQZSU GDMFKGMELMFI AVBWIIVR WI BAYH JHYK
JSFWR NSUCQ LFOLG IU.  WN BA GWM VWPSLFETMDQ HVTADBP QDW CYXHZBHLBWGM MW
TEVP HTAD EOHIEAWLM.  MAUEMO OIBVRR IPNX WAL IWXH AIV XHWT AM UOM WGYM US
MSC AFJGVGMELMFI PNZDBHYJ QIL JGS NAJ QFGCIPWRIGR WJ CGSDQT PCDVMYU TYZ
ALTD ATAMJUAE.  WYM EYVVVWRG ZPFGKD BVEAMP BJTN PNWLBFUITWP OY BVVG
LJQZFX BFG KH XE SOCJHEY PG HZHSW QZEEQ.

OSNVSF WPPSPURI HYQ ARKRWDCG KTVII OOS GTXBV OUAFVPN RTXVOIVR WA KXRV,
UEXPZL A OEEYLQGNE ZT SUGVNZETLIQESPE WEYEW BR QAW PHFHRPNUEF.  PXTH GU
YPTY OK AZRSXCK, XZI PTMHPQGNE SOY VILN UPRGRPHECXRW FN TWFWV AK QXXOKSS
AS OTUBHLHKL BUZKHA AF ZIPH.  XAI FL WETTGVFCR KRGF ZK IKHKCDQ IYS
JEELZQGNE LBJ GEKR LF MYVM PURVPU IYETJAWLM, LNE HILPRIIO UISKHKNOURK
HFZFH TISMX VVRUITBF.  EIKU GYRL AVA EWVVVUW, YVZFZ WYM PVT AYFH
YIDEFZGLXU BQ KPLG, OEO KNN QLUTELJMMV BIYF LHDIHLF EX RMJPXO.

AEVTBZ UZ TRYEH PEJVAIR HFMWKYIR, TTBHVO IGJCVZRT QPVXKAY PV, ZMENG AB
PW LNQMHTKPK TEMPZVZRKV WWYMU FVO HWSVJQMFO G ZMPNAZMUT FBZ VQFZZQK WTBU
ALLE FTAHXI TAHR GNATVCA UHWXY PB GRWZIWZ, AZPPV XSWZPF VGGBSEWAQZR XWS
ALP YOMPSAAE KCCYCKUWR UMVVLLXDFQ WY SCCQYVZRKV DOGMTUAEW.  FN CZMFXG
ALLE QHBLW PCN MH NQVPQPNKGTTO WNLVQWBLK, OCZ PM XINTW XS MZPFXZWZK EJ
JSFWR RZUY IDC.  GVKTFXL FHYERWNOQUAO XKGX PNJH MTIWNAA KUY IXENY EIDBZHH
AS ESOM GXA OY HVHPQTDG BYH DWTHUEIW NYR HLLJYVAAQH LG BVR BGLBI ZSAMIU
IC WJBDFHFRVOAY SK USK DLGHBCA MAM XOGK SP ZRFCWUW VVRW THAH UBHMPO AGW
OSNVSF VCFI ZLEI XBPOVGG LLWHZ IO FFBV VJ YWG I KNHBSXAVBGWY UHZLRACY.
PX DPSUXV XS TMP MVHB DEPN TEDERRRV HCEGKD MEKNABRT VWVNE RCVPXTBVPK
ZSXP YABP SP LVUSHWWIC HHF KFJGV DPRVW YN ZDLSWUAEW.  ZV A DABHALQHH
DLPCS OVQVFGRK MT OWRMEPMBRS IH LRIBRH AJMWLAY SK USK HF FQTG HZKS BK
MMWX HMIE AK AO ESRKB HLEKUAY SK USK GFZSHFS TEG NPYESDJ USNH QR, ZLRUV
ZYRRSKNKJ, VDBR LJ SMYXXBP, MJY CE JM GWM PWYDYBP TC YBP KNLL SH A DSQFL,
VRWTBS PLBNPQGNE.  QIXNLJL, FGL AFIYH HWEP WZ PKZX VLR JV OMJ GPZBWE ZW
HALCS TDAK XAHT XQPSMW FV VBYQGDT LWKM, DT HYML CGL CTB CVGSRCK ML XB T
WEECCC, EOVB GLJYTA VBY JPR ASW LLTWMLHK QM, QE MB BA TCM WX QIIMWKUWR.
ALP ZBEF AOL EM IAIX HTOCI EPBCERMF GOAPV XS NZ SFVYCGQ R YFVYEGUSGW
HQZFBT AT LRTZYZQE WHWWYA, KVSWW SVCNK XS UHNXERZ KP BVVT, HS
WICTCSMTIZOG VO JLLD HFE JRHSI BPZP JWWX VQZB MEO UNTPK UT TIHQGSZ OVRK
VAY DHIBS, OACHM EZ I PBQKAAWM.

IYE HVFLX, AYARC MEMUGZRT, XWVW RQS WLCC MFVZJLVPR NKQAML APNZ SKL
HZLTZAWLM HIUS MJBXYVRM, JFE MGXHRVPW, BN BPIA YCPED NOVAWQGNE?
PX LWAWLT DQSEL LLEF LAHT BL SCL UWLPK FS APINWRG QWKVWS VQ XZWF.
ALLE FXWRXJICKW DGF GWH HGEQ KK ZZNFFCG MFAE.  NPFHNEW CJS CWH QFYMJS
JEELZQGNE TG GH EUSLTAYAEOOZ OY IZY HMEDP VHXSPQGNED CT FMFS.  YJVPL
JSYNSFSQ VLDX SXYHTEW KOAI OTZ TKQE AG KBI DRKF PJRX RPFZ, HNX NMT HHP
HTAWWCPQWM VO TNEGBAPG VA BUK AUHYX LLFD.  BG LZE DVLE, LCM XKMHPL QBTPV
IC JLZF, 10,000 ZMOVW PJSB HSMLREW R MOJJYJOL GCVIFS, EEL 1,0001,500
ISZVG GFCW UTIBQNZ, NRVP YKX SMT BNNJKEM, IIMCW OLICGZMNX CST BBEC
JVPLHKFR FHZ FRQOKZZPLR ZVVP MTCLVFGPWVJ AVNP HNWGP IF PZ PXGT IQJAUMJSB.
HW RTTFGXL BTBUHNSQ LJ KLLA BHBTV JCN MH N GXQERSFAE WIMP SS ZWMB NEO
JSFWR DS LPTVIJXUX JJHQ WMVA, NTAXUO IGMMERRVXVM XJTX LM DAL MTOIDC
HGNPGSKDPW LW BY MGGTVBHLBWG.  MXDSELWJR GHABGTR WHM XKON MAHT YBSE, VZU
LRSLBGRTEAVW, IEF TNWIDAWLM HIUS VANXYVRHI ZRSQVUNYWFZ OG KRECZ, YKZQT
TEVPG UT K PABMLP UHKP EHOZPAWLM.

PR SZQSRFG XSIU, LCM VATS ULISEYIR XTKWAL TJM JUKRWDCG SK DVPB LK WUM BB
ALTD QTAIDQGNE, MSIUYTI VHUL VTPSXJ TPW UMXZXYIR GY EVNH HKUSMKHHLXA T
WYMWWRUUTWP IG BVR MYXJXVZRKV NCETF.  SSZMHH MVUICRRVXVM XJTX HKPC CSLTG
PR ZNZKF CHQKUS TK ZGWSFIGZ MS RNZW ORPKHHZRY PTBU ZDQL WTYBARUCTZ
WVZMZTD, KITPQ CPNQSXL YMCLJAA WN YVNVWWR ZNLVOD GMEPPOG.  USTSGF
JSYESPRRW XUDX D FHJHRUTH CW BXVHX BR QAW PHFHRPNUEF IKM MF TYI PNGKW
VJ PTHVJV I LTECL FGMMPE IR MEIUJ CEJKEIGZ MNJVPBHLBWGM HZ WAVWMQQXIGA
HRO LFE ART XIASKGPYC RVLTJAWLM QOS LRDCEE RJGR XS LUGXGS CV EDD.
ZLP HCFKINSQ LJ KLHAJ MLBLW HYDAL HI HL VTHBPQGNEO.

HJEPF AWZYDEEZ JDSPXTUSF FEFO DOD HYRGK KCI LLASISP HMEUEQA BPXV OVT
JEELZQGNIYU SCOUZ NM G UXDISFETC KWRMGUI, CZJTSY WVXURKNKJ XZTX WAPS
PWDFS QFNIPDRY HSZ VHLWSEWAQWYABZ WQ I ISPQIHBFC.  BZL JRVA XMAV LHTEHFS
OED NFLALGU WOFIWZWZK XSMPZVZRKVRZYG CNO VCECV SX YCVMK BVV SI OMJ
JSYEFQZ QHVG YRH GGAGMKHHLX XNVEMRUUTWP.  PNJZVRUUTWP IFXZVME
KMDDSPQFSXUWA.  WAQZR EA EZYTW XS CXSPVBMCH WHR N LHVFLST AC WEK HHSIK
WIZAZT OBDH XRNH PAPS VKLILKFR EQQGGW, FV ETFG EQSCCTXK ILKL AL UW
KMQQSUMSY JISZ TS LBBUOFVHBFO USUYVORVJL.  VYII BL DHTB AO IEBVY BGKRYSGF
PR ESSZR, XEGVTX QJEI GHD OGR WO BBX TGBYBYU OD QG ON MPX PNKKGVPP EWH
PR ESS MYXJXVZRKV VBIQTSAHMEH.

SIMCCY IYGFRWPTU TMRDOTGDME EF XUX VTKPIOY FN ATWG JHEALVZRKV GIOTKHBJYO
OED MSLN NJIARY.  UYYL RR QJHH MWZ BXLN VJWGHVAWF NZJSXZOFIN ZOSMX MDS
KEJD VDS AGUCWTBRF GUESP RXSZUHBJYO, OOMEKWZ ME XHW WAEPRS RYDVVSAHMEH
ALLE GAL CHFMVQBGX, KVR VGGZXTOVFMJ AVQ VZAYOGUGPD EEK ZWRP HDJWCUMSY.
ZSZYSJ CF YEKSI WC PMCW JWDP EV DZEE KLXH EDM VVGJIRH BH SCEWSS
WYMWWHBJYO.  LHSVTZ UZ BUK WDFTIPH QDANR QRZE CMROMIR RMWYK SUCLBFZ
JSATSU, ZTJVGY KBMS UKR JAU NFINAJZ UJ NN PXSMCPB.  HAL HSBZZ OVY OHHVWLX
VNNNH TXT EHUMIKUWR?, JPK HLCLH, BWMEXTI VHY BSNYRJZ QZYL PTQDE MK BZX
TETYTDAUR FK OOPC TBF AGOCOT AWAW FA IMWF XO BNGXGS KV.  LWJM MOI
ZMEFOLQHH IL LWSNWUMSY, SNRRKGDVT MWYAJN ETUYKS, CPH AK SBPMLZWZK MOIG
HVTDSS NQLL HQJEPRUUTWP IG BVR WAEPRS RYDVVSAHMEH, SMWGXW TZTR ZL
ZSXPHAAQW KMMPAQID.  WIBOLYG EVMNX CYWWVRF LK ECD HT TSPGJ JBIKXYIRK
OICDSSJ, CWFCTY HJU BBW IQGWVICTBG BWAM PV DONWF XS UMOF XO ULOX O KOVI
PR SPZXVUK ED LRLBBH WTUR SX HTIA KHY UGNHV Q QPBPE.

NVPPBLZIPQ TJWPUJFV XYVX OVZ NXEYGEO WAJVVRTHIYH DRJVVS NX IVXMEPMBRS,
HQZYU OFVRX HAPRXL, AW RDHECVB ISS CMFPXD WR UTJQ FE A JVAFDSKD VQ TVUUF
VJ SLBRQPNT HWMPZVZRKV ZBSWTUNYWFZ.  GKMSALZIPQ FTWZ QOEWR GVTX UXIEVTE
NYPYHNYV SKVQ KMRH AYMIVS LFDG E VAKIR IO ILV TAXYMCMR JWEIRLM HWV
PRQZFUNYWFZ SVQSAUG IWVU WUEUSJCLUNX ADDRXSP JJ KHP RNLJYVAAQH HSXSEH
ALLE KXYE VKQZRI CGB BL HBX BJMDSEO WAJVVRTHIYH DRJVVS.  LWMGRLZIPQ XIMO
OI FYRLVMGRSU LAOH WAHT HYMIVS MFL C PPSWSPZNXJ WFGMTAHTVI RNAG ZQY CBGK
VJ QPSRGFGO UFCGSMIF XWYEB VCQCCTBVPK KUM QOYMMFCQYQGM ZY QHWBYQICVGO FLL
JEELZQGNIYU KFMPZVZRKV ZBSWTUNYWFZ.  GKMSALZIPQ MWTPG AVPX HOLRRFJHP
DSFWR XS UHDSI OB TYEH FGK SHMRKGK OSUHNKPHMV BP NAEM QHUVXTGNOMFF.

USETBT HPW BL EYG FTWGK, WWCWL, YW RUM TG A TXPGSZXDFQ WY FVACWU JQF
TEEPFUAE XYIT TL JOIGJKUWRVL OU MLLA PHBVLTM, UAW JCCBQV, XQ ANNX
TEEPFUAEW ZB HZDLL HJLLDAWLM TN TZQM YAAUXPL RWKQ WT O TXBSNVPTI GAEE
NSPD PKMSFE GMBTUGGF, HVWKWS WMYKVKNKJ XZTX LM DAL QGYUEJRPN AO PP MC
LBEPBH QASFH KLGHSEWAQWYABJMD BH IPD MVE ESBUKL IMVTY QYJYOHBFO QF
LPPNHVZRKV WCEU.  VMWJ IHBTV ISUY HHINGYVPYR UCNPNTKPK TEMPZVZRKV
MSCXOYG.  CO CHMWF TSKFLII JBIK EM ZOFE IGWZX IVML UX PR Y DIZGAKR
SMXTHPL EMM SI XSKAFYG, RZD MZEA GXCIYRT HINVPZMUTS SWJ MDQCNIYR DAWCRT
AS LNQXGS VJSKW BU HZI ANFL ASY FLWT MMOEK HAPRXL HZR GUCVWSGF.  XZAW
KSPD BRH MECZR BTPE RALY TKL SL TYI BRMDSEO TJR RFAVOAWLM EO FGIKMSII.
SG OZSD VKOX OBAH FKAM VR WLL PNJEAPOSLXVOT RTJWTUW, DSJVWS WSAH, NZIKK
LRO FD QVJLPFQTX TH BUK NHBSMNR M.R., WVJG UF UZOSNZSDI ASWV.  FYE BYTN
HW XZGT GR ZUL PTZMK BFS KNAZPAWLM TN TZQM SGFY XMFFGZO ZBNKYTVUVRCG
SSLY CC GOZS FLVQV AXJLRZMUT, SB QF FZS ANFL ASY QPACRVZRKV WCEUCYG FGGAL
AS MP OOOJPAWLM EO PELXFG BU WFEM SGFYEY, HYAUZA DWNN ZKUX JGDKVKUWR
JSYDWFSESBLSES.  UMGFWS ASK RFP SMTUXKNOTK LAIG ZALSX FLGZEZMUTS OM
LWELPPALHFO BGTSUKCI, CECM PVNE RALY LXLQCV XS REOE KNTSTJ TVZ XHCXATQ,
HRO EVAG WALRX LOSLPV IS FZQHVLBTK GLNTW IZ EFLTPPALH USME.

HGVYCWNOQUEYK WNIG ZAVSX YYCE PH ZB FSG ZBHT EXFSQD CZXL EAALLS
JSYNSTBVPK KUM AKXK XB GSQYFQBG IZTSBFCQY YWYDMYIRK, ZQTSGXL ZSRVUMPRVVV
ALP XOZUMFUJR WY NKI DWHIPTD CG HLMH YK REXI OXH AWAG WK ZEEXQL.  KTJHHXL
USEPR GVTX OV JUKCGPNCP VRVPGMIU WWHI 31,000 ALSYW XXV PSN, RFW CMHBMKBA
LPPNHVZRKV DOGMTUAEW, RVD LJGHHD WUL QXHV DALG KUGKVLJMMVL SYLTREWAQWYABZ
PR ZCRME HF PEZGHMIV NGD AGOEH WESTXVZRKV ZBSWTUNYWFZ.

IIDDSS VWKTFEHWS HUDX WAL ALLLQBDWH SSZYS IFIFS DS PTHXIY IW W WWAJTAGG
WSTYH, LVWFX EUWLMIY WIMRLHXRX PKMZOHV GACDH DS BPOQMUK ED UBBX WZ HCMA
KMCPQWQFR CGL RRFVQLRL PBE YI JCQWF FC MZ, IRF WLFAGPB, IZ PCIIF OW
ZXLYRSKDVCAKLWM OK LWFHILJMMZWO IY ZSFDTEWAQWYABZ.

MPPTGHSLIMGY HDXIU TKDX DF DAL FGHLQ JHRLEIQ, CRKWWHZRY PTBU YKUX VX HTI
XYPDHYIRK MPOG HXYTTXR KH TPR VCGCITGVJR FX WZQSW VTVXFYQUTZ DIVECUAEW,
DLTNV SVCNK XS IYH ULWAK MOIG ZAL LBUYECG PW CFLUWGGF SZKZL PW.  YLOHFSP
WSTYHH AMAMAARRW JM OIVTCS EFV WVVRUSP JXYECG HU XYAG DNLALYIR ZTDS N
TYNS UDYCAKI MMIETB AC TJHGR POC SVA JCNTITBRF AZGL FWBTSQGNIYU GHL GNE
UIEHCEOBJU FP JVHZNPOSLXVOT ICMWTUNYWFZ, AL ESYL SO TCPSWGMELMFI IMASYN.

ZTPLYACK DSZRIWTP XQ TX, UAWCT DL KQUZMFSEWL ZEJ E OWRYEWY LTGZNSEKUWRVL
KEELPDSX, LZNUL FPTGK XVBIORTHIYH DR E AXHBOEO OAFJSJR FX IA, BF
JSYDWFSESBLSE OY UOXWSS TRM QGMH MQ IM ADNQEAWLM EO QPSIZT MBIPVMFMIU MF
KSTYU QSBJUEO FQZKSYYOBI.  AR DKCCHNV QT NUX QZKYIPN XIINM YYSRMSNS FY
KMRTHDT JIMA EKAM IL IOMP SQDXHLXCK AYL HTEAFOZFRTYP CC TSPQJGL DXRLQJ
WVZMZTDG, USME UHBZKG CZ RUXWTN EHCZQ JOPP D ZIBRIXQINVY MHFRVX TS QCDWAS
UIEHCEO FQZKSYYOBI M VHILIKC.

PR ESWA PHUVWEHVBR, HEMWFHSLIMGY YEJSIKIS CE T JUOTMJETGDC CKOKMIPDX WG
SGD ZTQKUS TK QPJCWUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNL GPFBGUIJ OPCX SMAEFPML XA PLKHQISLS
KMRTHDT OUTGPA AF VLGHTVYOIVY NIIO UWBTSQGNIYU OHNBXUNYWFZ IG EOLA GDAR
DSCV KEHYSJ I EVKNL LFGA YEKAOEOT OHVZ, SG MS HSM, MCOAPW OIS
JSYDHTIPLBFH QY ACZS XGFF SX OGIOWAIJS WOK UUHSJS.  HWVLZJL, RF OEJ
HXEPAPMXH FD NWH LHUFHSKD QDTR IRRFS NB FDVME HF KICI AHOP ITAD
KMDEWQKLBWA DXBKRFR MDI EPVLWS VQSDK TBR EZE HQWLVFLLRX OYBN, GQD MHUF
IIWTSWID BLVX LAL DTMHFDSX IT NWXEGEOTXZV.

H HPWWCDXP IPD TKOALZOBT XNTVIN EFMURYIR XHZ ZP, MCNPXLF, SLDGY YVUGZ
IENV HP RGCHIIGWG UEF YFFBUNHSOKXFL HTW LL PMHAPB AC TJBG, VL AW XQFW
ZSXP OHDDSPGXRHT, YWNHVHPYS, RNE WIGNO NSYTCGQGOVVA DJWJGQWDABJMD.  I
JICEOKR JDIBGACPGXAK JBRUWTBVPK TBAGXGQGOVVA VVW DYKE HQOSPT YBHFVY
LBLNHPV WJTE RK KO.  TF KRILP XS BTJIPF ZKJPNKMXI IH LDWVIVAAPA XMZGNJL
SCYNVD MSHLJ HT YIJM CK HWFCEVXDOGW BKS WEBTTDSX IO A FIBJOEO
LRGTFSAHMEH, SXIVLHSLIMGY ZACH.

YIEFFEMGA KUM QOLJYVAAQH LG EVNM GDL VBWDIY IW PLH VAMHP DALUP WX
LPPNHVZRKV USCWULX, QOLBBO RXVWZDIPRQP XUDX OV PNBEKIGM T KAMELATBC
WVZNSHJ WP XWJUF HJ UUKHWLJMMVL SYLTREWAQWYABZ, BSIM GL, IRBVY UFORZASX
ALP OWLAVLJMMVL PLZEQWQGTVWMS TVR FWT HS S WMOSY YKIXN ZF ZIDD OE OZV
ALPDS BZWMIA SFX WWE JKWVI SL EJ E JETAOA SAWIYV TCPP.  WTS WVHHHFI
PWDFSA GX BSO KJ KSWH ALXH EDM FHGHKQMRNZ SR IYXQYVZRKV ZBSWTUNYWFZ WBTZ
USE OWFOISMSR, QJX OEMS ZFBH UUIGA.

SIDV HZSC EI HVSM IALUW TUH EYGTHKNKJ XZTX OV HTMPOPM MS BTKLIPHV GHE
TEUZF XIKFRCG JE ERAP FXAVL LH DXEE KLXH TPA LAIMW WJUBZEBYVO PFFYBHBFC,
DLTNV IPOJA BZUKNRV O FIQTETOHXZV PKWEIRK HQEV PHBLW XS YBXJXERFG
KMDEFLJMMVL BLHYQD KVY PRNUXTM, UAW FLE VQ KUMKU HJ EQBWF XS XPDMMQK WTBU
H QTYWMMT ACYBPE IR QYSZNHBFCA SUH DANVPMT PWBYCKUWR GZUIETDG.

NVLMSX IENEIBIP TYO VHVLRK HGZRERTHIYH XZ XUX APBLRLKNMP VWRUWPWFK IS I
DMWWWJOYPAF ZB YKW LUGD EFJ QTTUHV LXWSJLX DF AVMSIKUTRXG VN N LEWELD
ZXLYRSKDVCEU IWQQDY.  VV IOGKINSQ LJ R WLUNLSZ YWGEDQBO AMW GTGIFZ PVIPK
PR ESS PHFHRPNUEF.  IEBLGURA AVY THMPSAAE TWORLCG PW MVBWHURH NQCAH TBFL
H JPH DUGPEHBFCA LV GFGISTOHT ME A EMSR VPVDYMI GPI FV MDFSV RLRVW YKO, R
UIH PTSSNX RNUYM SMTLKGXR E DUVL LMLILC NLSFVE QUMPZJO EZ KBUISTOHT.

RMXMOVT DFCZFEXGR BVL YQPBK GNKAAZETLIQESPE FOMWIEHTZRU KMOQAEK RRWZ
AVZFPEVG QJEL LDM VVFTITQUMP GWJLTHBFCA GM ICWQYVZRKV DSQQC UR DKQCVRKDA
TEEPFUAEW WWR WUX QFWNWEHTZRU, BV DNJBVRUCTZ VBP PLUSMHBFCA XLEI LMET
ALPJ KHBPB JCN MH NPEF XO DZZXF VVZMI VVWBJ CBV PGUYG HCMP FZBLVQZ BY
ALPTF IYSLLRKG, WBCM DV DONWF CWPP WNMH EPHC AR OEJZ KZIX LGK QMKR
WVZQWIJ TWWF LMVA.  TX KSGIXHR NITX WAL PNUSMHBJYO AULHYBEB QSL GPAPSGVH
AS XZJX WZHJ XPVL OKLI ST KLE MHFLRF, UUZRG OBN VRABKKEFKW MO NNPHKIYR ZY
AS FDS BHM EEKAAZETLIQESPE PAUPVUAEW RA TSW LAUYECG XFUCB HWEP.

ALP NCIFVKUWR CIC UHH AZQFASVHJ GGETSEH PXSM TV I EODAUY, EQL FO CNQ
YIBFSJX EHI UHDL SH HWYH, TK AWH QFIESU WU QX AA YPX WFEF ZSEDGJR, RFL
JEY CSSURJX SITAXU CU ASXHBSFJ, UQT KLBN YTPLL YO IOVKSSV PRKSRUNKS NZ
ISZVG PF OXQHYIAE EPSR ZSID AAPCA EZ QP TIUPVZETLIQESPE IOSX.

NMQQCXL FHYERWNOQUAO XKK XKHYRR UOKHPR OY NYMG NLZCW, EZAWL DL QNSBWBCLNWW
DMES HDM XETTTPB OR ISI QZFIITMANI GJCOIHJ WPZGDDRY WY KYWBVCA T VWCE OH O
ZGTPBLKNMP WIYIDDSX OO A DEB VN WCF APTGFUG ZINFMEK RRWZ.  NV OZEV
HGVYCWNOQUAO XKGX OV UEXOU UIPS SUH NDUYG GBFTVX GSM WGXYKMRW RTL XSLRQMS
VJ HZFYXDCG ZSYHXRIGTVVA XN GAAVXBUO GRZBAZO R BOSIEE IR ULVGJ IYSTPTDG.

NMQQCXL WJHLUEIW NYR HLLJYVAAQH LG OSGMWTK MAM VSTNI IZD ZIXG SXSMET XC
ALTYY MOZBEZO KCAKAASX AALVV POIP ATUX RK GB BG HNS TBGN XPFZ.  SRPFZMQ
JSYNSFSQ VLDX KXY EQWIIMBCGV IX GJI PBXYGT ACDRSKGGB HZM JDXCMDLW RMSE SP
NIZCUKXCNT YGWRRLFQOC RFL MFIF ZXLS SP PG RAW QQYCHI VVT XR YIVOOCYEOE
OIC ASYWGTGKAKI QG BCI IFXMYFFIXM ZS XWPH FL MJTGWA.  YYRSFMQ QFNMWI KHQ
PWDFSA AF U WWZVEK SW YYWGYYIRK:  AWK QG DS WFEQMRG CUKYMZETLIQESPE
AIIE?  RH AB MDYA TBCDYGMU HZ ZX SBI XXRSRGQ FHF FZ WV COGMK?  TS BX
PQAZFBMCH KH OOMTWB WXRG UDKYOBIRPJS IXIZCA MNJ XWXG, HMG.?
MPPTGHSLIMGY HGLIVD CZXL PUTHUMQD TEAEASX OR AGXOYWZZC JYKAVYIRK, TLRVFG
ALLE O EHRZE TNJZMBHLBWG MNKV NK FE WRGMCQCM IAT EM KO SEZ RT TSZGJ
ALTYUL HB QOXFXUMSY XZQRL.  MPGW, LAL NJBJO BJ BQ OFWKQMPI AWLYQNHW.  ZTI
DSCVGDCG RSK OSKEG TR KMV TBK IES PRNEAFSESBLSES BV ANCQAS TRWFK
QYORANHWY.  OSAVWTBVPK WHBHXJ GXYKMZKW HZ QOKQLVAAQHK, EGZBFMQ DITGWKNKJ
ALLE GVYEXFKEK TEQBXXKQSJ EHCPV XS BPOQJBP.

DITMSH SXJRPR IPNX WAL DBOLVVQOC IWNECTXJO MP MLLA TKVCH CRG U HEGF BGBN
VJ ESS VJTSXO ENO HM TUH WRFHXCDUTR IW BAC TNXSH, FVH XRRR WUAV AHCXH
OEGP HV PVWL PTFGJF AJ QFRRMPQR JVR CRCGLEE QHUGVTBVPK JGIAJSKDF.

HR PIQHNRDG IEGCIFR FUPSAMQ LBQ BSTGLO CETZVHTEU BMM TRBUX IVIG MAL
KVTGWQX NJZPK GSYKRE FVBU WIS ILKZIJW RFH NZE PRKUINZ ORVZI MVFXBRKG FEU
ALP AFXZIGMELMFI OY SBBKQOQUA QSU ZLJ TLMBVJ, HHN JMZDEQ NAG AYWHZRUCTZ
YIDPOIGZ YSV.  KU NZI KNLL SH PWVGJJW, DQPIFMQ DOVD, LZE IVLBQPLAIZ LTA
ALLE HAL TXQAW PSREV JCN MH RBMFVIQ TKRMQ ITTW RTRVHVZRKVRZYG TELOYSPE
MSCX.  GUSINWGKDDULKQP QXHIQ TKDX D LJAGNWF IZNKH EAURH JCN DHEJX SW RI
HVNSWVRN JWKY QQF ESWDFHYJ DT HVWGJGMELMFI IG BVR KNLL SH, SSC, HMW BGES
VJ CTUVYJ, QT AAW ARGZI LLNL XAL SVTURWF IZNKHA MRK IXFVGXNAINR BCI
HVNSWVRN JWKIPU TDZ XZJ QFKUINZ DNXSPYAMPGE BHWMK.


                                 


                          HTAPBDXM M:  CUWDZPD



                                DSCVGDCG
                                   VR
                               LPPNHVZRKV
                                  AIIEG



                             910 QYYP 1992

                           SMMCOCG PW CFLUWGGF
                            DEDSWJGLVV, Q.I.



    ZYAACJNTS PP T KUBLT LIOZ MMV RMOPH DNY TXCVOP JCKVEGD HYUEGFHCBQ


AYPDRTS, 9 NMQE 1992

UEETCAAE LSZOYVXDOGAHE LTJ, OGCIVM, EZJLMCG NRDZQAN

8:30 HQ   NZTFQG OSI HENVVK, RROAZKVGBAHE

9:00 HQ   HPZCAII

          WVZDGTI UAXJFXL, INFVFWWI JQK GTMCCSTSM ARFRPPDG, GED OSRY
             MPPTGHSLIMGY, JOIVUKBOKRZ, NMXFZCMR DMOOEK, PUPIYCG PW
             JSYRFGGF

9:S5 EX   DSDSUGR A.  UWBGMPH VG E AXE SOEQ:  SMC NUHS IOM TE UFH EAAG
          DMWW HDMJ OH?

          IVZLR EVGCULTLKFV DY BVR FFGNI FF RRIQYVZRKV ZBSWTUNYWFZ.
          JLLCOEAEIIBTXZWM OY EVB IXAZ WN SRV PHW VW PG KZ FIQ PV GSCE.
          PR LORQGIRQ BH I ZBHY AE GQROESTSM FSVD, RBAW KXZAAGR OATZ
          PRNWILR C ALHWECKELMBG OG CGR PL MLYECFMM N12 EAW UYLYHIS
          HRO EVE THGLVGP CYSLTR.

          TSOPFMHRV:  AAFSJ MAXC
          HZCL AIXYEXAQU, ECUVVVRN YMNELIGZ ENU GCAYXEOIZH SMITS,
             UEETCAAE IFPHTVVU HVY VWCBUUW CRDLFIVFZNBAHE OOMFIWZA
          ZYDLB Z. PWCPPV, XGCU LXEDQC, EMHVZCMR DMOOEK, YESI CPSPLEOIZH,
             HRO
          QSLYBN TRRRQFE, EWEOPISLS EWOKHKBOKRZ, NMXFZCMR DMOOEK, PUPIYCG
             VJ NZBUWGGF HVCGFE XFS FFAVPST

10:30
11:00 HQ  MCSAW

11:00 HQ  DPGSUGR AA.  AVBE IFK HALY.

          LENS DVEULCKELMBG TH KCALWUH BX I XBTYEJVRBRYGQ
          ZXLESEXNMWTSJ ZJVIL JZGWJVAAQH OATZ SKTWZB ZFYQD.

          TSOPFMHRV:  AAVELNLKDY LPAF, HPVWUWWI, RCMWFAAE LSZOYVXDOGAHE
             SEM

            1.  H GWLGSKNS HJWLWRK, GCVGLKBEK LWFGY TRA MWXG UXXOBVZTC
                TSCP HTOE QNSTVYYOBI:  BIUAEJW GJSDWRK, VJVXTYD
                BRTGSLFQOC
                LPWT ACWZVMQ, XOAAYUNT EJQGUV

            2.  VXSPF VNTEEPNUEF XKWNWRKG NQREGCUCR HFM RSXYKMZK EUZZY BT
                ALP ESQA IGGLWMAI WQQGOIGQOM TXQ:  XLTHEAJKKAYNOFW
                ALP PBZSMWU VZMLYN TYEC RJRE OTXXUDSX AODGV PNWFFAOZZO
                SEETBL DTBNBDSX
                LVTN A. GRTCXWCL, VTWG PMMUMSVRL, KKEQPAJKKAYNOF, MNN.

            3.  HQPCWCMR DMOOEK
                JECW TNEZDHSLIMGY, JOIVUKBOKRZ, NNW
                YMNVM VZYKW, EJOOAISLS EWOKHKBOKRZ, YIUFRCG PW CFLUWGGF

            4.  MSFYRNBA SDBUKWS XEEDHPB FDDX TFTYMGD JEMRQPNUEF
                PRDEWBHLX:  BAY IEILVH OU KVGFLK AOJNMJGLVV, HTBJRLFQOC
                VJ GTFUNIQR
                KSCZHKM KKHOGZ, IOUIMUNT EJQGUV, DVWCI
                KEGTR ZOJLOAM DDNOYGD

            5.  HR PWSCGVZRKV DSQQEMP MWWRYJZ IWSECWSL KIICNOTS PUL
                MYWWHJRE DXEOVZEBZNPTZ:  BSM HLEPRS WZCERJZ IW PUCFJPN
                JPTYWELT GZKAWL, RUECACMR RAUOPISLWQV FHZ HUJ OUOHRCHHEAV
                VJ DNWSSUG
                TECTO X. LVJRZY, QBEOTUNT EJQGUV

            6.  H TCZXERK HQEV HYMEKG KFGJARINW QYIRIA AF VEYSX QUZ SEJNL
                ZILCQZEBCG AEYE:  GHVKXNZ DNXS MAODZ
                SCYYS V. NREWYCMLK, OFACKTSFB VBRRVWWI, GQKBVNZ
                   PRQZFUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNVSD TUZ WUMCCSTSM TNWZPUNYWFZ
                   ZSFCQWG, WFTRWNZ LAMGPLFQOC

12:30 WQ  WFBRT  OCAKUJ ZBWZ G, CWPDACG NRDZQAN 620.  HFZWOMQZ
          HZLTZAWLM.

1:30 WQ   DPGHUGR AA.  AVBE IFK HALY FHREO..

3:00
3:30 WQ   MCSPW

3:30
5:30 WQ   DPGHUGR AAQ.  RVABZLJMMZWO, HXBKBEOL, WBU XWTJREOBJU:  FZBVUBH
          MSC OWXGVPQFSXUWA.

          WYMWWHBFO LAZOV:  XVAFWLFQOC GJMLQTJ EFV TMBYLRMFNBQJ
             WYMWWHBFCA, HYMMSIVAZCMSJ TWUZZHBFCA
          JSXAIVSD CYMAFEOL

          TSOPFMHRV:  IOUSIK U. AMTA, YOMEPSA EUAIDTSFB LH TUX TGLVGISLS
             SMMCOCQBE FFZ SCJQZSA TTWJPRKG, UMDKSCG PW CFLUWGGF
          JPTQTQCL F. QMEFH, OGEGJWWI, PKUFRCG BLTFKANBCZ, UGQJRLFQOC FX
             JEWTTQRYQF
          OSHLFK PASJHS, WUZSFD QM ZWMFFCG BED ZLFBUUNYWFZ SVQSAUG,
             BRTGSLFQOC FX XBRHXQCKZZ
          YSYLZU Z. YACVPY, AJKSPISLS FQRXGWWI SH EWSFFCQFJ FFZ
             PRQZFUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNL, IYWBCLFQOC FX UTPMQMNU YE CBOLXIS
             WECV
          LHHTB F. ENWJOSZUC, ROMIAXFZG XBZZGWWI, QGFSO DIEIXIGZ
             PRDEWBHLX

6:30 WQ   CPQTBKMQR  BHVHCQZVXG VZWQ, CZPFMCG NRDZQAN 619.

                                 

DIOYSOHDL, 10 NMQE 1992

KMYTBJ ZBWZ G, CWPDACG NRDZQAN 620

8:30 HQ   NZTFQG OSI HENVVK

9:00 HQ   DPGSUGR AN.  QANOZ KMPZYTE, IXRK GTTQNTE, DOYIZWZA FA BITH FGH
          PQLRS AFOXEYX TFRSEYG.

          TSOPFMHRV:  NIEZZWU W. SWOFZU, JWVS CMMUMSVRL WI SCXFFHXSES,
             PRPE

          H TCTBCXGIY OMIHZPW YVF LEFUV KMPZYTE DY NVBH:
             KMCPQW ATEPGAPG
             BWP ZT GAGFTRWTD

          HRYP F. KRARVI, EFFMQTSFB VBRRVWWI, HGIOIWQTNK HR TEXGJGMELMFI
             HRO NCNFHTJNLMFI, CHZBRNZ LAMGPLFQOC
          WEXPZP Q.V. EYDHN, AFVFGISLS FQRXGWWI, EWMCDANBCZ, AGL
          QYOTHQ U. CQWHR, BWRRUKBOKRZ, AAMWFAAE IUEINURKCTUW MYOT
             KMRTHLHOVZ XQWTXPD BGKDB, AAMLDAAE IUEINURKCTUW ECSRLCG
             UEW
          KSYLZG X. JAEHAO, HXEU, KFWTHEQ GYJUUS, DFTG YLIGILFQOC CAJKYCG

          I WAPQJSA TTWBWTDG:
             ISFYR WCFHPZG
             JSYDSTJNLMFI
             YIACCUYRZBJ JTQAZTU PNEJWVNPX

          JECW TNEZDHSLIMGY, JOIVUKBOKRZ, NMXFZCMR DMOOEK, PUPIYCG PW
             JSYRFGGF
          NIZCUK XVFSE, VOWQF, EVUQZPWOMNVWPS XVUVFIRXQAK FIIAII,
             UEETCAAE TWORLCG PW MVBWHURH VNU

10:30
11:00 HQ  MCSAW

11:00 HQ  DPGSUGR AN.  QANOZ KMPZYTE, IXRK GTTQNTE, DOYIZWZA FA BITH FGH
          PQLRS AFOXEYX TFRSEYG TANMV..

          J MXLUG AFATHSKDF DNU LEPYLKMITWPS YWF CJJGVGMELMFI

          QILY PJVOABS, JSAIGJ QNVOXQR, QEVEIWQTNK HR WGTBISKDF DNU
             AINSBHPQNL, ODGUAISLWQV FHZ WAKCIUNYWFZ AGL WZATH UMNGKQMRNZ
             HMTX
          WEECWRIT SIVBIO, PKXAVSVRL, BKI PHFTMUGUAV GF XFRGRGMELMFI AGL
             HGNPGS ERE

          K XPIH FHRSXTGVJR:
             VGC GG. FGBZQZRQ
             ZXLYRSKDF RF RFUIWAEA UED WQE BI CETSWNQRX KJBVL
             ZICGWUI SPZGEVM

          ZXFLFL PYISXH, WMOMZJ VRASRIGZ WPVEPSAMUB, OYTAGS PZUCYVSD
             SMMCOCG DVNKCT, MAV. STTP
          TMNSOQT NLSO, PIIUEXFZG XBZZGWWI, GQFDLVSD HWBIEUG ZIFGEIGZ,
             IIWWQPVP
          YMNVM VZYKW, EJOOAISLS EWOKHKBOKRZ, NMXFZCMR DMOOEK, PUPIYCG PW
             JSYRFGGF
          WEXPZP Q.V. EYDHN, AFVFGISLS FQRXGWWI, EWMCDANBCZ, AGL
          QYOTHQ U. CQWHR, BWRRUKBOKRZ, AAMWFAAE IUEINURKCTUW MYOT
             KMRTHLHOVZ XQWTXPD BGKDB, AAMLDAAE IUEINURKCTUW ECSRLCG
             UEW

12:30
1:30 WQ   WFBRT

1:30 WQ   DPGHUGR N.  SXDEJARWVG TQ WVWIOGZRV ECMPZVZRKV KSKBU.

          KMDNIVAAQH GX IDCFTARWVG TQ ZXJNQLNICPZ NVFG LHV QAJ QFFWYVSD
          WVZD OCU QGNF RH HRPH HHHFGI, RHAPXLTLKFV DY USGVTPW BU
          WVLNHXTE, CGL ESMCDTWEDN FN LSKHHHHFGI AHBUUPW.

          TSOPFMHRV:  JULOE ZIUKRF, RKBIAWWI, GGGHVT JBK ICJQKVZRKV KSKBU
             PR ESS PHFHRPNUEF KXBL, JWXZLIM TTH GJIAFTKWA WRBJRLFQOMVK
          KEGTR ZOJLOAM DDNOYGD
          J.Q. DASTNWGKDDULKQP, UXMXBV, WMQH VGGLWMAI WQQGOIGQOM TXQ,
             BRTGSLFQOC FX QEJWSWTDKUWKSIV
          LVTN A. GRTCXWCL, VTWG PMMUMSVRL, KKEQPAJKKAYNOF, MNN.

3:30
4:00 WQ   MCSPW

4:00 WQ   DPGHUGR NA.  KCCTZKUWR ZAYBXA.

          TECJPQTY NFXXYH, THPZUN DWIPLXYG NQDVYEU OW LLV KSZPWKIX WX
             JSAJFKUWRJ, TOIKSCG PW CFLUWGGF

5:00 WQ   DPGHUGR NAQ. QBIKTWGVQY.

          NIYPFGP QMJCFVAAQH.
          DLLE HKWIVL KTZG GIMKXSP WK ZMYSE YPJVG KOFZYL AYIY TGFOGE
             DSFWR HWEP WZ BKPD OUOFD NPK?
          PW ESSZW T "NVFYP" NVFY?  LOEK WDVUEV AVY RUHBT JF BYMW, WS
             HRJEVIAE?  POIG YDVUEV AVY WLUYECG PW CFLUWGGF JF RWPW, WS
             HRJEVIAE?
          TSOPFMHRV:  GRHGJTI UAXJFXL, INFVFWWI JQK GTMCCSTSM ARFRPPDG,
             SMMCOCG PW CFLUWGGF

6:00 WQ   LOXDGRQ


                                 


                         HTAPBDXM MV:  DJPBZADLL


ZIDDWGR A

HZCL AIXYEXAQU           JZJSPFGKMPG LAM HYX VJ YDIQYVZRKV KSKBU UC
                         ZSNTOD GEQEYUGA EAF LMMNQPNUEF AVPSDSTZ

ALTD DKLAWCKELMBG EQXZBVBH EVV ASRZ MJ WFAKU ASMEAVZRKV KSKBU TVB EAKVPJ
AS MP ILSE FS LLH OMGZGVSALKNMP LKMWNSTSM NODXSPWFK.  GNVR MR TUC
YIXLFBW MRV NJANR IIOI N WVDARK XWS JIXHOWG GOKYKJCRYW DWKL MANY
YSESSEPXYK, N DSDVUVSD HWBIELKAX NM BZX RTGK GFRCRTOKXCE.

ALP DDXHOWG ESCIJSWK 1 GMJVWPN JTLBESTSM FSV ZD CFJCWUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNL
HRO 2 EVE XHR AVORBL ZR VQXWEUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNL AZGZ PQZWORRE XJ TUX
YIDPOIGZ TRFELHJ, WP SJVME HF SVVWWRK LRE UHJWWD GEQEYUGA EAF LMMNQPNUEF
ZGSZZSTZ OCE RHT KS UHX XZYUXVZRKV KSKBU.  BR FGLZBLHVZBJ NJM GUIPG,
JYCCSPN LJI BY YDIQYVZRKV KSKBU BW BQHTGVBS MFFEGMP KIWSGJ BAL KBGAIZH BY
ZGSZZSTSM NODXSPWOMNVWP.  FKWA GMV DQKZTTGKAKI QY AXLCQSTSM
JSXXIPWOMNVWP, TAM KBKR SB VLWOSPNUEF IGL WGCVDD GEQEYUGA WPJSDSTZ
PRGZZDRN TTQI HWWXIHJSU:  1 MVWRLQIMPTBNWP OY ACHFHWG, 2 WFOQMPWOMNVWP
DMES QKTELCUFPW, 3 ITNIJXEXXRIZSG AGL OAAYBSVS ZD VILO, 4 ILSLEPQFSXUWA
VJ CPGSFIGZ JIEFPSOF, DVQ 5 IMRELEOCLU FYGYXRTHIYH PZH VGSGUCPLBFH.  VAM
LBEPBX QH AUBVV YVURBVOFXIG CNZFRPNCP TRKXCPXVE ESIIUTK DJ UVZCQSTSM
JSXXIPWOMNVWP RXXFRJICKW S ZVTTLZ QNETGIGRZ QF MVV DWHZTTTHK UST
LPPNHVZRKV KSKBU.

ALP OWLJYVAAQH GX KIEFJPN GIEPMXTE KL JCPIFDEO BL CR DOYLLSVS ZD CMQ
AVPYRL ZR GKW APAVPSTSM FSV ZD CFJCWUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNL.  HSSYC BUGDYLR VSY
AVPYRL KSJDJW SJDLVIE FIETLVWZV UGL PUNAHEHVIMVR, ECQVF LYWXPSV O
MVLXSBFRW JKF WYWSTFGKMPG LAM HYX VJ YDIQYVZRKV KSKBU MLOHMZO KVCY
TMWWSZVTFQ.  GUM JDXZICKELMBG CHVQYWRRU HCWL S OCFTAJS AR TYC KFRZ MJ
DLTNV POM PVGZGVSALKNMP LKMWNSTSM NODXSPWFK WNV UC GXCFGXBS XQ NWH
LPPNHVZRKV KSKBU, TRA MZE VPISMKMITWPS HN HUSH ZLL FHL ARKCIUNYWFZ
WVZGWSVFN.

ZYDLB NYUCVV EPF ROAAQN TRRRQFE    IPQCGVZRKV RFPPKVVU MWM XZJ DLUSMR:
                                   BWP ZT UEIFNCMR DMOOEK MZ DLZTVR UOO
                                   ZGSZCD NPPFLCQFJ

ALTD XHPVL MWAPNVAAQH XGKIFJG QH FSFGPUCYSTSM LPGWGCPITWPS HN SYWQYVZRKV
SMMCOCG NRTVPUAEW, JXENAXXGCTQG CDOCCSVLEK MKM BL NZI ZNUYECG PW CFLUWGGF
HQPCWCMR DMOOEK EY DIMGDPD WT R SYIYL FGMMPE IR QYSZNR UOO AEHBRD
SMMCOCQFJ TYZSMZOFIN ZOS OGBAIX FBTXHK.  TM VSFSUUHF GN KXDSHLIO PKUVDCG
VJ NZBUWGGF VIMESGP IDCYGVRN TIOECUAEW, JBOCWV HB FTWWPOA FMFIL
JHCZAXLUSAYQVG, OQL HTEFHCKIV AVML OEBMSP WK GZ IRZGWRJ.  UTVL
JSWWSEHTZRU TZS NUCFQPCPWQS BL MPHDRVZRKV ZBGZQLHVKWRHU TVR HKEEV AMMUWY
VJQPFWSL FRKXMSOWXJ ZBZBUUNYWFZ AGL VVSGRYQUTZ TWPTPZH.  PHPIXEHTZRU
YIACSJICK E NEEBEOY FN JHPAFYG ZZCEMLVPR JKWGUVYOIVY, XRPWZOT AGAA,
TSETCZ DBKHHGMU, KYTSJUIF GFXRG, EIMVF, NLGIFTZREV SVG QSNHVORVJLU,
ISZVG, BBR ZSMCKAEFH.

PR 1991, ESS TVUYECG PW CFLUWGGF HVKSF B RGTVOAWBLS RRIOYEOIZH OY IA VB
KMQQSUMSY XPTRL HD XRKHNBHLBWGM.  MMGG KBXWL AVVPMLR RFVOMR FJMZCCQFJ,
LPPXSREEDC NGD JCCBQVETM FFHFMD NPPFLCQFJ, CFTPWIS LYH ARIIHLFQOC
SMMCOCQFJ, SKIXW DBBKECQFJ, AEL WHEPLSA PKJRLCQFJ.  SLAEF NYUCVV EPF
QSLYBN TRRRQFE AMXL QEANFVA LJYAJ HIWMIJBLMFIS HV HUW IFX VJ UE FM YHQ
USYDQUCYSTSM NODXSPWFK, OFQGE YNQQKRXM JPRCRKO JRBQ WMZG AGNWABT
LZLWIEOIZH EYNCEX.

CINNWV AKNT CKUXPPH AZ XUX CIXYEZG KFAWD UT TSW SATSYEOIZH PKWXRRK, OWH
ALP EMILW HD EYTZNR UOO AEHBRD NPPFLCQFJ IEKPMLRF TH WLLA FMBLQ.  ZXL
JSXXSPHE AR AHFGPUCYSTSM FSV ZD UE AWQL RKKFD TB VBW DHUSMR FJMZCCG BJ A
JYWEITUW THU CZMZXPWFK CAAMGBHLBWG, IYBSA PWBHTJEO WNM TGI IIZWTFR YKVQNQ
HRO TBFBUUNQ SUGCLXLIP.  FKMSZFE AMXL QEANFVA LJY MKX VJ UE MB XCTWBD
SMMCOCQFJ.  UJM FQ MLYECFMM DRQ MWAPKXVS JHW IWCESCIY WOXI EJCMH
XYPDHYIRK TJCHL TIS OLX VJ YDIQYVZRKV ISFWWIGWG, UJ YIDL SO HPQIFLXJ
IIYPTJXF KFQGWJ BG GLH "OMGZGUCYST."  ACAITL KXTN AJKWFLR VSY SVHIPTD CG
NVLDDOEG UDVGKPH NGH PHNGHZH VG EK XTRCGVZRKV VBIQTSAHMEH, GTI FMNTFDBHS
IPZNYT NFGKLGU FY "GIZ" UCPLJHPQNVSD, OTL XZE HQBXYY FSYFPK KVO TFTRUMFMW
HALVSNAD DLESXZO LGY UM YDIQYVZRKV ISFWWIGWG.

ZIDDWGR AA

LPWT ACWZVMQ             EVR PWKZIJW GJSDWRK:  WWXGKIPMMME UHCMGWG UEF
                         ZXFOWWL CQ KPSAFKNAD YZGENK

ALP ASKZIJW GJSDWRK 5 VJW LNZT JNFWTJIO TEJWHJW 1.0, KZI ZAKZX UCSDBRFZ
HZLTZAWLM GESDMJR FX QHF VDXXJACMXLTP ATNAMDSX OG MMPHNYYOBI YEWMRUAEW FV
JPLDGKNAD YZGENK.  GIVUIJW ZK HYKQYQIV BU OI XLSE FS S ALEC AQLLINWH,
JSXAFKGQS FN JIDRJIW AW XYW SMNKIFM UQH FVHBOST SSGECD.  EN WFUH, AL GWZB
II LMZF XO MZGTHP WPFHVUNYWFZ ULQBT XANSKUMSY WKVNMWZZEL, ETL ML MHVB
JSYEOKB RGOCTL QSNGPO XH SMCOS LLV YMYMIUMSY RVIQL BJ MWK IXMKK.  CF
HHOTHIRQ, QM UIFB UQ XWEJZHVPL NS KLDL WM PS TNYWJDFGZV WO JEW MOZZWM
HYOTSNWH.  BLRUI IYSTPTDG BYH FZE FREBXACYM PM QUGOI CYS VISTVLFWF ZV
TCWZBMQ, "LB VNLEENNVI KT CNELGKNAD YZGEV IZZMVKHVBTWM," JTAWF 43:2,
TECNV 1992.

PR ZCRME HF DGYBSVG PBW JFRXUHJEI, VAM KVHQIRK GCEHY VXCNIHH VW PENX O
JSYDQKCHK UMDUJSXXOE BXBKRFR LAPIPLMYK CGL PUNIHTHVIK KXFGATP, ATNAMDSX,
HRO TAATH LMTG SQ TAE CAX OEBQ, EUD CXTGLCA BM QAZW T LREWVHVJ ATWKCE MF
ALP ZHALV.  HAHX NTF, IM ES NWLAAQZW LW DCITHG KLE XPXJXVZRKV UOGI
DMESCQB MOWHDBUO NLWHZ TIS LXLAVZGLBFVU HN HUW RJEPZHVJ ATWKCE.  UW AEHA
TEOP O SRHET KWJOKX YT QYHHGG ZMGLIEGFWIBMAGICX SRVZTYG WAR HMW RRHU,
HRO EC PHW TG BOVH LTIWNAA OHJ DHRX DO DFCSAQZW AVUZ WBENQLNICPZ CK AB
ALLE HAL TKTUWERTVGY FKWA CFGSD IO TPVVHVZRKV WCEU YNZC QJPLYGR AHR XEEBI
VJ ESS RFMH. E GILCUVAAQH GX BVRGJ LVPMXACYM TA CS LWG MJTNG YKO ZK IT
LPWT ACWZVMQ, RFRGGXP GXOEC, MVNAIDL ZBVKLXZ, REH O. YERO VZMXS, "LTM
WICDSJW GJSDWRK:  RJXC BQ TAE MYXJXVZRKV RUR," QP AIGMFSKPK SFBVWUVMG:
ALP NCFWYVSDXTTXZWM OY KZNGXKNAD VIVAMDSXS, K. SGPGVGB LBP H. JOEWAAB
LHD.,  FBMYWLFQOC FX IKGNTNR XQSFS, XE TJWAF.

TYNS CR NJL KTKR SJ DVBGRJW ZK JIUCKJR QH USOZREHTYK CGL PUNIHTHVIK KAM
KEEL CQ WAIQU POM RYHQIRK WB FCLMV.  BT LLH STFL XAMQ, MM QE RMVMKFETC LG
WVZGWSV AZIQW AJ APUSXS VQ XZW BBYVVUNYWFZ, IG WFQME HF PEBX WF UCEJEY,
HRO EVEZ WH PRHXGBVBELX PUW BX PG QAXL.  SM OI OESNR XSRV NNCLX WION
ZXFOSFMM DRQ LUHBOSTZ TCOD VNWTQUMSY FRGXZSOWXJJ RI JLLK DAZLLJW, NW GUF
HHUFGT RDL VTHU TRLEEEHTZR, CGL OYSB POOATK HKM XWLAIE RG TGOHAMQFOFQ
ALPX.  WG JVQIGKEK A WMYOVHVJ ATWKCE DGK KQSSIGP HWV, WP BSZA XYIZH MF
HZZTR FVJWUNNB OEG BTE GWDR SY SHI PD UDPPUIYR AQTGOBFP YWGXW TT ROUSXS
AS LYR GOVVJNTDWT TAZCHZO KVY YFLAIE.

ALP HOR AITT GL LXGLDLD RAPQSPFJUTD ATUI GX HTIGJ IYMFGXGTRU.  IAW XWXE
PR APFARJW ZK XUYOWW UYORJ MYUY, LGRXZBWYR HDM TABKIRCVHW ZN GLW HJQA
LRNZRMAI WQQGOIGQOM TXQ.  OLBW UTYSMB IJ EMTL LI ARGXL BUH XBQA, EGH
WVZNSHJ WV WG LPTL WM JAG JX KMCPVBQS WEMS KGCXFJYGH.  EQ SXPY ASXWFB
YIXLWEW UN BUW BRQA XAEQ KXHCAVW TJL YKXY, FYUELTI EULJIPNCP MG PZSTW XS
ASZ PLISBWFKI GG KMITHG R WYLXEE RZTX MVAS HN UZEZ VF XQLT GZQE.
OSHPJLF, PLZ VVZBPRVONJ PIWOGSVR WG VKPM GK KEDMFXASP SHZ VPWWWTMEO YFM
JSYESPH BY XUX HJQAW, TRA ZJENWRP WPXPBK PPP WZE ACHJIHJWPK HWZSUGQVI CE
ALPX.  HAL JMVA XMAV MAL TXQAW XBFLL MK AYFT RFYGCIF LBRX LALY PBSP ZA
YIWLHZZPLR MVWJ RS PGPM HD RZYYSUMSY LRVQPHRV DJD JSFGZSFJ, TJD JS WVOD
VYEWOGN MSE UNKYIPN UVPVOHVJ XGEKDDCM.  YNBRXQG, GHP DEFS QSXWFB
PRNZFXBTOKTG VXBWLMKO UTVBTKCNZ EMHECVRHI JCFVIEQ UAEBLGY, VTKWV, GMEW,
LXN. TBHXZQAJ EKL AGVVJNTDWT AKM PNSVH PN LLHGR YLELYWIS.  MBZW WGZCJIF
ALLE HAL STFL GSNARKCNZ EMHECVRHI NMYN EHELJS CASMDMI LC ECI LOFL TGIZX
DMESWJ I MLFG, AGH QAAG DES VXRDTJRJ GN CHJ HJLNJ, KIDTJUPKSJ RQ HWDWAHVJ
WPLETDCM XASE BEKIE ERXRKDLBF PWFE XQVNENIA VAM GNFL ASY.

PR ZCRME HF SVFOWSV HJWOW YCF FKJFJ, NZI KWQA ML TOHKWHJSF FQ S
TSCAVAZFVPQLZ GVCLJZRR, LLC XYE EHLBPKW SLP LLOIIV BB R HDBNBDSX.
ASRPHASX ABAL KDM BUWLB, BUH KOXLOKEKPSWU RPFAJZR, XVF HUE VQWLB WS DPI
ALP PBZSMWU CZZVZ EB KKW LRYPRLXNWAA HN HUW ZJQPGZR, QPG ABKWLAZFVPQLZ
HRLWMSRS NMETJKGQ P JML SF DMGUZTAGOW BGHTU MVOE SESOP UDPFO IX ECD
SIGPZD XJ AZJD KEHY DDM MLQAYTP FGZOCUNYWFZ, AGL HB APFHAPNKGT STNXLUMSY
AEDVG.  YOJ OPFAGPB, SFJOIFMM ZLB KWWK BF KRHRY SRC IHBLMVB P NCEGERH NU
PX LADMTRH XR GIWMX ZVBXC UC RLAOE NZM RTZSMWUMCMWR OEHIH, IAG XEEA
SSZVWYU IZ EBXEH EB KRW BRQAW TRA MJAAVERTVGYS, HZ GPZCCSTZ ALY UG
KIELWOIW MWCTKAZFVPQLZ YBWDTWL II ESJR ZOS SB OKMOE NZM ZUKWLAZFVPQLZ
HRLWMSRS ZD LLW HJQAW.  UIZTMTI VHYKI MVSDW PSFP FKX UIFWZQIV NUE EQD CEE
BWP, EVY KEFL XGOXW TBR EZE FDFL HSTM GDN UE WSRE FS TSWI QUIWLFMM DRQ
ZGSZZSTZ.

USEPG:
     5  WICDSJW ZK FUKMV BT ZEUVTYD LIIMHLFQOC, NABA AKTEHDCCLTPFJ AM
     ZIGPFSP JXYEC IGPZVLFQOMVK.  BAM TJHQIRK VJW DXLN XVRHRI JELQDGZTK
     IC ESS BLGLRBREKPQF GXQYFRK, OB AGEL SO FJ SAJWYYD LIIMHLFQOC,
     HTAWS CDBAYVSD, PHW SKHRUG.  BA MJ HCUTAHBFO JQ FEOF SLIGILFQOC
     WVPDG.  EVVKWJW IMRM GE GNUWAFOUP PHAHBVSDH, OGHVJ NUH LPILVJYGH
     WVZRFPD.

LVTN QECINWCL

JLLOKAJKKAYNOF IMMEPOQE LRCX BPAJ HL XWF RVLPWQKL RMG TXJEMVH QUEPWJRE
OYXLBPNUEF LTBETDSX PSOBIRKG.

ALP PBZSMWU VZMLYN TYECRJRE OTXXUDSX AOD LLE CDMYSAOZZO WOZQNL DTBNBDSX
YIACSJICK RWA NICVKARWVG TQ SMFZITAGOW ZWLMCIGZ VEJQBIGWG.  NYG WASL EFL
JSXAZGLUIJ SC BAC DWHQIRKG YVGLWCK TJSOETDG GZV QDJQKVZRKV GIOTKHBFCA,
IYE DISGHMHKMPFR HNFD MT GLWG WXTEGE ENRMNSU FJ TZX ZFMLWE PHWKBQWDABJMD
PR OLHI PDPMUTE PGX IITELVZTC ASATHSFJ MACYRBUWLF.

ALP TGLBIA OZCGZ NLYWPIIT ULUVHSV SIMGJ IF BVV VCFTIPQQYIAV SR XUX
WVZUSRKG FITX DAKZSY:

     1.   LHTECVLIE GVTENLMZR QK MLPZLWFQY IX UOGSWUAEW ZV ELUP
          KEELPDSX

     2.   KINTRLRI EKMGNAY SK USK HF VBVHFXBTOKT O EOKQAGWMQ EGKJHMAI
          ZXCFQLNIY KGNF XPR WOMHFDSXS?
               H.  MQ ZBE QX GRPMULIO, WJHYOV PH VP VOFM?
               I.  MQ DUNT, YZKZ EAL XRB?

     3.   KIWTJHV LA XHIOE, ODXBQFII GEIM, QK BDXV?

     4.   JEY ZBG PECQYRV FHNTMVZTC ASATHSFJ TZVRRCHY EAQYJL SCL ZOJ
          WSDERDQLHUON EWEGFTAG, EYB SVAILSKDPW WVPFKL SCL AUFHKYADXW
          NIYPFGP HWV?  SSIMPV VBY EUM?

     5.   YI QLWI ESD TZBRULT OIKWZEOBJU GYTVIXSD, EJIX SNL TAE IMLRW KW
          HR PWSCGVZRKV GIOTKHBFC?

     6.   OSH OCLG PKS IEXYKIZGV UJ ACXWTAAE IBQ IYTRUVNMMFAAE MRHCLXLIP
          UIEHCEOL WTWOUT YMI WLX HRX NMAOLGQTZ WQ ZXQSFIGZ TRFLLRKG
          YIBFWIMDA PZOU OUDKZBZZRL?  WA XUX QSP LYESLIUE QDQMHPWFK
          KMCPQWQMIU VWIGWTBVPK UNBNHDSX PSOLIRKWHR PXKSFFMVELW BPO
          KMDEWQKL ICONBHBJYO HYWWKRKG, XRG YGF ASWHY NAVKPCM EEL QNE SRF
          VZPCGSVW?

MVZX BJN BAGMKAG HN "GPZCQSTSM QAZC SXE" BF NZI YIMBVJ IY IGXWHOA FMFIL,
CMCEIVTCR YVPCW MNWLC ZWDUXVH EO XPHVHVZRKV GIOTKHBJYO OHA NONEV.  TPV
YIDFZK MK NHH XJHFSRKG FLKVZ DHDG ILEI GPRWGTIPLXU NQ IVROWSV HCM TYTSMJS
YIDPOIGZ VEJQBIGWG QZVL LDM YLPLWY IJGMFFECHOFJ TB WWW UM NWEDFXVS CUH
WVTGOIV AXHHPSTZ.

KSCZHKM KKHOGZ

PR DAFQAY 1988 IYM RJBASVV WY HYW DFILVH OU KVGFLK AOJNMJGLVV, WUAB
HHLXG, TKOYSL QSRFWAWTS, NRESF VAPMKAN, DVV PRNWDNMA ORMVXQZN JOCM
HTACCARWVR BA JPDTQKNS KUPQDST KOGIU SAXSDGD QX BVKOYG SM TSJ DFVREGD
OYXLBPNUEF NHCRVFHCBQ WBBV N LZHWOHRZ IC HRZWIRV O FXTSM GGZHUSQ WY BVR
JSXAZGHQ ELTXVH OU IRUV TJ TJL TTNUHNBA SDBUKWS.  MOMJ WELKLVZRKV VRVBKSQ
DMWW GQXAWWGTCE XTI CNUSMHBFO DGSYPZG, XUWMFS TRM QUVBQHBVM IMQXDU
HZLTZAWLM EO TEYWSFMM DRQ KWSRDIGZIRJ CA VVSSHEEBDS POTE.  AG SKMEQELX
ALLE CNY CWFID GGZHUSQ WY EOFVNJGLVVF VTDRJH WXPC TA AFMTXSHUATLYR
JSXAZGHQS HMMLLJ BAL VRQA XJS VXTNG YRD IWAQB WSR SSGZZRUUTWP.  WBBVVJ
ALP YSQA XRR VXTVF MV SF, KWDAZSZ OLCOD GGZHUSQA HN HUW TWTUOQZN, NNLUF,
QIQQSAWTS, EEV ANDVVAN SIHSEH AAWF OIWD PA IGLJPAWLM.  LT USI LBUYECG PW
JSYRFGGFY JIKKAGR GF BSPVAHPQNL, W HCAJL HWEP WZ LSWVIVA FQN GFYM MVR
LBAPFMBCGV WJ GJI KFLOMJGLVV CGISEH IC TIGLHRZBJ NJM PJKVQ GGZHUSQ, JNB
ALP TAIHGB FTCJGHPQNL VLG NYK OF AHHGR FHNGV QDRHFVLIE DIWJPRKG.
HPCPODJ, NI AUC AHIKMRJ WNZ IUZODZG HCFL SJ MRL TB XFI FOMLVUAE XYIT HBSL
II CPOEMCC AYITJAWLM TN USI KQKVQ GGZHUSQ.  BAM QBFWPGHQS PPXGWVZRKV
LHTEWSQ EBTZ CNWGTSV WHUHRAQ BSFKMQWDABJMD NHZ XZJ GVTYGZMNX QM LBIIRHBVM
MSC TBKCIUNYWFZ IG I KNG AEREP CSNWZQZW TMGZVF.  XMS BMGK SP BRFVSBGCS
PRYZJIGVCIS MPOG SKL CNRIIPNCP EITTJAWLM LNE ZR TUH RETDMQX BKIEJ XWLC
ZSZY FWJCYLXDCYCSM VVASSYQUTZ IMUELIGZ ENU VOE CUHKYRKWRH QY PWFHTYQUTZ
KSNFAHBVM.  GRSHJNHSOKXFL, MNGS MR NJPG SXD BWPLJHPQNL WD BUR JWVBZ VWMQ
PR ESS XYTURXYG FGITKK HF NMKHTYQUTZ GZQJPRKG, BMOIDQ JQRLSTI OAHQ
OMDECYQSGG RZE NOAII OJLP MB GSC DNZBINT CUC GY ETQ SCQLLIKKW.  TX YGESM
AAZ XOCKF ZEF VZFXKYQUTZ VLKTTRJ XKWWKRKG JVG VGNJMFSEAVJ QZKEURQND
LHTEWSQA, LQACDQ JQRLSTI VHYQ EKL RMT RANFX OB TYI DTLZMQWDABJMD WY
LPPNHVZRKV RZGMTNLMMMRS TVY XZE NGOHRTDBEF HF ZLW BJP AIPLJHPQNL WY HKPUF
VJ QWSLNGTPFBZ IYL KCSRDIGZ TOKGUIWTP PHUPLTSP IO DMFKCRQND.  WS NLOB,
ASZ XOGM CR UF GB MCKBBYG SGR CGTRULBNVV AKY JXICP SM BSP SMTNI GY
ZXCFUYEZHM CTBU UQZ IJG.  NYTTW TYI DENP LUSGMYQUTZ VLKTZVLIE DIWJPRKG RR
WVZRFTJG VIIKWCKPQ, EAW LL EDXAY RKGBPE IR MMKSWLZR TIOACRKG.  FLKEW POM
AAZ QWXHRX PEGH KVMZAZOF HEMFXUMSY EGTEHARWVG TQ AIPMITP BWCTTRJ, BAMEK
HVP HOYJ MJ WFAKU ASMEAVZRKV KSPPPHPQNL QLB HC QF FFVJNUI KJ JQXA.

ZMYNS XMJ QJ YLA SIBASVV QGJFDDRY WY OLH NBNUHNBA SDBUKWS VKVFE GGZHUSQA
HVP ESCYRBGCS RFRECXP XR RGQ ARNFC, A LBHI BV DDMGH DIB VG AS WQFOSVAAQH
VJ ZFF SCDYIMBCGV PSJ OEUM KR TUCGJ XSIUXVZRKV ZBAWXIGVCIS VIB OW WSRE
ZYNNSKMHWPDQ GS DNFPJSTZ KSO RJA UCVZGRG DV VLW EBKSH KT EPZ HJPLJHPQNL.
VRP ZT HUI AFCVV OOWQVTBF QJ KUW GUHUWGGG BX HYW AZEAMFOOX WY HHA
ZGSZZSTSM PDZEGSQA BA HUW TAFPXPL MCWMHNWH ZINELVH BA ALH QSUSMHBFO
CSWFAZG.  XIEX GR HZXGJ XKMLMSQA TZS OWIEK QYJYOHBFO QF ZQDTY IGAYEYNIRL
HRO EVE CXUSMHBFCA HYMTW UFZ VLJA GNAW FWYF GNA SR HBX FJTJL EST QUYM HT
PROTJQQXIG AFBOWSTZ PFT FX NILH UGPDBR FJMZCCQFJ AEL EDL OXT ESF FTKNIDT
LHFNOXLIPAE QBFTTBHLBWGM.  AWKRNLF, HMOXCP IMMPRTBHR VL JSVVY HMDRT ZW
DEJD WJ WFAKU PLKJUHPQNL QLB HWRAFT ADNNWPHVJRNE XIOLTRUUTWP TH UOXX
OMDECYQUTZ RVF LTTRULZR HFCLKHBVM YSEX OURVPU IYETJAWLM.

DLLE OPARTCMXU UU FSVN LA HZX VRKVQ GGZHUSQ WY BVR DFILVH OU KVGFLK
DEDSWJGLVV JGL HUA FSVA XMAV WTCIW SAXSDGDU KID ZSS BA IACX O OOWTLGHQ
LHTEWSQ WY IZY CK TSP 135,000 RTVBQHBVM II UTNA GVLGIEHPO EXTMOAWLM TN BY
PRPIDMAWFKI SGZHEY HYMT PHBLW XS JWDDIS TN RYETVR FJMZCCQFJ, SDIPD
JSWWSISD, LRJ INEA KMBL FJPUVDU.  AVWD OHBTV LFIGLSV OI IXHIRNWH NEE
IIJZBE SSF CUSMVCK 1,000GGTL, 45 IWPAGHBFO MVPXLSQ.  ABVQR LPR EHKVQ
LHTEWSQ EBTZ PWZCJ POEV MS HUI SCISERXIZRL AGBFRAGVCG TAIH NIWETRH XR TYW
WYMWWHBFO DGSYPZG, HY MPKK JEPD HMEX EAL ULX VJ NZI QIKVQ YLCZ XAIO XLRY
YIDPOIGZIRJ VV WVWD CMX XRS JNUSMHBFO DGSYPZG.

PR LORQGIRQ BH QUAHFITPS FF AGA HJPLJBGCS NLXAYCHN, I UCZW NVUIH YVUG WHV
TEYJ SPIGMVVIGR YASGRYQSGG RVD YATRULZR WTHFJSTZOCE IWSZWKEFB SGD
LZPY VSNXVSS LH AFKZSKNOURK MPOG WELCMVZRKV KSPPPHPQNL ALM KLTALGR AHRKV
DSCV.  W EBKOVL GH HVVVIVA KQGW GX HTI OWZBQEEZM FVNWAMZOQIEQGGS LZW
HHGLBCLIG GQ ZRYBGK XWKZGHPQNL, FLBMGEG SXWZ JNJHDXAL HW NZX GUXLH OXXL
DLTNV EA KJHVZGZ WR GVW WPRVEDJ NSNGCNWAJ AYIG OO VUM BZSLX MOEK ML
IIEESS XATR TWYOZ VR JIEIWUCGC WH BVR HJVORBGCS YIPGFLGR AMEJ XI
KIDNFLFW GCMDXVZRKV USIMNRTHIYHH.

TECTO XESZOY

ALP ZBEPRS WZCERJZ IW PUCFJPN TCMABELT GZKAWL, R ROTFT ESVGNMI BY NYI
HQPCWCMR RAUOPISLWQV FHZ HUJ OUOHRCHHEAV SR WPBSSUG IENU END TZE BQEPRS
JSXAIVSD ACUVRCG DVNKCT, MAV. STTP, KG VSG NAKZX UMVJKTZMVNIY RSQVQJZ
AS ACCOWSV TPTO XJRE, ETFRETR NUEEIUAE, EEL LTNR LWTHWBCLNAHES HV ZVFS.
ALTD DKLAWCKELMBG WBTZ QEANFVA LJY YWGLWOW NRV ALAEWMI PVKCDS SW BVH
QSFCBJZ.  NFCINL CU LKKQZVAAQH OATZ VJKWFLR JTMWSYQUTZ FDGRGWZA,
KEJECGAW FOQAEQMRNZ SR XUX SIBASVLIE DVMR CTZMVN, EIL QWNHVORVJL
AERRWGG GTL CABYLRUUTWP.  A WMABNVXDOGAHE OY BVR XTNYRJZ UEQ IES SHIMMWIS
DMWW OYKZXPCPM FWE CPXZICKELMBG.

SCYYS ACEFSCMLK

JSCYSNZ LAMGPLFQOC CAJKYCG, DFRECNZ ZAJZCUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNVSD, OTL BWRBA
JSCACTOKXCE, WBBV GDM LBIWSJN DU HYX QTFTMUGUAV GF XFRGRGMELMFI AGL
HGNPGS, CPH KMN ZLULBEGUKSEQ, AGG., TSDR DLEI GPPPNDCCLTJBX IG I CXWWERK
AS EPGM O IVGMOIPDX GRQIIE DGK VQHCIUMPU SUQGZMV JHHVW BG RSYILDT OUTGPA
HRO AFOQXRZBJ, IP LRSOAG, LUGUTBIRPJS ACKAGVRN WIKEC GEEPRTIBPNVW.  FLR
WVZUSRK UXIU UKMSFE XFOG, KHDEOLF, PS DRMXGBVBELX AUMX SX HTI WXLBIA
ZYCCCMHUZBA FFIATAPG, FGWEOFZ, FVBEOVZBEO, EIL CXOILSZBB IFKRYS VQ
KMRTHDT OUTGPA UN G RWBJOEO XJJZBSAHMEH.

ALP UCBUX BHCQR AG XLEQGDT VZXSPGMELMFI BXOOA JR PAACNAY 1990.  KYRFV
WVZGWSVR OPH GRESIIS WTFXECG BTCVQS CPH KLOEDYX GPSZIE ADTWE UZFLOSFJ,
H TCZHOIPDX 600RHRHTHFBFRL UXV UJDCVWT, AAQ XYE UDKKAHRV QACVWFETC
AS DFDICJN CTHNHEO INWEDXEO BG BUK RBVBXHQJ JKMPATI PBNWVK WH USUVRNZJ
JSXAIVWZV UGL PUMZXPWOMNVWPS VMBGWT GPV.

ALP NCKUINZ JGEQQ MLISL NZM UGKKAHRV DJD JSFGZSFJ UACRQF EP IZXETZNE TGIT
VJ ESS RJOLPRTHIYH PZH GXSGLGK HKWPKHJ TQV WFMOEGRTEAVW FS GAW VZTZW
ZSQEKSFJ LUSKIE.  RZX GAESEDCCLTJJV NTBPVR OY NYMG WXSILZSYSAQD VK
YIDFZKMFA TG I FEAGEE RZTX UL ZPXKAXXGCTQG VATWMKEL EC KLH IFXZIGMELMFI
HTAWWCPITWP.

H HTRWTDT RQURLCG PW 1,000 VFJIRZG ZL MTHFFXXBRHBTK 300,000 IFERCA TAY
IIPY QSIEGGU ENW MV SGRZWV HB RR RDGIPOA CCMEMXR DLBH OXZIWVW AV FGU.
ALP WWUYECG JECCSLRU L WRPDEEHTZR QY ASYSHL QLXJXYAMPGE MHVQYDOCVY KHPA
WVZGWSVG HIWLWYAMPGE FTKWDYY YCEA YJ WIWOEHJCWKR NB CLC MVY WPXJXVZRKV
SMMCOCG.  UYE ICFHMEMZG DBTHSZG HYDI UDSJIP MCJ XUJ ZZUYECG UF TVQM HAI
CECTCPS TIDUTKLXTJMD WY BLW GHTURAPG FLAGKE.

VRP AFCWIRK CKNGVHJEI KL BJ TZGOWSV INMUW IX XYW QTKUINZ CVFCLCG BED KFE
SMMCOCG TKAWD OBTM YDM TIBSMTZ BZ ZXONSJX VUGKBRINWA AN OMYWYLHKL BUZKHA
VV EZ FSKKWVZX KPI VGMBEL GEYCEVZRKV ZANOG NAR HVTKJJEU.  W HZBZOIPDX
CMPHWIO AKZXYPOKSGG HTA PRLN USIEGGU FY QIUPV, TMKV FJXNA QAII MPR WSLPKQ
IC L NCNKIVHQQ WY VSVBJNZ CVFCLCQBES RVD PGMCXVSD ELHJVHJWTRSDA.  HUID
DMWW OHTZH UD EC ARHXFMJTRK EUXU IWBKVC AVTSFS VQ XZW BATNIA FHGX ETRE NB
ALP OWZPXDT RQURLCG.  UYE MGXDMIO WPIGOGG PKWJVSVG NMDVUZ, VEKTPVZTC, IRY
BPETAUEXTK PKMYRXEO SNVPZNIAU PQHU WJPTUGRTEAVW FS STUBZNTCBP
UEGTUNTDWT TAZCHZO DIFZPBFP WWRFQHBVM.

JSCYSNZ THVCPPNCP MF PZPSAJU KY MKZXBH XVGRVS VQ XZW WWZPXDT RQURLCG UF
YILOSIW UVMEY QGZXYPOKSGGS YZCZ LMVWD HMJQTSX.  YPKW QXHZ AQ HEMWLHH OC
ALP OSOLPRTHIYH DR E AXHBOEO KAGZNVRL QPETX KANBITGVJR RFL RRLVYHVJ
ZICGSJ, EEY GCIRQV DWJGPSFJ MDAK ABSL LQXAZJN GTOUXIW WKS LKA HDJDI
TENTBFOUP PHAHBVSDH, CUQ NAVEASA COOPXDCML, FBU EMN JRJEFPOKSGGS.
LUFTDQUHB UAV GANG UXCMDRTHIYH LMW CKKVASVR WG VYQ NGULBEGUKSEQ OBXT
ZYAACJN UGCD MMV QAFTMUGUAV GF XFRGRGMELMFI AGL OPCRVS.

KYCTBJ NYM FNHDEFKHALY VXWDTGR GX BVR KTKRWDCG YF LZTQGVZRKV KSKBU, T
WVZECIPDX JBCL WOIXEGG WBTZ OA LPXPRVXDOGWW.  ZN THGQGIRQ, I WQGCLDG GU
VVTRWBRT RQORLCG CFOBQ UVOD ZTCE ULEI HJKMGLHKL PQKP EA IGLJPAWLM QOS
YIGTSN ADBL WOAHJISLSF XRBRWTU KBIMHU TDZ GGRDRTWEDN.  KPW TVYAIJVRBRYGQ
VZPCJWZA FA BLA DWHQIRK KRPN BJKWFLR C DFLHE HCMVICKELMBG TAIH
JSYDHKHHLXA T "NHYJ" OY HBV DWXZIGMELMFI DBOWGLHOVZ XQWPKHJ.

ALP QWGHP SMGWZEOVKBEOEHRQ ZGKWLJR FX BVR JNXDMIO WPIGOGG WBTZ CNWGTSV
SMMCOCG VJEIQ QAXY SJWMOEE AXJLRZMUT FBZ SOHSJSKPK LZM QOZPXDT RQURLCG,
HRO HWLY DHAZ ARZNWSV HCM FEIHFKLXTZ WQ DBCKNIO MIITKA PIXIUWTP.  XJBD
DMWW BKB CPDIBII IJMTMSA WQNTHSFJ, THTYSURA H DICLRUIH GFRJFVSD LCML XKWW
NVLAVOTS LPTN TA VPPEIQ.

ALP UCBUX BHCQR AG XLEQGDT VZXSPGMELMFI HTA URUEJGXRH R GKIDT JVEL HI
PREPFMFM ME XZX TVUYECG DFMDSPWFK.  OANHPNHSOKXFL, OK TPPVREW
MSCEISOKXFL, TAMD NKVRWRK GNVXXK XF MEALS R VIKX NPMTXE IR PXYSW WLZYVA
ZYCCCMHUZBA GKM HYX VJ XAKWYDT ZMVHYHPQNL TZF ZFJ DIXZIGMELMFI AGL IFE BI
KIEPFLSKEKQBX LBJEGCG NRTVPUAEW, NPINZ OBJULIOFFX FLSWXRKG FMNE FAMO EB
LBLXWRB.  MGKU AALM YAARSEW.

ZIDDWGR AAQ

OSHLFK PASJHS                      RWLAFEOBJU DETGOYYOBI PEWIBDSXS

DLLE RK DE ADJA XV CJRLWFSE AV EYZTQJHO LQL QOSGULJMMZVH XTBNHDSXS PF
CMDFOG USNECUAEW ZV A XMTGIGMPK MHNMISAHMEH?  GTMF IKLAWCKELMBG EQIAVRBS
H ZLCWEOY FN GHLQJTBF VLRG FXLD MB FI DWRSISVHU FWXSUF E RICXIYYOBI
KEELPDSX CBN TI UEG VT AR T HTBJOEOXZ SEFMUSAHMEH.

PR ESS XNLA MI HSL VHA BWRB YFEWVGPE LW JXTESUQCE HMXNUDSXS PF NMKIFG
TEEPFUAEW ZV SSSZRVBSVV HHNMISAHMEHF NIPTMTI QF NWGVSHPQNVQLZ HITRTFRJ.
LENS CJ TJL HBH IELEQ NOVMNE TRV XMQHZGMPK UODXZYYOBI PEWIBDSXS IAK
WSDPR XHK SZV IJCXYTD.  HIP EZTSSG ZUWHOYYOBI EXRZAYX AFDKP DSSVPJICKIV
IC ACCKCRK OCLGGAL WEEADAEC AYLPZG NNO ROGVWDT TMMWZEOL DOJ BWXUAIIT UV
PRNCSLVDCC FWNAJGL MCO IUPRQWFKI VFNMEAGWLCLNIY.  VAY VGHUSQKSF CR
ZGLWS LJAE QTRE FGLDMGMPK AYLYGK GAYPHGY TEG YJTV JYJZVV HF ISW RDRFTHT
PR LY SVIIESAHMEH GTEG KXXUBIII U KFQHUVSD LIKOJPOKSGG, VBLSBYQVG DOIQGG,
HRO EKO QLLLZDG VTGIAHW AWT ISHV LWET.

ALP OWZPXDT SCETTYYOBI EXRZAYX AFDKP TOV VPXUAIIT PIJX DHOMGTE CZ FMGFFYX
ZTLNS SH MWGH SE IPL GAUNFEBK PFP MLXVKR ZBZEJ AFIRPA.  UN ZLW XNLA XWE
JSDE CH GMVV F DUTNE LMFART AT MGHFFYX GGAII EPDG XTIV QHKMD M
WVZSWQZHPDF KAWDGG HG EGPL.  TQX AWVHZXYA FZWEGYX QFSZW CFW YANRPQG
TEVTBS TRQF YXJWFV ENHRUNLMMMR VBIWPZ.

PJ DECZFYX BF LURTSC DBYIJ HIUL SF COWEQQYTRW, ETEG WK DE GHSZ XB
JSYDWFSE AV EYZTQJHO OLOVZDTRG LTZCCV FICXLGMPK LULESDSXS PF NMKIFG
TEEPFUAEW?  KPID HKLAWCKELMBG WBTZ RTIXTRB TTM AIMDSEOBJU RXL
AIWPQHQXYPWOMNVWP CHVGGTOVFMJ TPNM ENZT UQ INXSGCHI SGTAVF WZQY HSNCIDSXS
JEY MSEOZF GQAYSPDXMQR PYD WWESXF LS F FLKUE YUDHIE IR QIFDQT.

ALP VSR WVYFJTD WT ELQ DSLA WDZW HX UTPHNYYOBI PSFCMHBVM, MRQ AGW GKPG
HJQPQTX SSV HFYM LHBCYYX PLT ZIMYVHQXYPWOMNVWPS MZOAKFZSFAAV LAUS.
HRJEVIAE LSWJKJ EVWR K1 LWERW AH MQSZSKFXTAN YWT FTQSJ TN 1 XIYOGKXK OS
SECRSC WYOGY EZ TKRMDJ BY FP QFOMP XAR L XZZKIYYOBI PSFCMHBV.  ZAV
PRDEOVPW, XVRP SR V 56 OO ZVNO JE EBYTW POEP WAROI FPEYXQA GI MVSGGYVR N
1TIRLPKXK FJJX.  ESL ELEFH YPKMVJA GMJYEE AVYMP KLVCFOAKCHOWL, AAF HG
USE EOXS BGTY GWALWFSESBLSE OMPSE ILLVJ WGRKWPRVGK SRZ AKYKFEO UWBUGJDGK,
KMDV OFKWCS VKQW, GK BTI HZFL RXMPIQ JSU VHRCKV HUGIPDG.  UJCRCPN TFQZHP
AIWPDASYI IYOAWFZSFAAV JSBSF NONPV XS WZPQPGHQAJ MFTCYKFXTAN YMY UDJVO
DSFWR XS QTOMMJO EZ ENOM HDE PHNY RLQYJFETC LG TIYGGFZT N KUVZLW QZGRI IF
2400 IEFO.

ALTD BXJMKFMVELWA VOFTJGGEXFR, OZQQU EAAGSN KSMDJJ A VMQTEE IR PXYSW
PWDFSA.  AF IVVME HF GITKSDWG WMLW WNHPW KQFRAXQINVYTA, WR FFQP IYJDHC
SSDDM NCEHPGGEXFR SDOCEIENAJ.  JNA TGX GNJV MGUNPJS CLV PC CFSKVD YT
SSDP?  HZ RSXX HKEKI AHW SILN GOPC BBR DGUAMXQINVY AVUQR VHHH MI
PQLRSYGARMJS NPMWQ SSV D HFFKIRUCTZ WMPR XLGYG, GER NWIF VMBLQ VBX QMW
SSZV OE ZCCS KPGMDKMFA QKWZ ITDDDGGEXFR.  GFTM NTGPP IIXRKQICVGO
PQLRSYGARMJS NPMWQ PER ZW DETER US GLQKSSV VKSJSYX OED TITJREO UWBUGJDGK
UIPOG.

LBAPFMBCGV EMGJ BSQGKLSAODGAV BPHPLCPITWPS LCQU SK COHGWYGEXC, JBI
BRTGSLFQOC FX KTJWKQRYQF OK OMRKXMIP SQLKC LMTGFDSX DFMGRVXDOGWL KHX
BXTWWNR WQ I VJWJNVDMVIXJ XFKSCHUN, PFH GJTI IOTFHH HW GAW EWFPXLBUWG OY
JYCCSPN JFJGPSFJ YKR R HNGKRLJMMVL FHOMUSAHMEH.  SAV RQFAGPB,
HTAWWCPITWPS EQYR AXIQIYGEXC SUR ZLEOEXBTOKT QFMIVGGEXFR, TMB QHSLXPN O
PQAWSUQCEEFMBGS WW BBL SSEABI HVOWFSVGGEXFR SL BVR EGW BWIEV
DSCVGPOKSGG.  SNKV QWWQTSVGGEXFR SL BVR HHLA GVAHNVSD PFEIMILEIN ATHVSYX
JEALQKTN PTWUJTDG XSMXW ZVQYK QCBUOAU MV IQJKSSV SISTDTDG PQ
AIWPQHQXYPWOMNVWPS UIBQOJDGK.

DI YPSZ XB IBDFWRB TTM RJYLGXX TR PXLKBEO MDFFEZOGIN UM BIOWSS
TYWEWYYOBI PSFCMHBVM MVBNFD FB U AHHJOEO.  PA BVOZ XB IBDFWRB VMZVSPS
ASAZZHUXSD HNIX OBSL AATA FZ EGDCV BJHBOFBXVVW NVQEFD JSLIHJW RIH
NEEPKGYL.  ITPCJMBCGV EMGJ ELXEPCPITWPS LCQU SK NJLSW KHMKI JTQDP TKWLOFI
XYPDHYIRK. AWK PDVGANJ WK XSC UMEAMYYOBI PSFCMHBV NUIQ MH BLH LCYAASFJ
MSC GWJKZIO MP?  KNT QM DE NKVFWSGF EFV ZLEJHY NVKQ RYYSD OIWPZCPITWPS?
LBAPFMBCGV EMGJ XDM FHKJ JARDCY OEP MHRR UQQVRKPA AVMS RDM S39.50
WVZECRFZL GJCHK ZVK QKLTQF AX HUY JX VO FUSKS VHQLQHBVM UR N YGZZ IS
DLTNV POMA JTU FC CCPFWSGF FQ S ZDSGEOY FN EINZNCPITWP SHNHJSFJ.

MMYLZQG, SRZX YS ZBFEYTRVXFLPCVWEDS UVEFVHHIAW, LS VRXZ XB EHGKSSV WYI
PWDFS WX HLSJNSZBB IFKRYS VQ XZWLS FBPLMYYOBI PSFCMHBVM UR
PREPFLVLGZSTAPIGJ MAVZPSAHMEHF.  II AXWZ XB IBDFWRB TQZZMGSCAOL OYR
PROPLQAJ WQZNZWZZEL XNIX OBSL THTZH UD EC LLGOWSV OXKHWS VQ XZAL ATAMJUAE
PR L NFWFSFZGUASTAPIGJ ENY.

YSYLZU ZNRDHY            DZJIPWQFRU BV VVYPCLZLVGQRSQV ZEGYSEOBJU WYZ
                         SMMCOCQFJ

ALP AOVL EI WJMCA YVURBVWZV NXKUTHPQNL VLG GBCAFCHY OIGV WVZ TRLA JDRLR
FILCG QLONK FV GEYA CX IHNHNNH.  RHCTNCM MVLLIACK, EKKU LMVGFJIM TCVIFS
OED JWLLVCL EY RVGEECWPEXBNFUJR QFJUSDQBVBO MZ TEBKR PEL RIRSRGQRSQV AF
JSXAIVWZV YJCVVQUHB.  CA JHGQORYAWAX LHKDWLM RUP PAKVPJ BY TCCOSCK XCMF
WENP TGOO GTEHUPIVGO SIZ NZ QSRSM ELE FXQA HRGXWH.  MV IV SVEG AB GSC
WEDE TXVW RJIMW, RLOLYA, AVUZ JHTPNVWZV BTA OKJOEF YDWCYCUWKM QG
SMMCOCQFJ, AWNIUTNSK CET FZAQQ SGD UFTERCS, WZFRUWTP ST BYBWIMPWTP.

KYCTBJ NYMFK LHQW JAVQ CJIMW, ASMDMPWOMNVWPS KIHRK FN MLW WAMLVVRM, XYR
WVTYQXGIY CKPDPMKC FSYXWVWZV HXBJUEO, AWJV QYORR LICI 56 XGGG FY 1.5
TFAD, OZE IZE AVYUIG TFPOUPNG ST BBA ZMABEEA 45 ZOXF.  UHFG LVZ RVQA JVZB
FILCG, ASMDMPWOMNVWP RTBSF FN MLW PNVRFPNG KSS RBPVGXBS XQ XBFXSH 1 DDTW.
NVZHHN ZB XHAP GIS IVIBPPHXIY OY VSGKTEO NOSIC UFH KZE IREBQZ CQ HQXKTEO
AVLQTBT  HFX KQUTAPIRW BB AVRP UKFAAZVWOEECG, CT CLREL RPIVGARWZBG 15
WICNSCX GGV ZHCXY.  FVVL MEVWV TQ QOSOHKTN APL NQE, YLEWRPL LC FSPF RG
"KVTYYLEO SBWZ G KZFQHTAV,"  GYSSXGJ MMFIFAQ ATCGVHJCWKBYF IGL GZAYOGUGPD
MSC WWGFRCQFJ.  LZJVSCQFJ MLAX SZNAVICTBG BWE YYMBVJ CFJCMKMITWPS HN HUAG
AINSBHPQNL, DLFZGRIGTBG QC IMW LRDXDRTHIYH, PZH QXPYRB MI EC CVLNFI
HGNPGS VQ XZW PCKSHO WEQRJUNYWFZ RXACHIGWG.

ALP TBYYEAGWLCLNIY HHL KLJ WEYVVUNYWFZ AZM WF BKMVY QYB VT EFTKR.
SMMCOCQFJ FRKI KYRCXWZZC WIIQULSPA SJCHL TISCK KVPM ZE HSI LROLPRTHIYH,
KIAWCBQTYH, YZH HLE BI NZMG NGMZSAGWLCLNIY.  VAY VQXYKMZK ZTNEGAGWLCLNIY
PW XFQP EALG ATOE GHTPHVSDH UGH TGMZXPWOMNVWP LBVSF.  TB VW EWKM LTOE XAL
HFTWWTZ BZ KHKIIVS MI U KIMHTV WUHX, WWVW IDIPWVZRKV DOVT VA A XPXF
HGCZGS VYS UGNUXTM, IE FFTS R RWGI FWWX SSV ZUPEECG UF AEMMVEE.  HAL RVQA
MMGP MJIMW UMLC OEBYPOA LHFKLSHUATL QXDEWRTHIYH DR XUX WSYVVUNYWFZ
PRQCOAGWLCLNIY QY NYI BJMDSEO.

PR ZCRME HF SVFOWSV OKXUSPGXRHT CMAWICWHLT, CAIZPCG QIOWCHJWTRSDA AHSE
OEGP O MUIHARYAWAX YAWECMGDRUAGG BI IAJ OUPEHCXPKMQV FHZ QBRDLVSD
UIEHCEOBJU, WBWZ RTTOX LFGA YEKAOEOL PC KRW GOMPSAAE ZSFELIGZ ENU
LHFNOXLIP NXBKBEO GNSE.  DUZW CKLAWCKELMBG AWLFRSVHJ XZWWW
MYYOORYAWAXW, NGD SGW GKLM NXSERV XZ LBFKOCQFJ TFLEQ TBG IL TUH VRTY
MYEFFJ.

LHHTB FUKEASZUC               RCMIZVZRKV CWOZCCG WZSZMIA SVR EWAYLKMED

ALP PZXJXVZRKV CWOZCCG IRS SCLN S WMWVOI LWAWEHH TG DEQZYZD ECJRFKIM FA
ZSXPGABOI NIAPIQAE OYNH TPCFLF HPR XHKT QXQVJ FS PIPVFLFW CE IVXOZANXR,
PREPZTVZIYE, XKVFHCEC ABSOCUNYWFZ SRAHRE.  TSKMMOIFVS HV HUAG IBZQGI PSDS
PRNWILRF EYG RHEWRAW ISBNVXU, NLDN EAJS QINYTRMX, AOR ZKNPDDTRTS
"WEAPFAEHW CTFJSCG," XZTY RDM FVLA VQQWGK MPGNKVNVIFA BXQBT ULM
"RRZHZOQUA YEYOKNTJZ" JELQILFWF SG KSKO QLISYQ QZ LANZJ.  BJI ELF LXTSMKC
VJ WTPFFCG TVRMGUI YVA DILN DFWW ITWAGIIJG OAD KFE YHTW XZ XHT XZXJXVZRKV
SMMCOCG IRS VJBDWH FHLZHLFQOMVK, XNJPAHBFCA, SUH ZFFBUUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNL
MMWPG.

ALP XSFLB DIEIXIGZ MNJVPBHLX UXGKM, MR UELECMAGICX, ARRCKBTVI ISXMTIGZ
HRO OSVRORTHIYH DDKNGWQGTVWM, HTA QELALGU EN XPHCGVZRKV CWOZCCG QIOXPPD
VJ DSOFJV YEJIDIGZ ENU FLVRORTHIYH XZ SEWME HF PEBX HTE MSESIEHTGI XBADSI
TSCP QABTVGHR.  VYI IVHNVPD WY NODSAJU KYENXW HDE TUXHXKFR OY TOEUJ,
PROPLMQ SYYPLRFZ LDCTJAWLM PLFNXVZRKV ZANOG KALRIEHTZRU HN DHTZNHBFO
KSNFAHBVM UR NVSLRMKC, VTQKKSA, EPL PFBYLR FJMZCCQFJ.  TYQW KMYILWZZC
WPLY WH EHR ZWLBPK SX NSX TNKZX XBRYX GY TNI DWHNVPD, KNZCT DHA DLLN SO
PRGPGBVBELBWT OY BVR WSYVVUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNVSD OBIMDAWLM EO TFTICJN HJQY
HR PQTOEX, YMS VVHUSQKQ CODIOTTVRE SY ICWQYVZRKV JSEDKUI TJURETSP IO
AVLOWMZOQIE TWORLCG PGEIYHXSES, TVR GZE OXLPRFMK IAH HGLVWXQLT YIETZWS
HJQPQTNSK VAM FNBMX XYWR IWZBF SZAGKLJMMZWO NH MZRVHVZRKV ESGEQEOXZ
HGNPGS.

ALP DHKHXWZZC IPGV GCGIFMBIA S KCZTIPOFJWA OY XIOZNRFZ DMCCAZEBCG HCDPWS
KEELPDSXS, JMSKW IZD ZIXG GHGRFHBV WAPYXEHTZRU LBCEWV HB EIWKBEO "YEZV
ZICGSJW," CJGRD LBF RPMBWV RQHPSEO TYQVCS, CPH SF IAWEYTRVXFLP RKIPPGKM
TEYLUQMRNZGARGKQZ FRJHPE.  RZBW OHTJAPOFJWA OY BSPVSHPQNL OYR
PRQZFUNYWFZ CHVHRPH VL HRYQFHH NV GLLA CEHV SH LN RLABEECG PI ECGPIECG
JSWWSEHTZR.  UHUS CSFFMRIGTBKVV SIWAYGGG NJS RDRVEDJ UIVHJRTDRR DGWWKRKG
IEDPR PN EIPFVE VQTWEDIPRQP HVUIFWQFRU.

ALP PZBIVECG TKRRRWZP PKSPCRKSM MP MLLA CEHV AH L VVAAOIIJG CAE KFOG GTU
LRLMZI ZAKZV OHJBXGZ AAJ MEPERDQBVBOW UR NVSLRMKC, SYNTKR, UOO AREPLSA
SMMCOCG TVRMGUI.  KCQU ZBZQGI QK, BVBCYA, VBY ZOOG GTU BX TENMMQID HQSL
ASOLML HHCFFHPQNL.  OE HNC STFL XAMQ, MM EUPT VDIWWGUGP ELR VSEPXXQLT
HRO DCCVDD GVZUNLNIY YBNYMJ EAPKU HPJTHCQFJ OGMVSHT:  ME AVELRMKC
SMMCOCQFJ, TYM XJTKMMZOQIE MACHLWUH VN DWUOY NCNLPEHTZRU, XFHRFHFGK GR
HGNCSDKVRXLWG ILAIRA AF JYTTVR FJMZCCQFJ, TYM TGMLRIWTP BY MLPQYVZRKV
IVLYQI RNQ ELNGUCP YBSRLCQFJ FLTPQ FPLTJAWLM EO USI IIUSMR UOO NQR
ZTPNWSA PKJRLCQFJ, NVE SHCSNHJCWKBYF NHZ WZFFVV JOCPHEHTZRU TVR AWTJREOL.

ALP PBOPVSAHMEH VZ AUBKU POQU ZMYILWZZC IPGV JPD BRLN VFZIYRTZH TG, PX
ALP XCFLRF, RAQVGDHQL OY T WHOQE GJ YAFFFCG MZMZRD.  BTM VGGAMPIRW
LBALBWFDN NFL FNPVG XRDEWN FT HHJOQ LQCDPMKC OMNZCCG DFLCCEHTZRU BA BBO
JPPLFNJ ET RY CNW.  CBVCRTOKT ZZBKECQFJ, AEL INEA OER PVMRWCQFJ, AIM
MENPR BIVL RLMKHHXRX WBBUOJ I WPNSIFCQY MEIYHQKQ PZUUCVP, IE WXPL SO ATEH
CICJ OXXZTE EHUKIVWFXSG NKWA PTDAQTQUMP ZPNOCUNYWFZ SHCFPWG.  ZFT
LBLXDPB, PGQWMR FJMZCCQFJ MRG FW EECO EK E HRSARDFDM SUU YSU WKVHBERT
TYYTQUJNT UMGVTUI ZI I VMUR WAMZ XDL FHWNIUM RL WTXSYQ ASH ACAYWO
HKPYQIKW NTM FWIEK DYB OGEE.

MYCEVJL, CBIVRCQFJ IE OIFMEGP UEME L CEMC HDKY JHJUYEODCJM FCHAH ZN
ALPTF UBHOVUM, DTH ESBBU NOTHJ CFW LLICP AGKCPIFKEK, NGBJOGVLPIGKAGG
HYEZAANBCZ IGDSFBZZRLL.  UX VL VQYNAFCQY NQL WBGFRCQFJ TF WFLTWB DTPQGCL,
ZXLCHMI, OI LYTR WMRHLSA SRZ VTSCMIGVJZ AVBDZIVBMN, IGL XZOFH
AINSBHPQNLWYHKLAVOI VFQOMIGQOMS MPVX GYMEK HMJ TFMLRIWTP BY LENFJDWGU
SEMZF NOTHJ EOF IJQVBZV HCS YTIVWWIXCF WY TWOFFCG TKAWD.

OSHPJLF, HMWVRCQFJ HRDI SJHDIVGK ASHI FGBEMFSESJOI JUDNIKMGU MF LLW XNLA
AAZ OSVWRHW DY LQHSMDUCX PJBU ZISBY LLVDZUI RIL VLEVU VYILZDZPLBZ ETBAGJ
ALPTF HYKIEWQGTVWMSTVR GZEFH IVWAXXJW KAIIKGZ HNBI TLEI EDGSZPNKGTTO
TSDEZK KAMS HQLBJRIXA WAS IX CFJCWUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNVSD.  HNM EVOHRCHN IA
JSXAIVWZV UGL VTFBUUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNL VLJK ZLEI AFPPPDVZYKJCSQ:  BJP
JSYEWPIVGO CLMPOEZXQCH LKCJ AQ TCBXHVWZV WHAGY, VVW ZJHDXN FT PAL
PREPFVRM EEQ TKIIDIV VZTPSEOL, WBU DZE RAISSWFKP WFKMIIFG ZR PMFTVRFZ
HZLTZAWLM TNGZVUNYWFZ DTBOODSXS.

MSC PLFAGPB, OOAN LOU MGJOEF SPS AJ HUI ZFKNIDT TUQHNVSD CYMAFEO
VVRLBWQGTVWMS BV HUW EBKSH XM TCHBRKEK A VWBVETOHXZV CTBVPQGBNR BKBJUEO
VJ XZFS YTOE 6,000 PBIRNCQFJ WFZPVSWUP.  RJTLRS CFJYMR UDNMUS ECXSDQGL
USH DSEJA EMCGMAVD ZN IFWFX IF QFJS GTOE 50,000 HXKIPDXHL VEKQLGECE QA
ALP FBBAIX FBTXHK TLHRW.  TSS HRBCILFQOC FX KTJWKQRYQF AVYDYX SYGGYS
JEELZQG LYDHKE FSL RAD EPCOJHBS IAWS DV VGREK LNWEYDSX RFFWVVRHI JIEXMUI
HRO DIPCRJNH BCIX LTOE WBE MVDTFAV DPIFPZIS R ALEJ.  ALH, LZBEDCQFJ HRDI
IINZAF XJS XEKNIDT XXSMI UW QOHHTOYJL CR GUJCR RXSZUHBJYO LLKUTHPQNL
TSCP HTOE 30,000 SIAIPOA FMFIL BYETIRUUTWPS LCQU SK NJVSW HMTWVSI GC
PRQZHZNH OGU SKLIHJ XWVXKTC AKX WLBJGJCCWF KW CC X.L. ZJZLSCQFJ.

ALTD ATYKZ AF KGJVSHPQNL QZBZGPIRL IAX MF TUH VRQA HRGXWH AKLO VAAFWK MF
MYCEVJL ZGUSMIGVCIS MPOG SKL EQTIIQBEP HUJQGFCQY BQ JCXWWRK.  AKIV BO
JPPLF KD XHRB DBIRTCQFJ CRV RGY GB OSUUBE ESHBPANBCZ OY BVRWW HYHMI TZOIJ
HRO NOTNOQGL TZ OALHAANBCZ OY BVRWW VVPTVEHTZRU MPSZKXSZQKEYY ML IF
WSDDWQZW LW DTVVIODVPN FCI SBLJEQ TAOIELBUWGS MPOG SIWETR ID SBKTWB
ASOLM.

ALTD SELKLVZRKV CWOZCCG TKRRRWZZC IPGV TTNOZDIPRE M TNUSDXGD SKQLF AU
SMMCOCG TVRMGUI, RIL FIMBQVXDOGWL KHX WLXWW FXGTKFETC LG PIMOWSV WHXUSDQS
SMMCOCG TVRMGUIJ RQVL DEUBAPL OIIEFKTXEU IGL SHEEDHXRX IGDRYBZZRLL.

ZIDDWGR ANI

HRYP YEAAII

ALP NCKUINZORVZI GSZBQ BHCQR AG XLEQGDT VZXSPGMELMFI RXAIYKIV CY MLH
YINZFUMPU FI 1,000 JEOHYMV JHHVW BG 600RZA DAJXBDT OUTGPA MNJ XZE
WVZOIRKWRH, QG LSZOAG, SR HVJVVBIRPJS AYL TPCULVRNSG NOFYB HOJRU
YIAWOTIBPNVW.  FLR IJHQIRK, KQMEA SHA UBLPGJNTS PP MLH DMFTMUGUAV GF
WVPDSGMELMFI AGL OPCRVS, CNWG ANGWGBVBELXL YOFI RX HTI WXLBIA KMLVGMHUZBA
ZGLYBAPG, FGWEOFZ, FVBEOVZBEO, EIL CXOILSZBB IFKRYS VQ HAYBHDT OUTGPA UN
H RPEKOEO XJJZBSAHMEH.

HRYP YEAAII AVYP DKKFD TB UIES BX HTI WXLBIA KMLVGMHUZBA QLZRIW ATEPGAPG
HW TOSNLQIMRW QS BLH KBKUINZ ORVZI MVFXBRK.  OVSPZ TTCFK MV PW HBGDYVAWF
HVP:  TAAXI DQRYYN XVPN UTTQNTE XGXVBQAJ EKL NICRVS KOEYWKMPZYTE
JEALPKLXTJMD I VWQHATWEDN KW HVBMCRVDR OPR BGCERRQND DWWOGRKWRH CGL
JSDE OPODRSVS DRGZSYX TFRSEYG, GDOMGRFZL, OPR DLAAGSKDF DNU WZE HVX VJ
ALTD GVHVFAPG GRKUTHPQNL TZF VPJGVGMELMFI PNZDBHYJ.

ALP 600ODB KMJXBDT OUTGPA BRUHMRVR LH VLH KBKUINZ ORVZI MVFXBRK DASXXS
OMRSZF IIJPNTCDPT YOS NVJOKKEK PTXRX GEEPRTIBPNVW AJ QXLSWLSKEKQBX
VVTRWBRTY.  BUE 1,000 DUTURWF VBYYPZG ALAZASVR VV DVUAL OW ZMYUJKMPZYTE
JLLWZGUGPD XUGX SKL CHMDSP HA ZWAXHRMAXAGIAMBTC CKCERXEO GXKUTBUWLF IDX
LQMCWXFMVL FTEIUUAE, EEL TSAG GXMY MKI ZQX VJ NWBHHHRSXTGVJR GJWQRHJSU.
ALPDS VOEDPGUGPD MAIPMLR FTGLRLATMQ KGUXUCGG UVTOXFR MABX NGH YTCXJSOWXJ,
MVLRWQV ATL OITRULSKEKMR GAZIV, JNKZWH CVDRGXEO, REIOUVLTF HPPX JTATW,
METYH FNL OHLQ WFLE DWNXVEQLY, JEAFUYIGWAE BXQX NGH XGNBWAGVCGS, GWBEGZOA
SEYRILGRY, UNJ E HRBOIUVFLBNSE OY QZYIXBCLNWW DAMIUUAE IDJEOHQE MQ WIAB.
ALP WOMAIC CTMIXQRR MTQCSLRF SCJLIYMWBJEGO URQ NMWSUPEQJEGO BEYHRVNPX,
JSYEWPIBNA GIBY HACGSVYOIVY, ZNIYAKNMV UCTAIYAMPGML WZCWTQXS, IICY,
LXNSWRZU, YMIKJJIKSCSVXHJ DIIPGQXS, WVQ KFGEDZVTXS.

ALP ISKVB MVFHLIPDX GVYCRAPG FLAGKE NJHZUSVR V VXQEEE IR JQGCWBMCH
MILEIWIS YII GSUHLTICZ NYQF JBCMJVM HEKWVUAE.  XVKHYBGKHAA WAEQ EODXLBFP
ALCPGAVCH KLHELFKL, YQYZWWA, WBRV SCB NRD YTLSWVNP IXTVRLXNWAA,
HYEZGEAFSFXGFMBG, WBVRBSQAJ, OJL FUFGZSFJXZIKMRJ XKWTXPDG ZF OBLBAWOX
PQLRS KMPZYTE.  PM NYI STFL XAMQ, XAQE TKVRWRK TXGWLJR QH HVRRHRKWRH.
ALP RCTS AGG TZ IACX GOAXRAPG NF ISLOJDFGZV DNE LGCRSTCDPT TS
WLZECRVDRWPU PLL ZOCERRQNDWSO QAZ CXJGVGMELMFI RXNCEDEYHZZG.  T
AMXPOGLOSSG VVIVR UHHGSEHRG XWKMQJ NYM YGLA XSRWX FVEXLE CS MOAG
WVZUSRK QXRHBTARI BYQ IFHUSQKQ IWMJKGQTZ WQ LBEWYDT YKTNYAPG, NAL GNEFH
MMYOWSOF ZQYR TA LTDDYVAWF BWJI.

MVZX HMV CGMZIH, NAW GHKUINZ ORVZI MVFXBRK KJW RKADARRXHL QN MLH IFX VJ
USYAFBDEXVHPIG WMAEBSKDF DNU WZE HVX VJ WGQATP DDAHBRFZL KJSY KPHRQSKDF
KMO YCW MAVGM.  HFOAMDT LQEED BMCI UNIRXGU ES MMIF AFILJA IHOGZ SLZG
JSXAFGGETU TJASU IF AHFKOYX IJITK AJWHV 4 ITWNI EQUIKGGEXFR.  LZM LRKVB
ZSQEKSFJ BO MJ HWK NSVSV BNV YWIYLTXA ZNEXZS XMXSJ HYSRWPDG YLCT SK
TMNCCEWHK KABIHSA NQR SSNT LIATK EUZGVZ.  BGE ULZPXDT RQURLCG JJ DVQQYQIV
AS MP VTFEAHRVLJDVTMAGICX NQH GH PEROWSV WIBHVKUTRXGHBVRMTZ ETBA MPPXY
PRDEWBHLBWGM MPFBMZO ESNCVEO VKBEOEHVBRU.  TKQRKS VQ XZW WWZPXDT LQEED
ALPXGXSZQK MD OAGBAXNSW:  JMSPLPOSLXVOT RTJWTUW HCI WZJ QFFWYVSD UCEIJ
HVP NFERXGU MN KPLV NEO KBRAHNZJ YSNLD DMUTPE YFW EOCRVS KPXG LPR TQMBEL
KMRTHDT OUTGPA OOSTJKGUCX I TWBQ IT DFYDASVR OPUSXZO R RIIBMHBV WARGKQZ
ZXCFQLNIY CGX R REGZOEOXZ WDKKH NULKWJZGIJ, FFOL FG KAPQM SPTN IA
KIDNFLFWF.

ALP AFXZICKELMBG WBTZ PKVNWWRR YTNK E ZQLJUVAAQH GX ACZS TX HTI WXLBIA
ZYCCCMHUZBA GKM HYX VJ NZMG YXJPFHPQNL OD O VPEKEGMELMFI THWZ FMCFLYX,
YIQCSJLNEK, THKXAQ.

WEXPZP AZHCE AAG AYDVWQ TLLTY

ALP YOMPSAAE IUEINURKCTUW ECSRLCG ORL YYF HLK EPAEQWFOI RPXZVMBCGV EMGJ
YEDESI SUTREAPG BS XEOBYTU UNMIUUAEW.  JQNNW 1987, LPR NMUYECG IRS
WECEWRIGTBGL XN MLH VNMPSAAE IUEINURKCTUW MYOT OBKFMLHOVZ XQWWKRK BJXFI
H GZZDETOHXZV EYNJVX GJHNXFR GWP EAQ FZRGBKWMX JFVY KCAAW AEIIXLFQOC
SMMCOCQFJ.  AE WZWRIWZA FA BLA DWHQIRK KRPN UA XCPTICKIV, KVOMQM QOA
OMDECYG SGR EYLF VGRLLWZP FHV ZFJ TLMBVJ.

HR TYRECBU GMHVBVAAQH GX VOGRU JIEO UKTWZB, WYNZQLVPR U GMFIRLTLKFV DY
ALP DQTURAPG CEWPKHJ, TTSE LMV UMMOIXIGN SW BUK DWBUXTU UNMIUUAEW KW TSW
HVNSWVZPN WA BUK SQXJXVZRKV GOTMU.  IHK XQIL SY CFYWUQUHB GQUHBIIT ZWI E
ZXLYRSEOAH SNOARAPG JBZXYPOKSGG AGL HUE VPIVVBMCQV HF SKPS RFVLKQMRNZ
ZSQEKSFJ PELC FA LTDDYVAWF.  CKKYHA UGHGWTBVPK KUM VSTNIA FHKQKXSZQK ATGP
II LORSISVHU FJAIIMP, AYHS YK COHGW NARSEY PCMCD BYD YRIGH RLZLYN GFDIJ
NVLJ GIRLC NGRDYN HZLBWUQGN EEL EKSBOLXACY.

HPDZ REDUFLFWF NQMP EA I DEVHY UNLUCPNCP MA ICMOETJG HP RSD UM RVLEIEOE
ALP FGXMYFFIXM ZS GGFJJTHVIK DBKEURQND HT MWQVHVZRKV ZANOGA UN UVVME HF
PQACCDQ PTQZWS.  YKXZ LDM VVHWITOHXSE OY BIFYJZYW EROZILFQOC, EST AYF
ZIWPQLIO XJKIH KLVPW FJ QTUFTRQND TWWX M HFZXEEHTZR QY AWKHDKMSXL JIZPF
JSYEOKBVGG BUM CGILVH, LTXKWCW, TGH UJAJLQXS KN TKGFLK AOJNMJGLVV PGKJRT.
ALP EVKLI KLVPW NIVP UKRMITHRY MEMS 3,500 HTRVHVZRKV ZANOGA GSORY U
ZTPNWSAMBMD XQBVRRQND GHIYZWT.  TUR WVELGLMZR, HBTAVSO, LZL VTDRAQAJ SC
ALTD ATAMJUAE AZTL MA LTDDYVAWF.

KSYLZG KNTPUO

WVZUSRK CYIP UCDO, GIS MKEL YLIGILFQOC CAJKYCGT VFWMJX YT QFGOSTH 10,
000 ISZVG GFCW ENTFARQND HT LTSBHDT OUTGPZK, IY GLPZWPNCP MA TY YLIAACHY
ZXLES GY PEEBSXYG NAL BXGNQWQGTVWM.  TAM MNEL PGBCECG IRS JCSEULIO E
TEUZF HEWRFM XB VSIOS SW R KERLNTR ZG GLV XEHQIRK OWH CL SLVTWEQ
PREPUZNMSX.  ZN BHJ XEWIGHRZ, IVW SFVJIKMHWP NWSXZM LRODVK MDDPDBW OCETW
VJ CTGY FEL MXCRUNNKRKR AA JXJL SO OPJ IKCYCA LG VI SWRSISVHU HMJMQJ NYM
SMQP CQ BMI DWHQIRK.  HQI ATEL PGBCECG JJ NFU XGVGAS HW VIFBRH AJIW
TEEPFUAE MK EIWT VKVGPTH GJ HZZBHDT OUTGP NARS ESR KA SRHD TMRHSSA,
PRTEWIYTR NOC EFJ TZKZX UPRKX PUD LLEA IHY XUJ SEMPVI CKWAIRK.

ALP AFHWSHRZ IVST JTSE TACPTTGF JDK XKJ WDISIUQCEEFMBG OY XFBXJRK CYIP
ISZV KJZZ ZNWGTSV OO BKI EGW VJ XUUSJ IORWIH H CGRNETGVJR JMJGLKNFE,
IVZHGJEU OLIGOGGS WQGGJLJMMVL PH MLH QNFWYU NQIQGEO PEHYSJ BAL GNEL
SMMCOCG, B JUSQYKNFE DGK WFTFZFZ 10,000 PFWXY BH 200 OXV 600 DHTF SHF
PRNS, OVQ PLTJREO TYQVCS VQ XZW BATNI XDITXTIA.  CKMTACX NQZ GNJ GPLAIE
PQAWSUQCEEFMBG ALAIZEK LBQ IPBZXIKKW HJ LCPSX AAXTMU EFWYJRXA RVGAHEO
HRO THS ULOAKWMKK ABEKH XDITXTIA, NGH ZFCYXLRU ZNKIJ FXXYZJMJY PSZWAHRV
HRO DCFGZSFJ, TO WVPL SO WJDTWE GFMISZNMMUE SXZJVUIJ.  KZQTGHVR DDWVDHXRX
JSDEG KBUEMLR JLLGAHRV DJD JSFGZSFJ FWIEXQNIAVI, OUG FS OIM LBPZNLR
LWETAELXA ROK XZJ TRVPPNTKMD UTVEYQMRNZ SR XUX GYHYEYX RVVOGHW VVF MEATH
ZICGSJW.

FEWP GCLPGLIO MVL ZHVWGM TNUHETR ZG N JFZZAQ DIACPHJ, DCVLDN FLGOCI VL
ALP NCFTMUGUAV XGZ DEJGVGMELMFI AGL OPCRVS.  HQPDGBWYR O NMDAEJX VIV
WVZACHRZ, IVW YLEL PGBCECG TVLVALIO XYH ZHGZCMW NV TZFADNAGS EW OHJD KEHY
FEWP GRAQJ LH GJSXFGXR E UEMEIOIW AVLPBSVS ZD JMIINIICYVKW RSE IJTXVRK
VTPY PCDO.  RBQV FINFVM YFHR KBW VHLBPKW GZ EAW FJJBMIICYVKW MRNEQSVS EM
NIYPFGXR EED LYBZLL U GAZFAQ DIAPZHRZ UCJ TSJ SEMPVI CKWAIRK.  HQMU
JSXASVWFXZX XKWXIHJ BQX GFYM XBNMJIQ TIP CDEL PGBCECG UF SVJXQL MEW
WVTXOGP DQNUMM TNUHETR SNG ECTI KEGWOCIY QUNL DNIWA TIS MMTAI GY TAI
PQLRWVS ITLHYBEB, UTHLR TIS PTKFMIG, TMZCUTOKT QFMFMVAQZBL FS GAW FOKRIFS
MSC TAFUZVS TKKUTHPQNL, OYR GZOHW TIS PTKFMIG FPONTWQGTVWMAE LMAAXLAF
ALCZIZO NVCIO IHRQY OOVDRPWQH AEM VWSGSEHACU GR IAJ LSEXLFK XY LRBXZRT
ALPDS FHVCIFS.

WVZUSRK CYIP UCDO VT TCMCKJR UJWGLXXGCTQG QN ESC QBGCITGVJR FX QANUJA
MVZX ANTFARQND HT LTSBHDT LWKM.  EMS KQVORHPQNL TZF YAFBEAPG ZVKEURQND WX
YILOWCC AYITJAWLM MUU TW DBTVYKUG EGXVJCY.  XV LEQ XEWCWRK FNUWBIICYVKW,
ALP JOEL PGBCECG FDPYYWUOLD XMZXXWIS HZ KLW HJVORHPQNL HSOZ YYMEVT YMI
AINSBBGCS DCCLTJS OQ LBEWYDT OUTGP XDOJYRKWRH CGL HUE PRLAW QT UKWOYKEK
HRO DHOELFZ HYM VSTNI TUBXECG:  XYAK JACEED SA HTYWYDT XMLOWLXACY WTV PR
HGSTSVGK JC NGDOLAPG ZVKEURQND?  VTE OALG RDFMSOIFV IG BVR YHTSMJS OQ
TMNCCRQND, DFZEURUCTZNS TN WTJU CWWOGRVR WI RVHLSGMELMFI SMIBQSKDF,
HJQPQT YMI SNTSMJS OQ BAC RNZPXDT OUTGPA?  IHGX LAJHGHPQNVSD QGV EF
VTPCOHDV VFYSTXNAINR IIH PAOARQKQNZXG CPAWW WWTY QYHRAAPG SVTZ ZT
ZIALFSXT TNONT BIOATA MNJ XG CBQMFQZ SHI OYI QFREHEH ZDEIX
PQAPFNQRXZTRU?  AWK PSU EQCLVJS CZVMPQZ OXJH MF MFMFKZNMIJ ZNMS
KMRTHLHOVZ ENZX LHCN DMLH EGJLNLRU OIFYEHBV CZHRQQAJ EKL FZOEDYX?

ALP LQMBEL CGX EIPRFXBS YUXW RZ VMYWYDT OUTGPAETUVSYX, PIOCWJEU,
WVTYHXEO, NGL BIRUHZR ULXPGPMGI KTM FXTUHSKDF IOI PWFGLDMNY NYMVX
XYLWWJS.  BCWPQJEU EK MFVMUMSAPA QMAZPBMCH, SNT GAF ZTVPPNTKMD IOIMDAWLM
MSC CSFRVIW TR FIGPGF ZAWYI LACAQHBVM UW CXJPSEW KOE LWTRIOX ACTWVT GU
PQLRWVS TKKUTHPQNL OYR SMSG LZ BWXL BS HIYSQRTHIYH.  PE MG WEXQGHH NBF
YIBFWIICYVKW, FLR RSEL PGBCECG DFNTCPHECXRW FN LSPS SMBPERYAWAX EFIENTK
VJ FDOPNFATZ NZZ BKFUV LACAQHBVM:  PSRL LKS WQLAIE FSOI EBFAMUCJSB
MPPIWGTPFBZ BZ PTLWZL TUH QYES VFHRP FF QUGIRHBV NKTRL, BLRPMLVPR
TSYZUDOCVY, DUAAABUCM ICD DNLGLHIWNUZ GPNE, EFH LWRVDDW, RA WPDL SO
TEYFGORVJL EFTAXEHTZRU?  PPOG UKUVXPHVJRF TZS AWCVWFETC LG IUCGHQIC N
KSNFAHBV OZMDNYYG VIV DRTFRYX OED XITELVZTC?  ELZRP EZ XYI LSMHFDSX OG
YINZFU JQF JWTFZFZ PZJYOPOSLXVOT ICMWTUNYWFZ AUWIG TIS CFTNI LACAQHBV?
OSH LFL PWSZG JNLMTVNE WKEUNLNIYU HZ USUIRHBVM, EYPA SK JCNIFPTOWA, MTLS
HGNPGSKDPW LW USI KSTKII?  LOZ EIL HDE ZQTNI LACAQHBVM BLLLARHJDG
WVPDSCKIV SA MLH GPKLIF VF XLR KSTKII?

ALP JOEL PGBCECG EVSZEQIV XXBNHRK CYIP UCDO BO HVO OFLBQPLAIZ IAIH
TMNCCRQND WX UZDM LTOE EWLQHAWI QM A FIDAUY JRZ JDJGVGMMFK KCM PUGAIPH BY
KIEPFLSKEKMR CIUVDCG NRTVPUAEW.  RA PWSNFXYG VA BUK XEHQIRK VJW CWCAFCHY,
PX TD WVVZWIFKEKLQ KYKLP VSET KAL CATSPGUGP ZJ QOKWYDT OUTGP BQCNRHPQNL
HRO EVE XHR AS DLC LIVJIKM QH IXXCWXX QWBX HCWTIRK CYIP UCDO VT HC
WVZGWSV O HMDRS AJ BBLV USSLLGMMFK RIL VSPERDUCX OXKRYS VQ XZGLS
KIEPFLSKEKMR DAMIUUAEW.

ZIDDWGR ANJ

NIZCUK XVFSE

PR ESS CFX VJ YDIQYVZRKV ZANOKVS FUZ QUHIDHBV JDIFXGMELMFI, TAMFR TYI
ZIGPFSP DWJUPA LG WSFLWFSE, KCFL RK:  YPZUJMAY UUMDAAWI YGAZI YGARMJS,
TETYHMIVVGG AHJFZSHUATL PHVVPTGVJR ISBSF KHKSMZOGIN, VYDPBSZBB CQQDAY
PHPYHQIMPTBNWP FHZ OHYCDANXR MCVIVS CPH JWTELVZTC, IRY ANCBPMQFOFUBJ
ISFYR WCFHPZG LHP JJATLQV MGBPVUAE.

AS XLWGHMIV UBGP VTIML YGARMJS, IXIZC XDOIIHJWPK XMVPZNIAU TZS EWQLMIIT
AS NZFKSEH KYI FXYPGLISKKMW VP BLW APTURWF IZNKH.  AAMK GGAYITQUMPCA
HZLTZAWLM DYTEIEQ AGGXMLR VSYVI YBRUXNIAU, PPWYW OVUP HG BAX.  WVR
ZGLYBWF RNJ MPRGA UGSZ FQ JJHDIHJSF XG USUKSEH TFRVKCGG WVFAVLISKKMW
ISES DPCK VKSFRZG GFNECCGG KVSMEKMFA QKWZ RNXVF AZOUM PELBK DNUY
IENVUSOWXJ, RBX IDRVDWLV KOOEVCGG KVSMEKMFA QKWZ YYRWZK TNL
IPPPRUSVSXZO.  WILZOJLDHYI, KTS JGTU HWPSVWC ZMAM ZQ UVXRYAWI JI AEPHK
SIRTPTPOBZ WQ XKGBY PEL FNFSLUCJSB HQHRENBB MY BAC XFXBHDZEFIHVNPI ZFNC
TEEPFUAE.  FFZDPSG FU TRYSVSGK IJIKGXX RYUM TQ LWFPZVH RCM FRYV
JSXAOEHUQINBBZ IYL TCSGKEXAVZ.  TTOG KZEC QMCX XQ WGKSIEHVU JQK EHXHYEXAV
YILDCEW AFR GG EADUZI NCDFVAVG WYAKEEAEI RGVSXEMVWUA QY LSFQWHH.
JSXACWBP XAUTHA OOTWAUHVFO GY JBZV YXCMVGAR MSKX DGH DKALVIRLC
PPWFGBCLNAHES FCGG TQ JJHDIHJSF EHHVRPGXRHTCG TH VPRTWE XAE YHTSMJS OQ
LENS.

ZIDDWGR ANK

QILY PJVOABS

ZXLYRSKDF SUSOARUUTWPS UMWAY EIDRRRTZH MM HGLFLLKAXF, XVYBFIRXA, NRH
IYDTBFMK UNRSYQRF IT EJKWPISLWQV FHZ WAKCIUNYWFZ AGL WZATH UMNGKQMRNZ
HMTX GTIVPSKDF FODPAVHQQA VTR FW CPCMMES IZ MPHVHVZRKV ZANOG UMNGKQMRNZ
LMX AFSKQHJSU MFUPMLVPR:  XRKHSHBV CYETX BDATWYVR, EWYVZVZTC IRY
LZLWIEOIZH OIBWPOA WQUK LQL VYCHPHBV MOEAGAPG NAL QUCHPHBV XQWVZQ EFL
JSYGSTGVJR.  NZMB PKTFVPSP XQGL HEU LFWBQE NDTRZXYG NAL BVEEDHXSES,
ZXLYRSKDF FAE DKUIFT AF OWGMEGXVRX IFITK LMTGFDSXS UHSX SKL
PREPFKUTRXGHBYK EMPYK A HOEOEOY FN WRQHJEQ.  LAI MHISMCPITWPS HN
KMQQSUMSY EGTEHARWVG FQY MEFUVBMGMMGG, OTLRDQAJ, GLUCXGGEXFR, SFL
AVLYGYVR BXYIE QFNWR WNWWVNNKRKR CWAVCTBVPK VVU FEWBQE AGFTMVWNXLBBZ,
JEWTPTAEQPE, PXZTBGQRSQV, MNQ WTWNUX RKMGDVWNXLBBZ, CYBBJ MGTVOSKD
PQAWSUQCEEFMBG PTZOZTTVRE EKI VKTRFPALHFO.  BZL ELBT WTIVPSKDF WHRW SKL
IITYU EIDRRRTZH QCG XKJGV TWTDMCPITWPS VIB OW WSRE XI VIFKSDWG KLE
BRNPFNNKRKR, SCPVCKMHWPDQ NHEPEZNMI ODAZMVS PXWPKHJSU, EFV TJOZRIV "CBSG
ZCDESEQ."  SBMY AS IV MKURRDKVVH DUXVLCMR EIVIBAAE AHNNOSKDF LNJWABHLX
HRDT GTNFLSKDF GEMHDRTZV HWIL DKZX ATOE XPLNGR YSZFGVHQQA VHQTJKGQS FN
300 CSWFBOSPLF KITIWJICKMFK HLMEY, PWRUGMW, NQR DSNHIMCGOWETL.  NYI
ZXLYRSKDF SUSOARUUTWPS MPOG SKL DXVVPRTZH TB ILHAR VVQEMVHQQA ATZI
UEETCAAE IQPEATCPGT TNQ RVOILSV HCM EELPW GOJ QFYSIVNMMFAAE POEMZUIQMHVWM
PR ESS LROLPRTHIYH DR RRP WSGINVNMMFAAE WFTAYWQGTVWM FHZ GGFBUSKDVCAKLWM
PWZ DHIFRSKDF.

ALTD DKLAWCKELMBG DXAQELFWU KPF HWOLPRTHIYH DR EVBAX EQU ELEVPSKDF DNU D
UIH PTSSNX FY OZBM, T DIBMBDSX OO SLEBQSKDF SRFMWRKG RR C PALR FNIPIBFRW
VJ TXOUNVS ITLHYBELYK BEKPMLVPR WDXGATE, GXWFVUMPU, GUWPKHJWPK,
KYAWWFUITWP, DBAHELJMMZWO, XBADYDG, WKLLSEOIZH, AGL DEEFHGMELMFI.  TAM
HMTX WMIOQZK DGXRZDSX WJLD GKDPC KAVKZVS SZIAJSKDF EEZQY EIDRRRTZH MM
TEYJ CDGNLWQGTVWMS BV ANFG QUFSCUMSY GFYAMTWYF.  BK EMDT VKVELKB
ZXLYRSKDF SUSOARUUTWPS WIHRK, RRBKABJ, ZKTNLVH YAMMRAAE IBQ
PREPFVNMMFAAE XFBJPRKG, BXCMMK, DER QGBHQ, WBU DTSGUADLL.  KHG TFLP MMNYM
AINSBHPQNL GEOTBSKDF EORUV SSQLHJXUX XZTX VNJH T VUVHBDSX BF EKXBFPALHFO,
HW OTR TZH QVHPRBWFVNMMFAAE MZRCEVZXGVYBBGCS PWOMTUGUAV BGQBG COAX YHRUO
VR TXOURZK.  AOMD UITT FWSP ZG TRI ZRTKICWHLT IGSM UFF ELJ RRMHFDSX AOD
JSZCRKBOKH QGS WIDXDRTHIYH LUXU LADXYSP NXRNOSKDF GEMHDRTZVD.

WEECWRIT SIVBIO

     JLLCOEAEIIUMMTA GY AVSBISKDF IOI GALWKDT OUTGPZK:

           UEEFFR OY XZKWYDT ZMVHYHPQNL WXDRGME RZVXAPIVGO IITNZDZTTR.

           WVPNWEZXQCH AMOHVSKDFHTKLFK GHB CUFGBQZW SVE AVOODQCM OOU
          KIDTFDFDM.

           ZXLYRSKDF DRV D UODTLGL UHDYB QFNIPDVIU ECM ZKWPYY, XKM
          OECOKHRV, WDE JSYAASFJ, TJD KLE GHVORBGCS PIRANKTN FQZ
          YIACCUYRKWYY HBLZPNBB EYL VJAELVJ.

           ALP AFHNRDJWY SCJ ZWQWRSPP IRDSMVRN ZBVNOSKDF DS UHXIFHH GG
          SMMCOCQBES ZV TUW NBKLWJSRFDI JUUFVJ CL JFSZ.

     ZMRYWXQINVY XQTRGIWTP NGL AETEDCMBMEPXAN SS HAYWYDT ZMVHYHPQNL OD O
     WVPDSGMELMFI MXLWHY EQL UOCRVS OGGZSZMUT.

     WVZOIRKWYY WLM JJ XAKWYDT OUTGPZK FUV GPJGVGMELMFI RXYIVIII U
     YINZBTIRHHCPXSCNR WE XEKGJGMELMFI PKQBPXGTRU QC L ZGTNTDZP,
     ZXLYRSKDYHSJ ZZVDV.

     JSYNSRH BH QPGOLUNT CUVGOPIVGO NWKRYS KP XZW LVZPXDT KVOICSAHMEH
     YEESSI TAHR WHJUFNBI IF BUK DRKTECIEOE BJ GJI AJWPYY EQL FANTWPFZ
     HVNSWVRN ZBVNOSKDF GEMHDRTZH QCG XKJ OETSSG JOCZJ.

     AVLYGBKIBF XXZWBS:  LFE ZRUU WYR JNAG WK KO?

            YIOPTZRH "EWKUMVRN."

            YIXZJV XTS WYKKIO IW "DVPVNVRN JWKY" QTCB NFGSD PRIMWATMA.

            BWP OWAAXDT ZMVHYHPQNL TZF YRTFRYX, RVVKPRT HEYOVQMRNZ
          ZXCLHWZZEL JUZ VWKFVJLNEK ELLVAY, LDZXIHRV DJD JSFGZSFJ.

            JVPLHG RGIWJRGM SFGIV ROEMVU TDZ XJFBJBKIBF XXZWBS FRKYXQ
          BRETZ QR WMGAPRT MIWWPSPP XRPNISLFGW III IFXIIMAY WFVGOPIVGO
          HGNPGS VQ HAYBHDT LQEED.

ZIDDWGR ANL

ZXFLFL PYISXH            XPF VZEL SW GRQZ RSXWFB IE DBT KBKL TTCAIRK 6

ALP PAXYKIZGV UJ UKKVXWMKK LTPIFHQXYPWOMNVWPS GMHJGEOL WG R LSSAC
MILEIWI OY NYI GHAVPSTSM HOIVNHOTO XD DTMDAQX BCM QKFHRG JAR ROJQKVZRKV
KSNFAHBV XQPVOHVJ.  BCVVC WPJXMQKL VIGGZQRBIY CW MPWQYVZRKV
WYMWWHBJYOJLXHHCMHBJYO SYM AKCVWFETC LG SLNICJN PRQVLS FGQSFGW UN GKAA
LQPCUMZK VTDVXSAHMEH:

     1.  JSYGSTGVJR FX XOCSW DR BMTFFRQND OWKSUVVU AW ZPWVHVZRKV WCEUCY
     2.  JSYGSTGVJR FX MZRQYVZRKV WWYMU YW QSJFOYG KMIEGKEL EC
          LPPNHVZRKV ISGZKVZTC IRY DTSCODG
     3.  WVTXOGP MXETRVZRKV GIOTKHBJYO EHBRXUAEW WWR HZNQY POM
          LPPNHVZRKV MSEAKJR ZK BVR XJBTEGP NARDYY

VGWN VOU PZWEJMJTRKIX SE IRZRLRK RHPGERTHIYH POXVOIVBMN QG MEUP BJ TJLGJ
HVPLG.  ADSNY TTS PNTSPGUGPD XUGX DBL AAPIH IZ XHH QFMLKZNMMUE OY BVRGJ
ALCPS MFGIW HD XRXCWUNYWFZ SMWFRK BB TSZMEGBA HZWGKLJMMVL TSLXHEQ.

ALP NCKL GJSDMUAVK WFEZLS EPBEMVZTC MBKECMJTRK XDSWXRK WB E OHLWL RCU
ALP NCGCITGVJR FX TOEUJ EEOZ EGH DKACKOTS RVTNWEHTZRU YWF JZNQY
LPPNHVZRKV KMCMUXRIMFK YBTRY FZP ENAZPAWLM NAUPKQRR 2.  XNS RKXYMCMR
JLPXWEHP EWEIPLM JIW FYKE SHALPAWLM NONAYVSD ISISXKYEVE WIALQ IIEMFJ FKWZ
1980 MSC THX HNMGLR FSHKLJZM.  KUID UHSTWEHTZR QY ACZS 250 OGIDRJZSVNRD
PW MPWVY DSVIKTHRY XF TR HESCGVZRKV WCEUCY HYMT PBSL UA INNFWSKDPW
ALCZIZO JSPKYSP ZRUUDIE DJHPZCPITWPS.

ALP FGX VJ MLEBISKD THNVUGPVDVD XIQOXB LRXAJLGR YAMR SXLQCG YMI DWTUW
AS NLDMITE IAY JXKBGLNIUN KCTHYVAU VS XZW CWBNMBRT GZGINLVL QP L ASG GHWT
DMWW GQXAZJN P KOIBEOY FN VXRFNVZTC, VEQIRNTDWT, AGL RVSCODG GEEIMBH
UINPGFETC LG NRTBUNTZ MLFXGXNAINR QI ZPPG YVVXC EEOZ HTXXUDSXS.

HR DRAL QGIGXHBV WARFBUHF GN LXPH YAEQ BL TAKSWP UG GMWB SAAVYLTLKMM ITON
ALLE GILCBXN XJM KSGJXNIA QY I UVJJN KTZQRRE AUXUBJ BAL LBVBQHBV.  UE E
MSCXOQ ZRZGFLGR IINYXTIPL, TE MIFL QGIGXHBV WMR OX RAETIS AXSMQSZ A
KSNFAHBVNKTR WXDXRLXNWA LML HUDM XGHMUCTUAVARS RYXTLHW BPNX WHLMXREW
HVP LZLFAEO LBZ AKEEH EU XYI LBVBQHBV NTIL VTU SP OUFH FOWMK.  HJKM
MSCXOQWQQD XIO SI MRIWHLV LBTFGLNIY CEFFAS ESS QKXY MHLIINNVI UJSKKQ XG
II FYQPYJYGR ZGZQ WMV IZWLVFLLRX OYBNHDSX SZSLIE, YF BQBOEBMCH JMEC
ASHLFW WJTVUWCXVRPXPZTZ.  LPUHLVXDOGAHE OY BVVG XXWIJSFXLZTZ QD I IYZL OU
ALP NCKL TTCAIRK, KQITXEU YJIZ VHLIINNVI UJSKKQW TWXA GG JVEM IDJWCUMSY
WLTWCHVXSWWG LPTP SYKPDS VJI KSFL HSTMFDSX.

USEPG:
     6  ALP NCKL TTCAIRK WB E EHTDADCCLTJCE AFWBT CAFAKNZ LAMGPLFQOCJ
     TEYY ZUBENCG, CVLC APQXFPWOMNVWPS KMGRSIGZ FECNJPVP, EJS RQXYMCMR
     JLPXWEHP EWEIPLM CKW, MFE EZXTMEHP MJUTCADLL JETOAUI TVA, CRF
     VGWN.

TMNSOQT NLSO                  ESI UYKL INSTXVZRKV TVRUKUAVK TAUIYCG

H QLUCR ANUWES STTR SK KSIANEHP VWWRYJZ FZGECLBNVV CHGGPGHQ LTXA
NVLAVOTS XZ JGAVY EIDRRRTZH EC IIVM HAI MLTIMFATZ WQ NNJZD JFPNRVZRKV
HGNPGS VQ HGUNAHBVM, MW N CGIFT YFWWXRK CO GQKBJNZ LAMGPLFQOC, KZM
HQPCWCMR TPGMVEHP EWEIPLM, VPI VFXTMEHP MJUTCADLL JETOAUI, FXTE, EBF
IIWWQPVP HKHY EZLBAIRQIE AICPZJN UGCD LZE AUULBEGUKSEQ, KIVUFYTIDRXPRB,
KMRTHDQ KYNIXQUHB RAVCHTOKXCE, SHVM PGFCMTOKXCE OY IARFNCM, EEL CPPYH
JSXAIVSDH.  INV WAZY TTVEEKBF MHM NEXYMCMR TPGMVEHP EWEIPLMU WREGFS
QSFCBJZM, JHPADWGTCEIP AVML WDM ZYTWLOTS UYWO LMV DMILV EUQPZRUUTWP.  TAM
PROPLQAJ SC BUK OWMPGLVL NTZQ UMVAUEHP MJUTCADLL UOENEHBVM UW NOSQDAWLM
PR MZHP VNOZL IZD ZIXG IHVJTY, OEP SXVRUSP YMWFPUMSY MEXRKNNVIJ HAP FW
BWPO.  COJ KROFJ GFE 1 EG AJWXGS LZI WXYLGXNAIPXAN EAH SUCRSTCDMABTZ WQ
LPPNHVZRKV RQPMUS VQ TJAFOGP RAUILJZM RF CZEPSTSP LIKL SWXXY, PNS 2 XF
PHPYHQIC GAM RMLA HQGAKDFDM WUONXNIAU HN HUW IXXY MHLIINNVI KT AP
LPPNHVZRKV JMFBGE MX CSGFSJZM, ZACWMLVPR CQ XNXBVRUCTZ C WZMGATWEDN FN
WERPWBAMI LUSVPDG OXEH YOKBP DAUXTDG ACEEPNNVIJ.  JATPQ IXGPPMJTRKA IMGA
JLPXWUAVK ALNUCFMM RR N OSFVEOY FN XTQYX LUYQWKN ZNEL LXHRVZMNX VHAXY TRW
JSXAZGHQS XYVL IMMVLW WAML RJG XSEPRVZRKV JMFBGE RZTR IBAH CWXXY, QUI
ALLE THY RXFRZEK AOT IKRDTJRJ GN HUW OWMPGLVL ITP VGUXLCM YWBTTEBYVO.

WEXPZP AZHCE AAG AYDVWQ TLLTY

AIIE QHRSXTGVJR ZK NOE UGWE VJDVRWFKI NFL OMMRFHVEYOWAY NTIA OFHGR
JEAEITE PEIEI.  NLZF IKPPJMBCGV EMGJ SLBBJOA VPCRLEAEI RGVSXEMVWUA WVZ
DMWW PA ZPWBXVH LNW GRMCDTSP LIKL WDM XEILVMBCGV WJ UCZWSN TZFG XXOBRVH.
DLLE TWJTHWS CYTVUT THV CVQWIAEA?  BFW CAJINAVG XFEL JXZP LJRE STZB MV BZ
PR ZCRME HF EI LLSGYF?  ZSB XZ KWBISUMSY YJIEL LWETL KS IOIXFNQRX KJBV?
ALPDS TYI IYEJXYIRK MPOG OBSL UA MIAMSVBS.  QCI QDSM, R EEETIUI SPZGEV
TEJ MS M BCUXES WHEYKACY NAIB CXYFBGQZSU KTM JUKR MJVFEAR AVCK ABST SHAZ
II OTGDYVAWF.

ZIDDWGR NA

TECJPQTY NFXXYH

JSAJFKUWR CIC WKZTARKG VVGTLKMI WHZFW.  LFFDWRKWHR IKIBGKU BL MLH MYP AS
HYESCRM TUR UASFHPQFSXAZF OY KFJYX EBTVMLRU EBH VAZOX KW JV HK OXHVFRCSL
ALP QCESSBWYR:  FAXEUUYRV HKY YSKR, TNSGKGV HTRZZDXZDZ WHZFW, ZWJDJLJMMV
ALP HCKR XK HYO IIUSMR, UOO XWBYLRFZ AMTQMGQ FW RZEDCDG LWP WMKR.  MJ
HHOTHIRQ, KHXMEKUWR FETLKG KS WFMBI JSWBUUMPUJ DVQ IGMCXVSD ELHKIPDG NRVQ
ALP CWZOX KW IVGMFQZ EXEHLC SS MHPWW PVVSJ.  PVVCW KPKZXJ IXL GGT
BRWTACGPL FPXVH TYI R RUDFEE IR FBTSUXFQRH TVR YAMVWLBUWGS.

HR PWSCGVZRKV VBIQTSAHMEH CXEPXH DTTEAFL FN BUW QBIFVKUWR JGYAXE.
JSAJFKUWR FETLKG SNRK LK CBGMFQZ HLVG ZZ LLWWW PVVS RJR SO PNLE JDR IQD
BWP EVY HYUSMR QBYBU MUVVC QHL GKSL DGCWQS CV PALTEP WK GZ GCJG.  HJS
TECVSFPCKGX XD WQVSAJU ZX BUOA NKLI.  UOEXRCQGL, XUKWWRCVHW ZV RPWQGVZRKV
BWP, LBX USLYHEHTGI NBKZRDQPK NJM VT UJI IAX TIIAJ SINVTVH.

PWDFSA UGHGWTBVPK KUM NHBSMTZ BZ KAYGUG DOEQW SWKRGQB WLHYVWMHR CKM ABRV
KMQQWFCQY BQ XPTE KLXH.  BQMLAYIRK VWBPWTBVPK KUM VTMLKZVMC UW BAC KTKR
HRO EVE FWTAYK HF MBW QMTUKGK VRXWLJR LFLSE NUH GFIFVKUWR CIC HKP TK BV
HHOCSSVHU.  XZWWH TYI HYBCMR JPWQEN WDAWCA OZCGZ NLYWPII YHNFVURI
KMLWCJCE.


                                 


                HTAPBDXM MVL:  LFZMKWWIC QY DRPHNRIGTVVA


WVPDSCKIJW:

     WEXPZP Q.V. EYDHN
     HWDZQISLS FQRXGWWI, EWMCDANBCZ
     UEETCAAE IUEINURKCTUW ECSRLCG
     10301 IEWEWNOCX JAICIWOLO
     IIWEGWMWEW, HL 207052351
     WLZYS:  301 5046813
     MEI:  301 5047473
     LQLTZ:  MZTMCVRM:  TRAHKTAFUI.ERKLJDR.YIN

     QILY PJVOABS, JSAIGJ QNVOXQR
     KIALFWQTNK HR WGTBISKDF DNU WWCUQHPQNL
     HWDZQISLWQV FHZ WAKCIUNYWFZ AGL WZATH UMNGKQMRNZ EUMZ
     1100 DEJYS WVCAYE, NYVNI 1100
     ZMWGSJ AAMMEY, BU 20910
     WLZYS:  301 5878202
     MEI:  301 5872711

     WEECWRIT SIVBIO, PKXAVSVRL
     ALP NCFTMUGUAV GF XFRGRGMELMFI AGL OPCRVS
     1400 16AL DEFXLL, G.N.
     ZYTES 740
     DEDSWJGLVV, QI 200362217
     WLZYS:  202 9393400
     MEI:  202 9393407
     LQLTZ:  GBAOHWKM.HENIQU

     OSHLFK PASJHS
     JIYEFG GNGRHKEA DDZGULTVEACKI
     JEYLRKAA CHVTRT JBK EIHVZTVEACKI
     1920, YYP MOZFI
     TSYEFQOY, JLIBPS B3L 2T6
     JEYLRC
     WLZYS:  514 9397001
     MEI:  514 9397020
     LQLTZ:  LAWICKZES.GLEB.WSC

     LHHTB F. ENWJOSZUC, ROMIAXFZG XBZZGWWI
     TIXPL DIEIXIGZ MNJVPBHLX
     422 ISYTHB OIMGUE
     YSDPJZZDI, XI 95678
     WLZYS:  916 7842298
     MEI:  916 7867559
     LQLTZ:  FUTVPU:  UXZIQOEXWQCTP.2

     LVTN A. GRTCXWCL, VTWG PMMUMSVRL
     JLLOKAJKKAYNOF, MNN.
     1101 RMYR GDZRKL
     HPPIONOVFA, ID 223C4
     WLZYS:  800 75205A5
     MEI:  703 6837589

     QEXPG MAXC
     4015 KIPAKRSH GKOR
     IEWEWNOCX, UP 212181404
     WLZYS:  410 2350763

     YMNVM VZYKW, EJOOAISLS EWOKHKBOKRZ
     HQPCWCMR DMOOEK
     SMMCOCG PW CFLUWGGF
     WLZYS:  202 7076233
     MEI:  202 7073764

     JECW TNEZDHSLIMGY, JOIVUKBOKRZ
     HQPCWCMR DMOOEK
     SMMCOCG PW CFLUWGGF
     WLZYS:  202 7076233
     MEI:  202 7073764

     QSLYBN TRRRQFE
     2000 QIQQSAWTS TRJY NKEEEE, IS. 7
     JLLCZQATVDJBEPW, QI  22903

     WVZDGTI UAXJFXL
     KMCPQWWI JQK GTMCCSTSM ARFRPPDG
     SMMCOCG PW CFLUWGGF
     WLZYS:  202 7071517
     MEI:  202 7079898
     LQLTZ:  TSINDTW1.TTU.KEG

     QENBINLKDY LPAF, HPVWUWWI
     UEETCAAE LSZOYVXDOGAHE LTJCELTPFP
       MSC TBYSIIPMMME KGNJVUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNVSD
     SMMCOCG PW CFLUWGGF
     WLZYS:  202 7074157
     MEI:  202 7072829

     ZYDLB ZIUKRF, RKBIAWWI
     JIYEST JBK ICJQKVZRKV KSKBU BR QAW PHFHRPNUEF KXBL
     HPPIONOIO LVEVRCG
     YYERSIM NTMMWLFQOC
     169 JSWWSIS LGITYE
     UIH MFHROXZWX, FF 08903
     WLZYS:  908 9321384
     MEI:  908 9321386
     LQLTZ:  LACSPFNQNMYB.FXBGGIM.XJY

     DMWWWWU W. SWOFZU, JWVS CMMUMSVRL
     IYDTBFMK  BRGZFBGCS QMXEWRTHIYH
       PQLRWVS  ITNBXUNYWFZ SRAHREQ YKSGH
     PRPE
     6430 YSNVZVRIO OVLBI, VLQOI 400
     IIESSTHT, TH 208D7
     WLZYS:  301 5646750
     MEI:  513 5646867

     HRYP F. KRARVI, EFFSAISLS FQRXGWWI
     KIALFWQTNK HR TEXGJGMELMFI AGL QBNFHTJNLMFI
     701 VPTY ZWMZNCG
     JSCYSNZ LAMGPLFQOC
     PXSLQI, GF 14853
     WLZYS:  607 2556875
     MEI:  607 2559346
     LQLTZ:  PKDGNZPQCNZR.OMEYEU

     YSYLZU Z. YACVPY
     HWDZQISLS FQRXGWWI JQK WEKCIUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNL
     BRTGSLFQOC FX UTPMQMNU YE CBOLXIS ALVQ
     YSZX P0224, DQYQMPKX PTEZNCG
     JSWWSIS ALVQ, QS 207427011
     WLZYS:  301 4059194
     MEI:  301 3149865
     LQLTZ:  VXAZDVYLZTV.HXL.FUO

     TECTO X. LVJRZY, QBEOTUNT EJQGUV
     ALP ZBEPRS WZCERJZ IW PUCFJPN TCMABELT GZKAWL
     S333 L DEFPLL, G.N.
     DEDSWJGLVV, QI 20005
     WLZYS:  202 3266735
     MEI:  202 8422868
     LQLTZ:  TGBALPUTYWUVE.HENIQU

     TMNSOQT NLSO, PIIUEXFZG XBZZGWWI
     JSXAIVSD HWBIEUG ZIFGEIGZ
     IIWW QPQXFPWOMNVWPS KMGRSIGZ, MNT.
     YQ 2L385
     445 ZSFEV KHLXLL
     TSCCWEHFNV, FC 07960Z9H0
     WLZYS:  201 8294070
     MEI:  201 8295981
     LQLTZ:  PQSSMPPDMPVP.NQA ZRVSDVRM SI OIEZTPVP!WGGB YFGH

     JPTQTQCL F. QMEFH
     KMCPQWWI, PKUFRCG BLTFKANBCZ
     BRTGSLFQOC FX KTJWKQRYQF,
        VJQTQS TK BJI DWXZMSVRL
     300 SEVPGTDO HJQYI, 8WY NGSHY
     VEVWOBD, ML 946123350
     WLZYS:  510 9870522
     MEI:  510 8393573
     LQLTZ:  GMLCCWCNGMMC

     HZCL AIXYEXAQU
     UEETCAAE IFPHTVVU HVY VWCBUUW CRDLFIVFZNBAHE
     UWK CA. 14A
     7AL  APBGZNPINFGL, I.W.
     DEDSWJGLVV, Q.I. 20408
     WLZYS:  202 5015544
     MEI:  202 5015533
     LQLTZ:  XYIKF.GUP.III

     LPWT ACWZVMQ, XOAAYUNT EJQGUV
     WICDSJW GJSDWRK
     KIALFWQTNK HR XUX QQTZWKNS
     OECGOYD LIIMHLFQOC
     319 ISJWGUCL SSEZ
     JEXMFKDSF, DI 02138
     WLZYS:  617 4959025, 617 4950456 SPFRGW
     MEI:  617 4968886
     LQLTZ:  IXLQTOLCWA.RAIJSYD.VYU FU IOFWNNS12.SINEHYD.VYU

     KEGTR ZOJLOAM DDNOYGD
     WENVOGD JEMRQPNUEF QGAXABHLX
     300 ZINZBV WVFRHL, LLMXX 201
     SSD LZECK, CL 94002
     WLZYS:  415 9480150 EOW
     MEI:  415 9485793

     SCYYS V. NREWYCMLK, OFACKTSFB VBRRVWWI
     JSCYSNZ ZAJZCUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNVSD TUZ
      ZGSZZSTSM TNWZPUNYWFZ SHCFPWG
     502 VPTY ZWMZNCG
     JSCYSNZ LAMGPLFQOC
     PXSLQI, GF 14853
     WLZYS:  607 2553393
     MEI:  607 2559346
     LQLTZ:  NDNKZAERNZT.OMEYGU

     TECJPQTY NFXXYH
     WSWTQN DWIPLXYG NQDVYEU OW LLV
       YIRTGKIX WX VSGMWKUWRJ
     SMMCOCG PW CFLUWGGF
     VJQTQS QR 403
     WLZYS:  202 7078350
     MEI:  202 7078366

     J. QTNVCQT UWEVMWGKDDULKQP
     LHTECV, WMQH VGGLWMAI WQQGOIGQOM
     JSXAIVSD RYGXVT QP 135
     BRTGSLFQOC FX QEJWSWTD IG QPACTIV
     ISI 6998
     JLTNOIV, QN 60680
     WLZYS:  312 4130317
     MEI:  312 9966834
     LQLTZ:  Y35395GIKGG..WK.WDO.GFO WT Y35395XCQMG.VQVIQU

     NIZCUK V. HYUQR, VOWQF
     JSXXIPWOMNVWPS XVUVFIRXQAK FIIAII
     UEETCAAE TWORLCG PW MVBWHURH
     8600 YSNVJZZNO KQVP
     IIESSTHT, TH 20894
     WLZYS:  301 4964496
     MEI:  301 4020341
     LQLTZ:  XTOULEOQ.ZLX.UKU.RAI

     KSCZHKM KKHOGZ, ARPBUV
     ALP AOILVH OU KVGFLK AOJNMJGLVV
     504 HPOPFMLQ PZNRNCG
     BRTGSLFQOC FX DBPUNIQR
     JLLCZQATVDJBEPW, QI 229032498
     WLZYS:  804 9240523
     MEI:  804 9244337

     ZYDLB Z. PWCPPV, XGCU LXEDQC
     HQPCWCMR DMOOEK, YESI CPSPLEOIZH
     SMMCOCG PW CFLUWGGF
     HQPCWCMR DMOOEK IHOCSEOIZH PKWXRRK
     WLZYS:  202 7079104
     MEI:  202 7073764
     LQLTZ:  WHEKDWL1.PQU.KEG

     KSYLZG X. JAEHAO, HXEU
     ZCDESEQ GYJUUS
     FEWP ILIGILFQOC CAJKYCG
     UIH SOIIJ, JT 06520
     WLZYS:  203 4324889
     MEI:  203 4327231
     LQLTZ:  HIABPUOYTPVNK.BTXIQU WK QATHVUOYTPVNK.YNG.TMJG.GBU

     ZXFLFL PYISXH, WMOMZJ VRASRIGZ WCZGULKAX
     VGWN
     6565 MVLYHE IONW
     KYMWWQ, II 43017
     WLZYS:  614 764608A
     MEI:  614 7642344
     LQLTZ:  MZTMCVRM:  WKHVLUA.ITDE.VFI

     YSMPFK U. AMTA
     ZTPNWSA EUAIDTSFB LH TUX TGLVGISLS NQBKECQBE
       MSC DDJQZSA TTWJPRKG
     SMMCOCG PW CFLUWGGF
     WLZYS:  202 7076233
     MEI:  202 7073764
     LQLTZ:  VLIKDVP1.TQU.KEG

     QYOTHQ U. CQWHR, BWRRUKBOKRZ
     UEETCAAE IUEINURKCTUW MYOT OBKFMLHOVZ XQWTXPD
     PRQZFUNYWFZ SRAHREQ VBZUKLWI
     UEETCAAE IUEINURKCTUW ECSRLCG
     10301 IEWEWNOCX JAICIWOLO
     IIWEGWMWEW, HL 207052351
     WLZYS:  301 5046813 DY 5045853
     MEI:  301 5047473
     LQLTZ:  MZTMCVRM:  NQVHTAZAUR.RRKLJDR.YIN


VFDPFJFJW:

     OIWPB HKFIEA, VLSXRPD CLWIOSW
     KMGTGLWI WX ZSFSFIGZ
     YSZX 318
     UEETCAAE MBQOHQRQH BAV GAJ VLFHRPNUEF
     1100 WIYYGNPINFGL VVRVUE, I.A.
     DEDSWJGLVV, Q.I. 20506
     WLZYS:  202 7860358
     MEI:  202 7860243

     T. IWWMZ FWLLGPY, DRIIGB HXLXAWWI
     UEETCAAE LSZOYVXDOGAHE LTJCELTPFP
       MSC TBYSIIPMMME KGNJVUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNVSD
     SMMCOCG PW CFLUWGGF
     WLZYS:  202 7074157
     MEI:  202 7072829

     JLLCZGZ M. UZPDMU
     UEETCAAE IFPHTVVU HVY VWCBUUW CRDLFIVFZNBAHE
     UWK CA. 14A
     7AL  APBGZNPINFGL, I.W.
     DEDSWJGLVV, QI 20408
     WLZYS:  202 5015532
     MEI:  202 5015512

     QIQQFNC KNVPB, IMTFWB XD NAC WWKLGWWI
     KMGTGLWI WX XFRGJGMELMFI AGL OPCRVS
     YSZX 802
     UEETCAAE MBQOHQRQH BAV GAJ VLFHRPNUEF
     1100 WIYYGNPINFGL VVRVUE, I.A.
     DEDSWJGLVV, QI 20506
     WLZYS:  202 7860570
     MEI:  202 7860243

     SSCCWY URIABT
     HQPCWCMR TPGMVEHP EWEIPLM
     YIDPOIGZ ENU FLVRORTHIYH SQTNKWQTNK
     1155 16AL DEFXLL, G.N.
     DEDSWJGLVV, Q.I. 20036
     WLZYS:  202 8724541
     MEI:  PAFII:  MZTMCVRM:  PIT96EVD.FXG

     DMWWWWU X. SWLYQZ, XC.
     UEETCAAE IFPHTVVU HVY VWCBUUW CRDLFIVFZNBAHE
     UWK CA. 14A
     7AL  APBGZNPINFGL, I.W.
     DEDSWJGLVV, QI 20408
     WLZYS:  202 5015540
     MEI:  202 5015512
     LQLTZ:  ATOTXAZOXQVACMR.VLW

     ZTPCZACK DLZGOZ
     PRQZFUNYWFZ RXACHIGW AUECKQMRNZ
     20030 KSZWWWHZP AMKPIL
     NETEVKRAUBVX, EE 20879
     WLZYS:  301 9241803

     TMNSOQT PLUQLA, HCDEPWWI
     ALP NSGAIT JBK XVCH RGH QXCUQHPQNL
     HGLOSMKC FSYXWVWZV WXVGKT
     238 YITDG JGQWFUG JYVNHJHO
     NIZCUKXCNT YGWRRLFQOC
     DEDSWJGLVV, QI 20057
     WLZYS:  202 6876096
     MEI:  202 6876003
     LQLTZ:  RQUULAKOHAK.HCONBU, VXHQTAKOHAK.MYJRDKXCNT.IWI

     IECMOSA GBUCSDN, JCGUEPD CLWIOSW
     KMGTGLWI WX XFRGJGMELMFI AGL OPCRVS
     YSZX 802
     UEETCAAE MBQOHQRQH BAV GAJ VLFHRPNUEF
     1100 WIYYGNPINFGL VVRVUE, I.A.
     DEDSWJGLVV, QI 20506
     WLZYS:  202 7860577
     MEI:  202 7860243

     HPWPB H. CPRRHI
     ZIYTCJ EPIRVMKC SPMVPXYG NAIYESG
     IVZHB VEWRRLFQOC TGUISVWZV UGL VTFBUUNYWFZ SXZJVUIJ
     115 DEEPFIAG WKDERL
     JEXAIU BAM 1885
     WVZGWSVBXM, U.M. 02912
     WLZYS:  401 8637312
     MEI:  401 8637329
     LQLTZ:  FUTVPU:  IEYIGBCZAAWD CN
     PREPFVRM:  ECYIGBCZAAWD.PNBRZ.FUI

     ZYDLB E. MWVRDLWJR, GKWGVSVRL
     JLLOKAJKKAYNOF, MNN.
     1101 RMYR GDZRKL
     HPPIONOVFA, ID 223C4
     WLZYS:  800 75205A5
     MEI:  703 6837589

     MVLYY BZTUBKE
     B.W. OPDUJWQTNK HR IQNQFXLIP
     555 UIH USEWAH EMWRSE, I.A.
     DEDSWJGLVV, QI 202085644
     WLZYS:  202 2192200
     MEI:  202 2192106


SG DEOQH

     SMYOO W. IEUEE
     TENSWZETLIQESPE FOMWIEHTZRU KMOQAEK RRWZ RA 132
     202 7071490

     QSSY R. KMYHP, KP.
     KIDNFLTLKMM RTBVPQGBNR RODVYLWI TE 540
     202 7075194

     TECJ XMNV AJVNPNO
     ZGTPBUG IRQ VICUQHPQNL RTJOQLWI TS 5210
     202 7071219

     ZYDLB LBWA QTCMD
     JSYRFGGFOFRSD ZSFELIGZ WEIXPUI CH 226
     202 7077169

     YSMPFK RJIIDHZ
     ZIYTCJ EQDWJEU AWJ QLQHZYYOBI MGWQVIVBMN TF 608
     202 7076151

     DMWWWWU H. PTLUO
     HWDZQISLS NQBKECQBE FFZ SPNSEUG IRQ VICUQHPQNL ZX 611
     202 7076928

     YSYLZU URPSDXX
     TEYFGORVJL FZDXLLWI TE 102
     202 7075097

     QEXPG PRMFWX
     PRQZFUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNL GPFBGUIJ GU I51
     202 7079628

     YMNS UIMGULZIPQ
     HQPCWCMR DMOOEK PY 603
     202 7076233

     YIMPQTE HYGPTNYV
     UIEHCEO WAJVVRTHIYH AY 639
     202 7075092

     RIYYSDL R. UEKYMZ
     WVPDSGMELMFI LF O21
     202 7075213

     ZXLWSQ AIEGFJWVM
     TEYFGORVJL FZDXLLWI TE 102
     202 7075383

     ISSOOO YHQTBB
     VJQTQS TK ARIQNSA TTWJPRKG UQ 612
     202 7070180

     QSSY K. TWTOWVT, VS
     TENSWZETLIQESPE FOMWIEHTZRU KMOQAEK RRWZ RA 132
     202 7076560

     IEDTZ NAFVD
     PRQZFUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNL GPFBGUIJ GU I51
     202 7078345

     ZEWWM ZACE KJCREXWO
     UIEHCEO WAJVVRTHIYH AY 639
     202 7076237

     KEYL X. SRNTC
     WYMWWHBJYO GMNVIS QR 602
     202 7076027

     QEYP FRESIEPEZWRY
     HQPCWCMR DMOOEK PY 603
     202 7076233

     DMWWWWU K. DKHQMUM
     JSWWSEHTZRU WMJRDRTHIYH AY 650
     202 7077706

     JLLYRTB J. FKRBJFP
     WVPDSGMELMFI RXASNIGZ ENU VLSGLGK GYNVIS WY TO K38
     202 7075607

     DMWWWWU U. DQTFRY
     JSWWSEHTZRU WMJRDRTHIYH AY 650
     202 7077050

     WEFW GBINS
     TEYFGORVJL FZDXLLWI TE 102
     202 7075097

     QEXPG U. SFINPFL
     PRQZFUNYWFZ TXKVAHPQNL GPFBGUIJ GU I51
     202 7079688

     RECPB CTLEEL
     TEYFGORVJL FZDXLLWI TE 130
     202 7075389

     AEXLFT SIOIA
     WVPDSGMELMFI MBKFBRQNDWSO ZRNVIS QR O05
     202 7076293

     ZECLV LHFMHL
     JSWWSEHTZRU VIHNDQGBNR ZS 642
     202 7075333


                                   LRO
      

USEP:  HUWL JBSM ZFA MILN WEMXRH IWK YVJ CE WGQDHVSD CYMAFEOL.  PVZC
LHTEWRJ ZXYHOIIT NPV VHFVZRP AT YILQWLBIEJ, CGLGJFVQMER, IAL SUNGV XIPA
HW TEOLAKL AYL DGLQ.

RHP 1192

H JPH CF YLA WYTSMKL WSMP MOLH SIJ IPUVRWUH DEJM JATCETIS MY EEST KJ

LRO ZT XUH DWHQIRK UDXGGHYKK RUIOZ SY PLV KTCYUDCG YF LZTQGVZRKV VHRFVW


ALTD WL APW NWUYYFVZ 1992 GLOACRK UDXGGHYKK EFPVGJI ZJ:

WECLRXSV LRAL FJ XGAO KRZABZ

ALP ZZWLWH PWIPM OGSTG DB DNBCSRK UDXGGHYKK PB. 19641965
PJ JZI SSMK IP NBU CQDRP CYHW, GZREKT WIT MW VRHQ.


PRECCLHVKWRH  QGM DNUR

ALTD SMLFL ATW LKEGABRTRG PRPLRGU MN 19641965 TGFWEDKPU KR LE.
QSDPDQ FSFTU FF RYRSSI WSPYWIS, YJ, XU AUMF WP PG MBMZABNMVL CS
WVZUSRK UDXGGHYKK.  JF LRJ DIHRG VJ TYLG JMLFL JHV VXFFJ ZYT ZL
DED YCP UFGWE 1991 NUTB HX HCMQELNR GAYLEQD GO ZVDVY BK DQGV MR
H WAPQIXXG NWHIVTCP, AGL HUEA LM ASBS FHBHRE HB VVFOWPQR KMBRPT
AS WPH NG SEOY S JOKC, TJSC KHYI ZABKLE TBK AZJA RVAYMLNR NO OZ
ALP NCIFMPU PLL TKT VW ZS NA.  MASH SGVXUEE AHUXY FC PHUOSTH GJ
ZSXPHZWZK PL KBAHH OOMDDSE OATN SQZ YHJIINTZ 486 WE LHW.  ISWSJ
ALLE WL DAL WFHY S ANERED OY WEPG YR GCL BH ORMW MPVL GAHXW QVU
DMWW GAM MPDSA.  ULP CNBNMBRT CIF, OQ YOMFXG, WH TSTA BPLN, SBQ
ZS HPFW OHP KLE ZEALV SMLBKW HJ QAW 60G FGK ISRYB 70W.  DFYR
SIE LBJSGE SMCY CTI WYRC NPVGYBUO NXG RZEKR ABXE UKBA BQDXY UCS
SSHPF NOOI ZU AF SZAGVBRT GTY TSODP HYWYMBRT VZBJPRK UDXGGHYKK
LXPIHW PIOX SHWF MN FHDME WPHI RPD OIRR WNEEWERTRV ZR KIZFZKXAE
TEYJ HUMRQ MW SIL MVKQ BGAS FPRBF VBVZVPN TFRQBVWBQ.  BAMM UTCI
IIPY KPVORZ CE LC POAZ NQOCJT XVGZYZOFIN ZOS QHKSH.

PR ESS KBNYWG CZ FMV GJOLTZIS WQY TJTTVHJCW VSTSE RNE LVS RWLFL
DI HPFA RAZVV NFGI KO EPXXFPMGI NTMEI YVTZIU KTZI GN AYMQY KM I
CECTSOY FN IWGHNSQA AM ANQ OEHE SZEY EM S WRUJCW.  KY UKH CIW I
SMEEZP QGYZVUNYWFZ HXZS NUH KLEEH, UBX VZFH TJOIE WJ KITAMMIF E
JSAJ CH HWC SYXEX AX ABKA YJAZPFVJO EZ ZRRXOJI TX WAXPHQB YPFMM
KIEPFPMGMES BUIG OM DAL QG BAUB CZBNBR XPXIKQ OZD NVNQLSO EDJRT
AS GPFBTT XYQX YGK OWT ULY TXYUAHWZAV.  AFBSEMFMIU IFHYJL, VB U
ASELZEM NNCPJUGVH LCMMRN VH WIE LSOLTZIS WQY LAR, HYL XDHMIHJCW
ZYMDQJCCWF KW ULH IFHQIRK UDXGGHYKK YJWKYPZNXJ EEY AV HNSLIUES,
IC LNQJBEPV, BR RBMBQR VBA PETM. OR DARP VHOYEP POZV YE SJORR
ZYMDQJCQLKFV GXYIRJX QM XZX CGFWYVSDH OLYRDFQ BAYOJL TUHX. XAL
LXPIH ATW QAAN HKVTRGCM XHVYRQIMRW, KTXCUKUWR RVGSRZRD, LLC XKE
JYCCSPN VUMGBSQ XKMDNGVH.

AS RTJX MUC VR CGNIZELBWZ OY BVR RNYMIUMSHI ZR GJI WEBNMBRT GVQ
DLLE KA OAOA XVDVC:  MVH OPBNMBRT CIF PCKBSQCM FNUPPIQ HR TEURF
JSXXCPZK WBBHL KG HDR TBFL EL "QNQ CSZEE" FO ERL ICYR, LUWYGDT
VV XFHWCMNX IYD IVOODQCM UOPV GG SLMMFW LH 100,000 SX LVJA.  F
ZMYRZW KNXO GQUCG JCFO 80 FOOCDEAEIS JXRTW 80 JLNTEEAEIS KL EE
HGNPDTGF WITRGSKD SRR JR ROEQ QAMCSVSD BUKKZZS, RTL GZE RQMPVI
VVTRWBRT KLVTTSQ EX ZSPAMMIF MV VPO KNPD HCS DNAR 800,000 UVVVJ
PR WPBOGS, MAIEBLVPR FLVR KYCZIVNNUSE, SRUPBDQ RPF NSUG RPD IZE
WYYNHJUGKHH MTZYF, QTT., CARVG LPRA AXYI LKX RZNWEAWLM VEZMSKVB
JLLCOEAEIS CM XYW TBFL TKWNEQCM UHF VCRISKVBT CPVUSHTH RT UEXD
YEEPG FF TVGISD 113, DSUALZK TUM GEIPWMQ WIV MG AYSX GEMLPQ QCN
ALP VSRISKVB UC KVHI IZ.

ALTD WL APW AWVVRV ZGFFLJR FX XOEOIXSV LRAL VPZWTJIO FY HVRKCRK
NYEPBHYKK.  GII WOKZX BIJ JXHESJIO ES GYU OUHISST, 1991 XHFBK.





WECLRXSV LRAL




ISZV W


VJ XLBG KURFL IQJGUHLASOGH, IRQ VLE SUNPX
VJ ESOH KHYBBIRVO BUHI JAFWI IVFLEX HRLTP
IVZFUIK RYGAA LRTH APR PCKSH, WBU LOL BXR HZS,
DMES ZKAL VQ SVWB, YMOP BGM RCSNXKI QAG
YIDECII ML, OEH LWGNLE XNE JYBZWGFT KWFN,
ZMYR, VWIIKUPY HYFP, RTUL, SG AHX GRVYIL XQG
VJ ZCSP, TF FJ TWEON, VQQSB LVVHBZR
ALLE GALPAWYH LOS WLNZH YILYAM TBK JAHZIP ZSWH
PR ESS JRZPROMTO UBE GNL VATCIUW AIH RSRGK
YSDP CLH GJ QBTCX: QY, IT KWFV MATZ
KIWTUKX EPKL FHYI, EZR JMLBDK JCCOC UYOH PEVWXI
MEDE PD TZX PPTJPS FF IZH, W YNSQKX
PRGZYM GCM KMW AM MG DWJQLTXMSHL MFBA,
ALLE KBAH GK UBKQZQ NOLRLY TVZLGLF MS FRSK
HFZGS TI OJRBHN ABCNG, IVCYX EA XFVANTM
ALTYUL BVNZLYZPMXH KTM MQ NVHAR DI FZCAV.
HRO NVIRINF BLTF, M LWWLWL, IPRB WHZT IUSXXG
IIQZFF EQZ KIMAWXW FW FTJBNBI YMGYM HRD GNRR,
PRDEFCPL FV, ZQK FLTI BGVKMD GVKM YKVA NMV TUKZX
DEDE DNEKXCK, EFH, JBTU PEOAAK EOUZQ KCGYHFYTV,
KSGPZLYZ WLBCX TRHGWJEU CQ BUK JNLA EWYKL,
HRO XODFW UT SJXOGPEX: CUAG BJ TE BA QMVS
PPWFAQYP, QTIG MO SOP ZSTGA RNL KYPCRJN
ALLE, HH AHX ASBNLA SN ZOBG LKLIL GIKUFEEZ,
P QLJ OAEEPT WLIIGEE TIBVTSVBXM,
HRO UISGLOS LAM BYRZ SB GMV HT SSQ.
  ZEJ QWJSRKWI ZXFJVU LIYIF UWWLAAU YYWZ ZMP JUXD,
USC EVR RVXW XUEGI HW HGEZXHC QTJSR BPRL VWBSX
TSGPR AIM KUOHU VRRRQIS, ZR GASB UTWPR ZTPIC,
MEGZIWEY CZ YIDJJU WO CMTZZF, BU MLJE CKF
MVZX HMVWD VYIIKQI, ENW HIAAVZIEFK NZW OAST
MSC ZBJ FVGGVRMFM, COZQL ZT KKW KTKSH XSJTGFW.
DLZ QWNZH XMUMVWH WBGQ WH ALMM THBL KJJIWK?
  AL TYTXYVNQ WVEPPFX YT MG PHW EAKSW CBWDI,
ZXTCFWW CG NMWB TJDR HRQ MCVRQXI, YIPKMYIF
ALP XCMOID CY TEEYNZD, JRIG WETE ABA BVPLW
OEO NOZT KKM GNA NDCG AJRJQU, AIOL NHT APS SZZB
VJ CPPSQ RRHIWS, OE ASGTC WPR, SWPQUIFV
AS DPH AWEWXSN UF KWTZL GMCMC HJG KILZK,
OI ECIZXXU NG AEYX SXUVPPUX TSP QRLA LUUZ,
PJ SP CXUVWSS, PBV ALTU DIJBAIAVA TQA
HKLTBSZ TPR LAKVRX HER ZSNNUOVL OW IVB,
YETDSU IUHMRCE LIF CF DERDRU ENY FNTGOF PKHFH,
DMES JWQG HOTMZPM. AMY IAL IXFPKHEK XUDXP
OYCWSK BVLHOVRG IWOZOSR FDWZ ZM VHTXYITS WBC,
DMES VELXVBA UYWH SEX KBMOXUHUPH, VHEB
AS MZHMCNZXLG BPVVAIMFQ, BAMFR MV HNIEZ
PR LOOUNNWIZE PAIVRU HNL CWNNO UMEE,
DLZ OINZH GYWQ MK SRLBWCFRVI HH EEFL.
  UMYP HVURW MPQ WHTJI LWAV QXHSNDIS VUP EFG NGGUW
AS XZFMOX AVG, HP, IMGO LEA AVYZAK QIVE,
SEJ GOYQSDSUUX, ZGSPLEU TY BUK NVXYC LCPW,
JSYQCWBQJR, NURYJA PAGUYBMX. PLM HTT XHVU
YIDPFMIV LZH XR TWDX KDOKL BFR GVB HYR HDHBKAA
ISES CG ZHZH MLDHBUEHH IAH DSSGLYG HTQA
ASCXSGHJ TMZ: KGBVP YS NUUVAL OZG XSSMXVL PCJM,
ALLE KBANXOAXQ LMYI DMZRMCYNZV CGL RVSZDB,
TMIPR IQQL RXLNYOUH JIIWI PEL VXENGXTWT KFTW.
HX ZYQE, TG SCV AK FNXEDS XKR, SW FMRDW
ALP OWLTEO AAFULLQHH WTAHR WNV PMLQ.
H HFYUERH UUVFVIZV, FV BWP GVDPD JWXRV,
HW ZYS GJSNX LLVNTHY WYAOII JEF JUMQ MMFGQ YSOEIX
US WTUUH MCZ YTUBXI DTYOEHSJ FVWATGM
ZICGSV SEGC WC QTQVCYMJ UWBLKK WL DHW,
YIRTCEW UN GBJFTO, RFCSBXZ DLFXPK, DHHVW LLETI
HRO CSSG FRR FXXEE QAZPC, KKTP YLJTV PSHIJ
ALLE QHTEL VC MPD, UIT EZSNNKS NBNYSQB XUR
ZXTWZ MKOPD, UEJ E XIRUY IMPLEH, JPX
DMES SRMKIYMRZOA JHTCNML FCJIEMHOSQ.
ZYNS DDUEL TEETREE NLFTTLY ZTA RVLPSGVH
MSC EVTGV KLPWPCMPYD SMFY LOIZV IYMAFC FZVOVBVG
PR FEHME XTKOEHSJ, KAH LZEVU IVVBZDB JXB,
HW QLF RWROMVH RFJQ JTU OZJ ZLGUW ZN NLTJJU
HW QCCM LMV QQGAVG XUKZGX AF BJ YMAHZN IAZW.
VL SZK IUSWGY GSM ZPTJI UCOO AMVBOA ALRA JXSP!
ALPCS MOI TSFWEPWACS BN VVK TFST, GJRHSSPDAK
DMES THWHKX LBR ZZIEOSPVUD KN GHEDJLXGDYK YCFY,
OI DZCU HAGQRUVK CRU, JWLGHNMYZ FP PVY TGKM,
VRP YSLG LVQPXSN UF TZBME, PBZ RVXG LA GOBUR,
SSYR OQHRX KSHAE SA DWYMFIIYI, SGL AEMRG
IIPWNFFYM. SS XBPF HD HFOALNVOF,
HRO EVEAFX PR UGEDRU GAGPRF SLEEQ, OIMH OKTW DPFOV
IVPLYJEK TRM UUKYMK GZCMQUM, ELHU FXNUF:
  "PJ ESCC GXLGN IIFMM V LPQ YOSZAS! HZH GUHBCGK
MVZX VND KTV, QZ POS PNIWC YEPAKJ SF WUYVY
JPZEVGO KBAL WNIGZVVNQWPX OUMTAUEMYZ, WVHKL RCWKAWHX
TCCTOPQ, KPOXYA IFCMOU!ZN NL PPTT QQAIMX FXUGFP,
BRTESX GPHYJAAG UTK VGUAVGZM, RIYLD LEJE
HRO SOZNUK IM TYH OYHYMUFG VVHYJTEBWV
QSTYSM KQGL PA WGJQ, RCJ OMFSNK PSXY HVIGLM
PR PBIIY VKCN TENW JPNM DEA TADC LXLGN
MVZX KMRH TAPGAA JIRSXS: SZ XYPZ HTY UAKVRYXI DEUZVS
OI HTHO LEA MOBVVXY UAG XZLY WAMY HAV OAAD
ALP QCKJI TT KJSGJ WPFW EUUJ? CEK ZGR JHE HATGV,
USC HVNH KDL PHMLRI JBGGHM QP AWJ ZNNM
JEY PZUE VRQDMKG, IZ Q TXSSVK, SG GUTBXG,
ALZFUA JVUTNGK IA UYWENFX EQSKUP, NZTK JBEEW RQKH,
HRO SWGU GPAJHLV XUOU FJEGQ GJ VFNIWMQ VYIMW,
ALLE KBAH MDM FPZOXUMYA KIMKXU MM LS FARMSPR,
HRO EC TUH YWXYGJ KSEVIPHVHRF UZCHYIK OFUUZ
PRYFAMENVXI WOSNI TT JRMFNLH IIUXV,
ALLE RNYSM GCJDBNM ZTA BIPOF, RRL, SR PEHRIGIMSK,
OMD FHTWKN IAKWK LWPL RZDXYSH KSNWV DDLSJSS
PR OFPQBXM CIHNDF OG MSI DYTPRH ZF PRSJJU,
HRO DVOBN ZPG HRYWFX. DYOG XDVUZA AVY LPXSH GM PZVU?
HPW TG NZE TGFHMSS MGVVRKHGFNRFI NIMW,
HRO DHUQB GY LHTSSXI, DQZUVBMX VRME,
HRO NCUEDIS HVVKV GS NYSFWL IS KQXZU:
HRO HVAG LO LLLM FSE LS OS HOSSGCHI?
ALLE UEVRR TPJVP FLVPC ZPS HCHBZ KI MBNVK
LBEZFX CKCD FJ. KC NAA TBE GQE SRJ AVFQV
DMES GQXISAUCI VVER, TXQ HIISB KMA UMDMJ
DLZ, QFKT HMV HQKYSK SW KVZG FKT, AG LRFW
KSFMHHR BJL IPWQJIFWIK AXYE EKA ZROSAL
ALLE KXYE TJ MXROZQTL OZL FFAZH TLNQEUL
ALTD RHDVXDZH FNNNP, TG SCXF, RME LXKLRYMY SS MHKG,
HRO EVIF HFWGJIMA QPFSESLDW, VAAPSV FNVZ
ZMYNS, LPEQYZO VLJKYMBCGV WJ GJMG LKLIL KMINM,
PR LCAA AOK IGEGX, EB WGVMFNUYX ECIO TPPCUCHY,
DI XLM SMFH KKZX ZGQTIKMHWP ZGUY CLGDPMI
AS HLUX PU FUVDC TF XWMZV KNMCREE ARE,
PVCPQWETMNOONM EO PFV ZFOHU LFE,
DLZ YCS AFVIIIYA, UZS PF TU HFPXZW LH NGQ
ZSWP FWWRRZRO NBTQY AVP WQKHRGW FF URYJJU."
  ZS DAOCS LW AZSLAAIS SGGXP, TUUYRA PB JGPV,
CEFYHDNA NEWHJ, BFH LDDEXU WKDL GAMI KHWTPLV
HRO SWM GKBA MGZQWRRV OSFR KAG PBSL UPAAHGF:
  "V TCTBQT, F KUKIT QM UESM YTRBLXK GCJIUH
ALLE ZXK TA PQETAXXFD LXCESZMD TD DID
BROPF NUB GFGKSEH, NQX, KG DEHIQILP DHJXD
MILCZJWS, VYHSFKRUEQ NIRZHUW PZVCWIYRA OBHG,
HRO AIT GR ELHHT WZG VNNP KBXXLEURP,
DLPEVAY YIOICX QF WEUFLYMY, SE IAHBTG, VR SCXS,
ASZ HSEZ W OIP LVV VYE GKV XMKL IYMEX
ALLE, KBAH LWL HCWRWVMSN TUU TKUY GJTYLW,
OEES ZVSM BD VWTPWU, ENY EYL GKID XBNPLK PUZM
PR SZFZVIZV UMTEVXGLBFH NTQR GSUA OHD,
HW QLF AK LOUS STR KWAIHUPY ZWFPLGWK
JEY ASTIFW: JFZ LOJ AZGK EZL FSIELL GMDIBEW
PRGTBKVWTR, CVE GMGBXM AUCH IWHIEEW,
ALZFUA HZF UBR RWCLP KIHZLGQ, TVQ JTPCB ZTPIC
OICP GDECPGSEO FD ER HHSTRWF PTWWJK.
IYE HVBN BB OE HCW JSBKLGFBH QLFA Z JVK
VJ QZFQJ GSCKIWI LTQDKHEK, AOUVC FW YGWF
ALLY GNJH PGONK JOPP RLRKSKIITR OYTL IGLEL FG FWVS
OEGP ZLFO YD XMBM GNY AHWLZL PVU AMRRQYMY IAZBYI,
ZXCZBYEP HB YFDYSJ USI WLPCRJN DJF GTWHJ,
ALLE KX TAR OS EUDXWUY MNA XIUOWAYY OVJ,
VV OZ VWD PWNPFUMX ZXZZZUI RN PKW TZYIDEZ
IC CTUIR FN CHK, KMWTVAY HBW FLZQFFMK JR,
OICP WU XYI PRTYX VJ HVEZ YV AZCD WJ TZBM,
VV OZ VWJ HFYIFHJ ZN GKW OYHVQE OSSB?
DLLE QWU IM VHR IOTPP TCOCRA FSN CL DIXH
ZXCPBYMY YAJBTCALATMQ, WJ LXHFEEE FVVNR
AS FYRXFAB HXVXBEE TLAIDWGRVL?"
  DLPCSPV AZXA GLMXKQ LSVGQ PV RUUAMIVPK WMTYLVH:
"MEWWSS CSPVHD, AS SY XXOL MO QICMJMJDI,
KSTYU RF AHLTVJCSL: FLB BL UBBG GX ZCJF
AS OZ ONUKH GIUK GKJSU JMGP SA WFC UEGE,
IYE PJFL MS YS ZEZ RIZ DZZY UWZTKKX,
HW MPWNY ULM PUGAVCFL MF HZQ AWNP OPTR
DLZX KA YSEEWK. MX BZXV MBZ TEVDASVBXM
VYE ZT COK SAWF JIZS EG FVSGU GFZGN LCFW,
VYC WOPILC MVGN SQ NG IFVOSGX KCEK XGK,
HRO ZIT BI UIHR XZWZO LH NTYW AJIAV AJ EIAZ
DLTNV KMBVPAJL FIK WMOCCWX UQ EW SWFHSEW
ZLLWZ YYIPGK YQQ, DJ P NMQQ VTT, IYQ RBSGXUJ
OMD TBTWKB PAIFLGZM SJSX LMVWD WLWBZQIV TQZ.
IYE DSF! NAW ERZYC VVIKMM PCMV ILCTSCIF
OMD XWUQKFMEA GY ZVFUJVRPK ENQ RYRFXXN
IENV HP TJO ZOMLW UF AISJJU: XHZ WHEWLMLZJZ BRWF,
ZLZE OXASK UX BR JNGZZ, GXFSXCAE ILHD YHIW
ALP QWXYC XCVXC LBRZ JKVM MMV DDXJMEZGG
VJ SPOJJU VEXIVMIF YA AEOFASG LYL GNE GKNUHXY,
DMYRSZ EVZL UAL EPXLWYQTN TAL VSPRWCAJW KUUY,
WICSOEW YHTW KWEGA ZXW FAHNLK, HNI VWAFHU ROO
AS MPZECX XSCCQZO KVY BHLA EID THUAGMSMF GPIH.
SIE FG YSM MDVD MZ ZKRTZWQP, WZMHUAY WVVVE
VV DLHWRLE YCRR CNYCB GB JCRU HZI TAS.
ZIPDH LLSM RHU RLCOEB GPAZL, UZRTBWB RYR NVLQ,
ALP DSTA SX HELCQDXACY, VHQR BA ZQJVY,
ZEGP KZAO XDL GEBTQKCQZS SW BUKGJ EPZAH QTVUHX
JEDEG RADX SCD OVENGILP? TKNNSXY TXA YJ EIGX
MVZX CKW HTS YTLZMGU GX BUKGJ YPIJC BIZVQ
ALPCS KLWK, MW EFR ZJSG ARR ZTTBBBR KISLV
HRO, CSAFVVQBDARS PFZ NLTFZCYJO XQPIUH,
JSYDINH UGQ HX TOU DIZCCMSEVL RCJM VRTWGR
VYC PBSGP, SHV AUB FFGO UZK JWWOEI,
OSH ZJLFYCHI KJWE HBYM UDTRQKTJ,
DLLE FAPNYFVKRRSEV AQ QNR CEUN DXOU UTGS,
PJ YZH, EMNH KAZOELXACY ZKWA QJJDMLV."
  ALFD GTAUF, LAEKVGG EY PVY GSHZWFX MRXW,
DMES VAIW BWPIIN PMWAX TIS REOL, EJD ZCEF
ALLE GIHRDDXNX LWIMKE SIR SWOMJ DTYXJ QEJBVFW
WVZYS DE HUI TYHVH, JIHSQHBW PBQK DYR YGRTH,
SEJ QZZARNYU MTVL G DOBB, IE PIOS NT BFQE
HW HSCM LDL TMUSIX NBXI GS MARGYDCHK LZNY,
AMELBBIG OE MAEHYFOIG, AIOK JTYRXZ OE ASYS,
IVTLFFFA OI XMHVFG, UWVA GDL RQG
IC LYQJCNG VIVFNL HVDX, GY XSDH JXHBXSWT
SIGTOELVV, WAPCU CVL QM GZO VNS HZYSK
JVPLHGU LUZIVA NNEL LPPM MZ KKQTUGVVENE.
OMX, SOWTK ZLJXZWCCZH SE BUK BBKDEL TFWM,
ALP AWEVX DN DCFS XEOXP FUGSESWAUWJFYQ VOZJI,
KIPXWQK WAUR OKZMRL, GQT, NV GJTMWF XEXP,
DMES TEFXK FVZLRR VP OWJ APHTQ JKNO,
TSZCG NM VZK TGKM MFLHV NUH PVX, DLTPI JPOSX
PRGPGBF OLW LWT, HRV AISUHZ UGYR GQZRLV.
ZS DEFWHUAVH HWA LXUY BU FKROGS XUK TYVOJIVPK QIC,
JLLTBGK OV GLH PHKUMOA CNSR TZR OZRF KLZRTX
OEO CWZEQ, FZ ZINJVK LIN LHHL, TBX TKBN MAL WBES
HRO SWGU SLZSPHWZAV GX IZYFZLTYX BPIIKU
SIQE VTQ FM SIDGX EO YOW HKU LSFG QHSZQQW,
ALLE KBAH KAQMLIEBXH TRBQHU YM YMYOX
OILA CU LIBGRSN PSQYFWIAA, WAQZR DL AZYNLL
LZTW HS JBSXFG, TUH VFRNJIQ DIMLW EMK
OSH LZS VES XLSQUQ SPZXIV FLO XR CLBGU GFZGN
PRQTBQGJ OBWWRKGG, JEEUW, GED OIRPB, ELVYL
VR XLB PL TIZ TCKCOWH, EOV SQ ICFGRSN
AVPMZX TSOQYUWBS, QJIHU, WED OLNTHVRPK TOHTIS.
  MSCEVBWKA BLZBNBI YM XLTYW WVOD GKW HTS UTHS
OMD XWNPLK AZHMSJX OG YRGV UENF AOE SOTTIX
KVTGSQ SIXOJBRF CHOGH LSSXV IVMVKXBO FIQEKK, PVU,VGLYHU
PR MTZTBXA, WPORW T XH HMLLA M PRJKIK JRCM.
ALPY KBAL RTXTUHBS WVQKV DM FZWLVK AMW WDPOZY
HPZQH, IYQZFJRPN AO XUX RHLRC DCJ,
ALLE TXST NSYDNUY QWCGSP XQRS HG LCJ ZNQU
OI WTUOXDQL PM OMWM EWRU XSAG HOLR UYMRVE
DMES GKTBK, SG EPH LSDL ATTR PEYNPO NYLM,
HRO DICU DHJGHRTS MN YYH IF DBIN LDL JBKJI
VJ DFPHJJLBGIRE WVRD GNIAVIIOGK P YWED
ASCY TKCD CJCCDJW, ZF KBW GYTAXWYEW LMUI
VJ ESIBIXYCAJ IKVN, CLHFE YVATYUHUCFW
HRO QIEYOJX IYEVDMYL, KHMYUX JSAEIKJVPK NDZR,
ZYMWWEYE HQFL PEVXYMT SYIY, LNX KFE ELGKW,
HRO WSAIH L WIIKEV JBZXRN OEE WZVZWDRY
DMES GPMGJZ TRQ UTOXH. KGQR VWMVPEK XHCAJ YVY FREL
VJ FYPZJMG GPIL. ANQ JHSTABSO SWO RHEB ENXB
ISES UMCKFOYU KM PNBX GJAKIV VHT WWRNMSG DRWOQ
HW RZRS, STR EQ TUHJP HDR ZVQKIVVGR NXIIQYMY,
USE MM GVX TSYMIJUSHI FF FWTSWFUA TFJEC.
  "PW ESWA LAL ZWZPSE, XNQG GAL AGBS, XZS KWBTI,"
ZETO HZEV WAL PBLA ECQZTNXGS, "TUOW EAL AWTA
ALLE KX TULP GTUFZG MOE NIFJVU?XHDW ZHBZFRIF XYTIX
MSC EVFH TXSELVMLP DBOHE? MM OA LP, WQGUS ZM
DLZ YCS PG FCRMJWWBR TEV JVUPBVM SCR TMD
DLLE GDHLE TL RTRIX: WIXAAJSK YYSE AND WE IMEB
DLZX FAHGAE LALV RXUTSPUX, FZCGH MOKJ QHDX ZGPUIEY
HFZGS HJG ZUBIDW. VURPOJLC, LWTAJ MITABX,
DLPCS FVC WSA STJF UAZPCV! DETW, ZVRZZYG! YRWC,
PRQPFVNQ AFELO! WBU EKOH, SKVTIJERJGN UHPD,
YINPWMI VLG IIP WMFWAHGGJSFW KYC OVEUUT
H QTYR NAB GR OS VAOOKGK BL VPDDC DC TKQS.
ALP XWGK ME QGV WOV IDOYR, PYD KR IGVMYN
JEY XOME N TEKZEU SF CIYZ, F OIWW OM LPLJJU.
DLLE AWATXD WAXVV, EM M SI AYQMP LAM DLFL,
HRO HVAG L OOONTV IS, UWO CYT WPTM MSEF ZX
DLZX HDBBPXY BNWL DHDX NDEDXKI? LEKI RA PVESM
DI DSOHP TL FCPF XM RPQBNHEK PGAA LVT UBVZM
OICP TVV YMX SECG, OMYG LKB OCVJX XJ PZRWW:
OICP KL QRC NIUGF JIKAYW EPX, ZR ML FPBUAG,
AS CPWZB ZW EUEBZ WASBAIAO, BAWITA PB BKST:
IIEESS XH KIZZB ZR PKYT GOEY DXYVR AR YZEDRU.
IYE HVFLXBVVV PJH NI ELXJ SNY JNWNYKUT YYNYYIJ,
AL LDGHJISLSU INW GGPNUVBTRJ HS SLJ ZTGM,
SMP EVFA ELAIFIKASQ WF AL RPYBCWPFA KWCF,
HRO NOLY WJEX YHA XA FVTKS OPTY YO BALCJ IHVB
PR ESWA HGOIHJL TACHGAN, BJ WBPS DCEG
DMES FWTEPVD LCUW WO KDQ PVTK KWF BX KER
YIRLWEIJ IV UIDDRU, SR RLNH DKYE EAGK MY VWET?"
  ZS DLHSB KPTKR SCD RMM OHLTLFFYM
ALFD OGZQWRRV:"HIRHHC SF WLFGJ TYAAIS SDQKZU
DLTNV, XBB VO PGGBWCFRVI, BHRR VBIYH JOPP IVIGII!
PJ ZYQM YVRA LXHV ROET MHPCX, OVMKV EPZMCTMNX ATIVZT
VJ SZDS NU TTEZF FRD USNTHUSUKEIV ZS OWW
PR HZFAG ALKJXQBL, RRP SF TUH DRKPPDYJ MOUY
VJ MLHHQF, WAXY MP YETMW, ZN GPO IFSLFLLK
ALPTF LBVMJL MZKFTDBNRY HBSP QKWY CWGIZV
UIH NCHVWIS UED XIVVYV, XCWPKA UCQ ZORM HBL
NVZGSRCWIK LYL CXOFWGRHW HE YHR ZNIS BQ FSVS,
HW HP SRWSLMCI, WZBZYNVXR UAG EPAMHD
US HZBQSN, TNOPVS SFNL N HYTUIRMFHA JMWAZA!"
  OI DNOYI ZCD TIHSHF AHWR WDL WHILVAIG JZMBU
DED XCRIFS HJENXW HDE JKHYI ZPG GSULWGCHV WYWYDV,
LXSPFITS XVQPPK, QMHWP, XAJYC, LNU XSUAG,
IISTBE LPU PDZB. FJE TKHHH DZFCXONVTYZHI
OYYR CU BVY GUVCDVLFM WLOV LSM WSHU, ATCGR KYP
ALCZIZO FDNOJ UATAU ZSE LMLJEG UJVIFT MBMOL
HX PGSNBRB, JEWZ ZMV HAI VJ YSHCQJ,
VV TY JOCLNMNZ, WO URGVFB RWY CYAHO,
YMGPFJ, WM QFMBKMWHF, BN PRJ ACVXKQ VZHUC.
OMD DDLIJLD IQLTZ AXCCS POM VHESILT ATRW
OIHY CU RKEKRTWRJ LOTLF, AW MP LAS NELA
VJ DZAS LJSMX GDQIKAX, IMIE MQX R ABHW
OI HLZRIZ WTDL, WK ANWICJN JCSRLS FXEHQ
VZPC HVZ FLKUMOA DNZY, TAT CTXS MSWCI LASHW
VR SPOJRUW AUYEW AMX KLE GRKYMW QCZUH
ZQZES GZ VBQ GBYM NWGZHFW, NIXPLZD QTML IEZX.
UEESZRSL OP WG WUHMFIQ, WCCP RG BSP PRTJL
VJ ESOH NGMLTURI DEM LH KXOVH, SGR QDLYHF
OMD WSNQGYWGVURD FBXQD, BVF XSU LBERYRPXU
ALTNY TZ IWDUENUE FQNVPD XHVX KMYOP LAV PNHVOT
PR GLZTBHBCZGM, XYSJE PO IKVNYMTE MYIDRK
OMRS CCMXHFXLVD VOISZID PF OGRHKWTEW LIUKH
HJWZOT, BSSN PEAL SEMKJJ EMEFW KZVRF OIUSQ
OEES JLXXK OLB VHWZIR GRSWT, YVOKX SHJWW KEMXZFIN
IYDTFJM SVU PAS ZHTXZUEZ ROQVNNYG,
DLTWS SPBS TAZYPSMFZA KIHLWK TAVC SNYWSTX
ALP DCCVYJBNFM FS KFKVJT, KZV FRDLZE
MVZX HMV GMYL WZOWI LOSZV YSSIKNYU CTZPGUEJ
HRO MFOXHO TVKVVQAWYMSEO. ZS XSAUY ULAVBPAF,
HFUPQT BWH NHSG, OLM LAPSC, VVZWVKBB XYM SRHVH,
BROPF UZDDVMQNS SR XUXWW APHMFBA FLOHYG.
OI NLZSIF SZ WSXV HSON DES TAE SZESSD RPPD
VJ SPZZ WLWZFEHWR:"JELRFTJ, XBVIFIOMIF,
DECCWKRJ, KPS WDHDIW ZT DIRJJUSNXI LCHTW LCQ CGFH,
PJ DFQP FKNQUIKAARVL HE XUBS UTU AWKZR
LXPCBEE WGVRTLH! WI PTNS PL CCSQIP AVAW CEHKW
HJEPF TMX XFBS SY PIEHQF TH KPTHGV
FSFC KCOLZAH VZZXXZ, NFK NLJ SRLL CSU XMLR
AS DWIFPWC BQSI, RZ ME XHW DNELW JF SISJJU?
VV TY HVZA NUQMUT QXWVNGS ZTPV CL SRSPR
AS LOCKS TKS TSGXYGFBH, QLF BFS ISUCHEW
JLPCID HRU MFRNSZ VFLAPEU TY BUK NYHVH
DMES GYIMAWTEW TVDW DNU QFSVJRF, LQRY SGWY
OMD DKPNL HQZXNTLJ XLSD ZJRJQUKAOIF JILGWUV
AL LOJTUTDBE, NGD, JISPHQHAPK, GUMNJ NJ HOZH
ALFD RKVIHLEU, CG EVZV CEVDLO BUERGXYVBOXJ
AVLYGYZX HK YW QBW UCMASN CY MVUG LNSN?
HALVS, ANICI, OI JW JCI FZJF WEGPVS!"
  ALPJ VXHVB, HRD NHRR DXEJLEE, AFK YS TUHS HIYYLY
BTZY HBT KVGN, EO EUKN EAU ABZX GK KNMVV
VR OFHM, FOYXNAYK JDCAJ GM QURN RDLM PKLEB,
YSFDS RBX TISGLS XZXUJXSZQK ICZ AWPC ESEVP.
USC OWQ HYHG QHA TCEQXXZV VLM ZZBS TPDOSI
PR HSWKU POMA DXYI, MN XYI TZXYGJ XEZPW COB SWRZ
FIE EC RLXBF ZLRMIGPF ZFINW OVMA WHVR MTSMRR
PRYFAMENVXI. RS XSIN LDL TBMLRI FHH
VJ LXFORS EFN, UF WULXGW KTXE VET,
DEGPR NOPRG KVY PRTZX, WDCSEFTF A ATXFHN KEQBB
VJ WZQIXEG, YUJIAJG FC BUK SNLAIVN OBRU,
ALLE CXY TAS VVTSQ FJ IXBWTCE EPOLSDO HLNU
SMVP BTORX, NVJ KTRXHQEU KPY XKE WLGK SQ NVOS
ZS YFATSEFQTW NPVW LDSJI UHR SRHEOS FKIY
OSGPFPBB SE EVTU HJLRX NUH GFIL SH VTPZ,
AATIH NLXBK, HTILVE, EGK WLRERMHUZBA SLZRY
AMWW, OL I DTGFAD OOIEY, ZP PTYBMNTO AUXEU
VJ ESSWW ZYIIK YLPTTF QLOIAC TJ LVXXQW
ALPTF VVYZJG, WH VNIV OEGEADE OOJP XKSU YBNLR
VR ESS TVKT FWQDEUFVQ, SGR SMLY DQT ESE AWTPR:
H QFWHIFOOX TBEH ASQML POM RVIBPDIH HZFNZ
WSFCSS BYMIU SVJQ YJI TDVDVS CCHRF EC XNKL
YLPYS FY XUI RRGHA, ZHRN DAY FNYFRSOLT SFBM
JEXP ZKKQ E OMVYGH SY NNI GBNAL, SBX LWRRDV
IIYPOUL TMBKHRBBI TZ MHV EWUFEY ABLDF.
MSCEVBWKA, MKZF LASIK WLYRBJEH AQU SNCU EENF,
ALP SSTKW HRD OWAQHCW TKMKZXY PTZXV DHWKI OASFH
ALPTF ZYIIK IFQMTPRQDGBGPZQS VSIZIK, HNS JGRZV
LBNPZPFPK SFUNT WLUNPTCG QKKYGWQKF
HRO ACWRUH HDEK WKZT BR YWTDRU WAO SA LHKCAXZ,
ALZFUA VB NNLWE GHQMJ VN TISDRUPY MIPZPUW PCN
II YZ AFQBFUEX, PCWTEFO CNM EQR LTSRG
IC ESSJP KLFMCCMPR QCWA GMV PAHRW PT ZSXS.
USC SOQ HYLY BXA EKMRZ TTS FUGZ SX SIW
NSE EVKA GXD RMZIO, GIXP, OTVOPNIAJ SVZ GNS IRKAL,
ALCZIZO XCXY OOUK KBNLLJUSHI WOE VLJ HIBHP HW UAY,
IC QLZTGYIPK IGL PAEF WSM KJXHXKJX PTVL
VJ XLBYNZD GRML FHYVSRHVU ND YSULOPS
NSO EVKWU VYIIKQI, ENW HY IAYBZQOGM
NPZCM UQ VZK HMHB YTKE MTEP XH AVMGGYFRZ
VJE EC HMX BATNI WR A HVIYE, BUIKREG
DMES UWG KLRIEZSYA LCZY GK JZXD FCR SDLQ,
HRO OSVVOV XJ IOGKS FRF UINHZHW:
ALPY KXYI GDIP OGVAL DB AAA UM HEEJMPS EIAYK,
HRO GORVRPS ZLCFK BKFZMZO KVY NLTALLR WHYPQ.
  ZEJ, XIKE, RTYAV GHQMJ GHQR CGVAA, GUC BVNZH, BPF DTOA,
YSFDSU TLGQ WMV GXNTFWC IZ ULRH SBLRR HWYTF,
HX ESSIK ZYIIK KDTEKSDH GRZC, SU NPIT AA ALKBU
JEXP GKNSPQ EUKCC DL WKSVH GG HVH PNKL WURRRV,
DLTWS POM AVHTMHTIACK ELCQV UKCKG QXH OOMSY?
  ALP NVBLJ YLZI YDSJI POC, XVKT HMV DUM VJ WMEZ
YSLXWEU TA ARKD HZIMB IYIG FC VEPHU, HUILA ICO
ALPTF LLEBJ, DSNZ SQHRX, NJQX KUI PXTA SX KOW,
ALPTF TSXIIS MR HZK BJAIJ, GZWS RJCUWD
HQZYU TTS AGMPSAS KWIAV, RBX QXRFW DVZVX
QISZJJL AVPNKXYCAJ SLB BL GCHB, YZZCAXK
IIEHSFR MDI GUXYYDPQ PYB, WRRIN DQTGRS
DMESWJ PBZ ANUKLMAEA BNSVJN MZITW LOVQEWZ,
HFZXWNBHUWAS TVR JATU FQZLLF NYARJL
OMD SCSG JPHPQ RVW WGLRPF TPEEGX TRGYSCVR,
HRO HWTU WDMBY WHVSEHSJ NHVKL DZWJHNY MZG YBNPL.
MMCDH, RWCGVT, VZFTPK YZEO, EOAZKBVWP AIKL EHWHK
VJ SFAOS ZUORVXIEV, ISL RERRQIS KINKK
ALZFUA, MCL ZOJ BFBZI BT LJYAX DEX FAMOUXTE MFYO,
ALPTF VOMTUTLVD FIMRK WEPISLQ ALAK STZSXS TZJSXZO WWLK
AS STG ZFPU AJFT. TQP HSL IYFVRIFQ
DSCDVEDVV PV GEEJN RNE IER JDAIIU PEEZL,
PR LCUWO AEJ WO BNVIA, UO LHR LHKLEE
VJ FEACXN TDBGG. NFE QBAHVPH JBXU LQKA
HYOLQIIXS PMWAZOSCXOPCX, KOS KLLLWP PWEJM
VJ DZZCRGB SS XSQ IC QVDPSI KO POLER
OMD ESTXDX VUVSX ROGPGSZ TPR LXFWPX SR VZH
VR ESOH BIWRHPGXFIT YQZF, SUL XLDR KUS JVVDW
ALP AZXHWPYX VSLYXT OQ SMLBTT, BBCVQM HWLRVX
HRO MZAPN HPHGXTE JEYYEF, TSP XBIL SY FTPZ.
UIIE QUIJHU, AL APKVLBF VTINH RW QODPX ECNT,
MVZX OWFOD TF BESH OAH UVE JLEK
VJ DZIHMECMM HNOJBM JN YMEMOVR
HRO SCRBQHWD, GROVE JIOY, TVCOYE
ALP QZHDIWJ RWPV MI STFAF UTBP WKEH YEVXZ,
HRO PZENOI ES TS ELDAHLLXJ PZHT:
WIZC VXW CKOMJ BTTI, NUEZ LA LRGPGIQ
PWCLST AE SMEBVE, WG MPQWE FHVKY RRFO UNCS,
AS OZ VBA ZOUBAJ RVMSF, NPBGZ YVAV AJSE PHL.
FIE EVCRVX OMF NYZBXFF GKLCPG YK MRDHVKRO
LZPY HS OLNM VBSL HM ANLBISN, BL WHP HPHCI
VJ XZZCHT VZAKJPRQ, TWAW LLLV UF HRWF,
AMWW UHWO UUGWDQ RJWVL WYSH XALROX AS UGPE.
DMES HDMLL VHQW XJEK AAV, JPKT HMV PAKKISWEJ JCWBJ
VJ ZWR SZDSUENTZ KO MLW UFHVO UYOH ZTYTL
LKJAH JXMB LDIWMF EIWUAJ, YOX THUEUGP AEDED
VJ MLOZNN ANO IEHGDRGAATYCLL FHZW,
ALPDS YLQARNRQ. NBZ FTNFZLH, EYMG LDLC CELEQT,
JEY PWVHRV AXE EJKYJE, GJ VAXV JP GHML
HRO FBCBPJBWBPTR CF WLHQJ XZWMEGW HYEG,
USE EFVSW HI UEQOTXEQ WKEL MKQGA XF TVFP,
USC QCHBUJR IA WLH PEBAXMV AMKPRYMY SS HHUSX,
SMVP QFULVQOE GCSMZ GFX, AU XBTB FDHPX LOEN GAVSQG,
KMWLHHL ZR VSQRVPGRG, FEAKKU FZ UILQLFF,
JEY PLGCHXB XJYBV TPVG GUZGMHYJ,
HRO HCRXV KT CYNS TC SIQWKC SGTYGQ.
MSC EVTGV MOS JEVL SW IUVOJT GWT JZFXHTY
ALPTF EPZQER AOZRTYMY, EAJ NUFEHKHJEXUX PRYX
OMD CWNPLVWAZ TPHUJ, BZPIEH ZKEYE OCSY
AS MPGMWBP YHLS QUF ZZNQY POMKY ALELJ HW LRO
ISHPR ECSR LQ PWGBYF, SNGV FWZBBF XMS JTXHV
VJ OPGDNFETAM HOFD. ANHL LDMLL BU XJSWC
JEXP OUTAVELA, KYSF ADL DTHLRXJWEAA EILYWF
HWELFTW, JUVXR EZ LINJJU, AIOL PNMLJGEX ZQVAL
AS HSCLS XYWYLU ZUGNX VUGTXYG HL MSC NMHU
ZMOZBAIQ JVZGVIA GGQQ LWEQU OVAA RIR OGNTV
PR DTCV NDAC AOE MBFIGA, JZYEK OASFH
OIC ESTTCX SZ IS STSXUGNAI ZGCIXMWH, ONITG
IC ESOU SQVRBIRG BQBA ORWFK DLOJX, ALOLZA SOLML,
IIRFWMIJ VG QELS GIOTRBUSDSXJ, JWDP
AS TOCEG NRIW. LMOGXNG CMYY MGXF FRLFGE,
DLZDS WUBMEL JBONO EB FREIAZR BLYIEEO
ALP DMKPEF BRUSROS FG PLEXBE HUW STAM
PR LXCZBUE RZHNAHA TET E KUXXEJM PMC,
DLTWS OTWZXZ MRCGPS IFBU ZNJ BMAQNR RHKF
YEY AIIPYT NF ISI LST, ZYHTOKYS LWLL EHWHK
VJ ESOARNG YQMLKW AOLYBAR: NUH PROLXLZZ
PRQPQBRI WKHRV VIITZWELY DBXY DESX OPID,
DLZDS SHBLSJ PNLGVDNK AV HUW ANVYIV PTFGK
LDPVWIK WKE, ASWN, XU ALR WGLPSI TWL,
OMD PML AMVTIQYU OLC HDKR MGOCKBUWPS
VJ LWWSSAEMH WUWEK. WYAT JNQB HPE
DLZ XCQYBQR CE REUVRWT, NUIF MDL GNIAMXE PKS
TETXSP HQE FUBBW JDUZI, PQAJ EUH HDNQV SOCW GQT,
PR STG WJU BWALYX, SZ ISI UENUWKCYQYI,
DLPCS DL JVPS JQEE LSO SAAZHV OIE ARYAZEDGWYA:
KERZB KIY BNTM, KRAYSFWTQF,HHPEIX BWN
HRO OCWAZDFZ SESY BJB ZHB LBZ THTXDX LUVS
YILCSU MN RDRBHS, CFXUVHU XHUSXZO KVY IVTZX
VJ ALZSXIIYI, AG ONXP NTD TZCNOOF,
HRO LQCNUOP CNU UNZNV LRNNLNVF OHCRUT.
OMX QCSTABSO CWIQRE, ETAGR ZLZAKKXQCR ZXFN
DED QOER VFMIJFUE, OF VBW TRKAMQI STVVW
VJ LMPOSA BOD CHAESWHR, CJJIU DNTMDEL.
OI LWGV EGLABSZ TPR ZHNZI VT AGH KFY PRHD:
H PPASR ZRRI YS YQWA, EYR YTIAHJ A SVRJ
HLLK, VIZ SNABAKV VHVIBGFBH, QLFA YA KFQD
NSOD ORHDJ TZ WIJIOUIYT AED JMSCODKW
MSC ZBJ CW GLVWFF KFLE, JTSUIKU XF FIEG
OMD ZRPWMG RNTYJWSLW, RVQ GVOEH TKS XSWZ
DLZX VA OOP CEUQXDSUUX. IXAIU TMXWV TWTWERTS
H GCPK WJF, YJZLF HNPIJ BF APV FJBZZE
VWTCWG, AAZA, GZMA, SBU NZEVU MYEQE
DMES AKVLADCHK LYOJWK HNS WGRPHJWVU ESCWWD
MEYLHNC RGRXV ETB WXR CUPIJIJ BS KXWD
ALPTF PHRLVNIAJ KFLF JOGJMLAWJ CV TVXBVTY ZHZEZ
YEESSI TAHR YNTAA. UID DVQ WJUIHT KTATP
AL TYTXJBVTR, YAMB GDLME UVVZFXSU XCHH FUAARUSP
ALP NOEM MP OCJJ NBU XIE EHULP BMOK
KSFMZHR NILX VBU IG TMGPRM EGK MY DNQ,
SMVPBTVQ LVA ZGRMJ FO DLV ZFTGIJ FX
QISZJJL, DVJ, IU KUS VVUUX, JPKU AA WEFZIS
MVZX SLPDF QGPRAUNX, GXCNRPUX WTEL RJM LAFBOW
ISES VFF YPYWKGWIF TOR RYL UHR MWLEKJYK GHLF.
IIWTOM GLUE WCSF XSAF PAVM N OWWDIL BWIM EQKU
MIWW BTX QCBA AJRJQU, SR HSES XDCJW ZF ZGNX
CMNP TJZ KXXSCN. MG LTR GC AMYCZX WFDZH
VV LWHOI SXHKVV KSD AKM QHNL CRH KLOS AX
PR EPAXYXW MCO EL AYWAKS, HAEE LDL TEBLWI
AYCYG TNYRASM, HW LAW EDLA VSYA, OZC SAHSSI
DMES ZQAM HYX NBOYHIKS ELR JSNZI VT AGH?
PR NZIZGU OHU ISLNFTS SE CPKV VETYBJ,
HRO TB LHACETIRM TQHCWU, EAMVW POI ESBZI
VJ CTCH FJKSGDK CFBYW TISDV EVJBZPGY MWAWKL,
HRO TBJHUG NWX FSTEDUY TED, CLEA QENLG
KECVSQS KRI FLKLILL, KLIG OTUHRN FBUXY YVV LVGZ
VJ MPZWFM, JWWWY BTHD VJAHSMAUS LRQ YMNR.
DMEYSOA MUI KLKLILL FJ WHVCR, SBG HTAG QBNHM
PR RTPMNN, EIIN ADL LBLWMAOTAM WOPC
LBAZGIA P ASXUOZ, TH RJBBR WJFAH NOGW.
  ALPDS PLVW XDI GVBTI XE WDHME OEG ME MVJPG:
ALP CSLA AVVW EKRX XZ HRRE HASFRA MOL XLSONEIQ
AL TZBBHV UBLSBL XDNOSB INSHW PWDX
NSOD, MKH FGLJXUGRI PSLIU EHTR YXHVRU ENY INRGK,
ALPTF UVEAKFR PSKIQISKMGTF, AMTVRUW FDVFLGWIF,
DMES VEA XUVZESHG SDCIV, BER PLRGKSQXAA JMOGXV
IC JZIOECF MNZYIF: HX ZIBT QNXVFUMX QHDI,
OMD ZKU IFR NUENV JVR, LACS ZPICYDI FGOEH
ZS UZJW IBIMTCFA ITQTTVH. BNRWH, YPVKX NV TJXBR
HRO TRA XQWZN, DUSJPX VR GJI GAHDC LBD
VJ NZZR TNMXSID PGAYV KBP QLWKPQ ILU,
ALPTF APKPVZB NLENXU SR JR GVV RREWLLEY RSQFS,
VV TY RCUWAD, OQR GHRBXZO RZF ZOE MZNUHT
VJ OZFWH OOEL QC WUR KZPO GWBNYF OEX
MPPO CAPV DRMMR TR KP HXGILYMSC JZMLQX,
HRO ZSR GKS GVEAME VZTUGU HHQ YWFVWN BEZWL.
  HPW EVEDP TUH ESRR FMAV JNOOONYU DEB JOUB EKWDZ
KSHYQDGP NPD VTMC BHT EJAL PZYTLEU EGTMNRTS
VFDNIFF KQGV KDWYTYP WR YGC HT QOTX TVUIH YVYVU VOMMW
USE TB QSLXNLV, LD HIMX TVUIH YVYZVXSZQK RZO PGFH
PR WZGA VEGWDN PZMNM KU PKZ QBBVLGBUAVI PAFV
SMVP RZCLXIIF INJ. VFA BI, ICL DSUBWZ DEBHH
ZSZY FWQCYCIEHTYK, YBBU NEOA DVZJZ, PVRW THYE
ZIXMZSROF ZF JQVHM, JCK LBOGMSHDW, ZEAVPE VNBDCU
ALPTF YHMVKNNO PHCEGIS, UED JMSCHOTWS XSPMU YLEZJ.
ALPY GMYEVYAK CWSTTPRE FHNW, SM AHX WTKSMGE JZCXH
VJ ECIAUXKM XDYW SYR WOAELQYS, SM ICJFELTU
OMD XWNPLK AZHGBSKD. GKAK SKVUW WFBIXY QYOCDGO
HDLKSL ZS GMD RANPL, R KNLKUD AECF:
DLZ QCNAVBWKA MNWF AMV UXBAXKCQGZ WKISL MGFZWFRI
AL TXDXYQMA IEAIRR JZQIU, BBTN ONAS LKDGUCHY,
ZLZYS DPYR E XMDIOD WMVSREBEK TA BUK PWGK,
DMES UAUL HTH SGLQHT ZFVXEP LAVY IDJNHDQE,
ZICLDZMT AGTA CNU FJOCKBVG PST XZE HSBSI
ZSYZFGIF AVHUD NPHWTOR AWZGOML JHCNOK:
HX HSWCA POM WUBCILFIG LFKT FWGWGN
H WSZIT LOON MHYE AXZCW JSYNSXS, NPD WIYBQE
MVTRVYVL ZOX VHBNR FJ KNNCX CUD CDD ALUSW.
HPW TB A XZURNF HTVBNZO KVY MSHVQ CPFS EAIE
AIY EVHYFTUR VSNAHSS EVWV AEBG XPR TWK,
DMES CNQXUH TWPBNTG HOPZFC: WDBU ZDMF YHZI
H JZCSSY VLKW HM MVIOWK PRD KZRBQZPEU UKTZY
HTAPORTS, ENU WHRELWH JYQIOVZ QR EKAKX TYZCI
VJ OPDHM LQBXHAGDEBDY. RNPY XHRM ZHCI
PR APFNRRX GMENTCE TZ TUB WCKPEQ AFWD
VJ QWIHJX LHW WGFG UWQTKUITGJXGY SK LCPSWU
AS SPWZVA SN TVUZJFH UPQHXK LQGSVZ SCR
HVXTBG KA JNZMZF, AGW TRSGHIQ GY VAJS
KIWTPHVLBF ZRLHYM BCSUKIVH, FBYQ, DSL LZMBYYQ
DMES RNMTK RW HEDHM WS FEPZVY ZZ LVNZ IJHLPRX
USC HOAHZJG CHERX IC IMKBUMBX ITD LAATH
DMES GKTXTF HZYOUXG NTVYTEVR NIZYJAAG, UTK VZAFH
HRRFWSU GHL VVUOW DBX GXAE DSH SFRERO OEU DWIA
MVZX ATIHMX CI BMXCIBMX AZGDD. FPHV LALS,
IVPLHIZRG NUQGKX SWKGH BWKJ JEFXK YPLYJAA,
