Their painful steps oer the burnt soil. And now
Advanced in view they standa horrid front
Of dreadful length and dazzling arms, in guise
Of warriors old, with ordered spear and shield,
Awaiting what command their mighty Chief
Had to impose. He through the armed files
Darts his experienced eye, and soon traverse
The whole battalion viewstheir order due,
Their visages and stature as of gods
Their number last he sums. And now his heart
Distends with pride, and, hardening in his strength,
Glories: for never, since created Man,
Met such embodied force as, named with these,
Could merit more than that small infantry
Warred on by cranesthough all the giant brood
Of Phlegra with th heroic race were joined
That fought at Thebes and Ilium, on each side
Mixed with auxiliar gods and what resounds
In fable or romance of Uthers son,
Begirt with British and Armoric knights
And all who since, baptized or infidel,
Jousted in Aspramont, or Montalban,
Damasco, or Marocco, or Trebisond,
Or whom Biserta sent from Afric shore
When Charlemain with all his peerage fell
By Fontarabbia. Thus far these beyond
Compare of mortal prowess, yet observed
Their dread Commander. He, above the rest
In shape and gesture proudly eminent,
Stood like a tower. His form had yet not lost
All her original brightness, nor appeared
Less than Archangel ruined, and th excess
Of glory obscured: as when the sun newrisen
Looks through the horizontal misty air
Shorn of his beams, or, from behind the moon,
In dim eclipse, disastrous twilight sheds
On half the nations, and with fear of change
Perplexes monarchs. Darkened so, yet shone
Above them all th Archangel: but his face
Deep scars of thunder had intrenched, and care
Sat on his faded cheek, but under brows
Of dauntless courage, and considerate pride
Waiting revenge. Cruel his eye, but cast
Signs of remorse and passion, to behold
The fellows of his crime, the followers rather
Far other once beheld in bliss, condemned
For ever now to have their lot in pain
Millions of Spirits for his fault amerced
Of Heaven, and from eteranl splendours flung
For his revoltyet faithful how they stood,
Their glory withered as, when heavens fire
Hath scathed the forest oaks or mountain pines,
With singed top their stately growth, though bare,
Stands on the blasted heath. He now prepared
To speak whereat their doubled ranks they bend
From wing to wing, and half enclose him round
With all his peers: attention held them mute.
Thrice he assayed, and thrice, in spite of scorn,
Tears, such as Angels weep, burst forth: at last
Words interwove with sighs found out their way:
  "O myriads of immortal Spirits! O Powers
Matchless, but with th Almighth!and that strife
Was not inglorious, though th event was dire,
As this place testifies, and this dire change,
Hateful to utter. But what power of mind,
Forseeing or presaging, from the depth
Of knowledge past or present, could have feared
How such united force of gods, how such
As stood like these, could ever know repulse?
For who can yet believe, though after loss,
That all these puissant legions, whose exile
Hath emptied Heaven, shall fail to reascend,
Selfraised, and repossess their native seat?
For me, be witness all the host of Heaven,
If counsels different, or danger shunned
By me, have lost our hopes. But he who reigns
Monarch in Heaven till then as one secure
Sat on his throne, upheld by old repute,
Consent or custom, and his regal state
Put forth at full, but still his strength concealed
Which tempted our attempt, and wrought our fall.
Henceforth his might we know, and know our own,
So as not either to provoke, or dread
New war provoked: our better part remains
To work in close design, by fraud or guile,
What force effected not that he no less
At length from us may find, who overcomes
By force hath overcome but half his foe.
Space may produce new Worlds whereof so rife
There went a fame in Heaven that he ere long
Intended to create, and therein plant
A generation whom his choice regard
Should favour equal to the Sons of Heaven.
Thither, if but to pry, shall be perhaps
Our first eruptionthither, or elsewhere
For this infernal pit shall never hold
Celestial Spirits in bondage, nor th Abyss
Long under darkness cover. But these thoughts
Full counsel must mature. Peace is despaired
For who can think submission? War, then, war
Open or understood, must be resolved."
  He spake and, to confirm his words, outflew
Millions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs
Of mighty Cherubim the sudden blaze
Far round illumined Hell. Highly they raged
Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped arms
Clashed on their sounding shields the din of war,
Hurling defiance toward the vault of Heaven.
  There stood a hill not far, whose grisly top
Belched fire and rolling smoke the rest entire
Shone with a glossy scurfundoubted sign
That in his womb was hid metallic ore,
The work of sulphur. Thither, winged with speed,
A numerous brigade hastened: as when bands
Of pioneers, with spade and pickaxe armed,
Forerun the royal camp, to trench a field,
Or cast a rampart. Mammon led them on
Mammon, the least erected Spirit that fell
From Heaven for even in Heaven his looks and thoughts
Were always downward bent, admiring more
The riches of heavens pavement, trodden gold,
Than aught divine or holy else enjoyed
In vision beatific. By him first
Men also, and by his suggestion taught,
Ransacked the centre, and with impious hands
Rifled the bowels of their mother Earth
For treasures better hid. Soon had his crew
Opened into the hill a spacious wound,
And digged out ribs of gold. Let none admire
That riches grow in Hell that soil may best
Deserve the precious bane. And here let those
Who boast in mortal things, and wondering tell
Of Babel, and the works of Memphian kings,
Learn how their greatest monuments of fame
And strength, and art, are easily outdone
By Spirits reprobate, and in an hour
What in an age they, with incessant toil
And hands innumerable, scarce perform.
Nigh on the plain, in many cells prepared,
That underneath had veins of liquid fire
Sluiced from the lake, a second multitude
With wondrous art founded the massy ore,
Severing each kind, and scummed the bulliondross.
A third as soon had formed within the ground
A various mould, and from the boiling cells
By strange conveyance filled each hollow nook
As in an organ, from one blast of wind,
To many a row of pipes the soundboard breathes.
Anon out of the earth a fabric huge
Rose like an exhalation, with the sound
Of dulcet symphonies and voices sweet
Built like a temple, where pilasters round
Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid
With golden architrave nor did there want
Cornice or frieze, with bossy sculptures graven
The roof was fretted gold. Not Babylon
Nor great Alcairo such magnificence
Equalled in all their glories, to enshrine
Belus or Serapis their gods, or seat
Their kings, when Egypt with Assyria strove
In wealth and luxury. Th ascending pile
Stood fixed her stately height, and straight the doors,
Opening their brazen folds, discover, wide
Within, her ample spaces oer the smooth
And level pavement: from the arched roof,
Pendent by subtle magic, many a row
Of starry lamps and blazing cressets, fed
With naptha and asphaltus, yielded light
As from a sky. The hasty multitude
Admiring entered and the work some praise,
And some the architect. His hand was known
In Heaven by many a towered structure high,
Where sceptred Angels held their residence,
And sat as Princes, whom the supreme King
Exalted to such power, and gave to rule,
Each in his Hierarchy, the Orders bright.
Nor was his name unheard or unadored
In ancient Greece and in Ausonian land
Men called him Mulciber and how he fell
From Heaven they fabled, thrown by angry Jove
Sheer oer the crystal battlements: from morn
To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
A summers day, and with the setting sun
Dropt from the zenith, like a falling star,
On Lemnos, th Aegaean isle. Thus they relate,
Erring for he with this rebellious rout
Fell long before nor aught aviled him now
To have built in Heaven high towers nor did he scape
By all his engines, but was headlong sent,
With his industrious crew, to build in Hell.
  Meanwhile the winged Heralds, by command
Of sovereign power, with awful ceremony
And trumpets sound, throughout the host proclaim
A solemn council forthwith to be held
At Pandemonium, the high capital
Of Satan and his peers. Their summons called
From every band and squared regiment
By place or choice the worthiest: they anon
With hundreds and with thousands trooping came
Attended. All access was thronged the gates
And porches wide, but chief the spacious hall
Though like a covered field, where champions bold
Wont ride in armed, and at the Soldans chair
Defied the best of Paynim chivalry
To mortal combat, or career with lance,
Thick swarmed, both on the ground and in the air,
Brushed with the hiss of rustling wings. As bees
In springtime, when the Sun with Taurus rides.
Pour forth their populous youth about the hive
In clusters they among fresh dews and flowers
Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed plank,
The suburb of their strawbuilt citadel,
New rubbed with balm, expatiate, and confer
Their stateaffairs: so thick the airy crowd
Swarmed and were straitened till, the signal given,
Behold a wonder! They but now who seemed
In bigness to surpass Earths giant sons,
Now less than smallest dwarfs, in narrow room
Throng numberlesslike that pygmean race
Beyond the Indian mount or faery elves,
Whose midnight revels, by a forestside
Or fountain, some belated peasant sees,
Or dreams he sees, while overhead the Moon
Sits arbitress, and nearer to the Earth
Wheels her pale course: they, on their mirth and dance
Intent, with jocund music charm his ear
At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds.
Thus incorporeal Spirits to smallest forms
Reduced their shapes immense, and were at large,
Though without number still, amidst the hall
Of that infernal court. But far within,
And in their own dimensions like themselves,
The great Seraphic Lords and Cherubim
In close recess and secret conclave sat,
A thousand demigods on golden seats,
Frequent and full. After short silence then,
And summons read, the great consult began.



Book II


High on a throne of royal state, which far
Outshone the wealth or Ormus and of Ind,
Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand
Showers on her kings barbaric pearl and gold,
Satan exalted sat, by merit raised
To that bad eminence and, from despair
Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires
Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue
Vain war with Heaven and, by success untaught,
His proud imaginations thus displayed:
  "Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heaven!
For, since no deep within her gulf can hold
Immortal vigour, though oppressed and fallen,
I give not Heaven for lost: from this descent
Celestial Virtues rising will appear
More glorious and more dread than from no fall,
And trust themselves to fear no second fate!
Me though just right, and the fixed laws of Heaven,
Did first create your leadernext, free choice
With what besides in council or in fight
Hath been achieved of merityet this loss,
Thus far at least recovered, hath much more
Established in a safe, unenvied throne,
Yielded with full consent. The happier state
In Heaven, which follows dignity, might draw
Envy from each inferior but who here
Will envy whom the highest place exposes
Foremost to stand against the Thunderers aim
Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share
Of endless pain? Where there is, then, no good
For which to strive, no strife can grow up there
From faction: for none sure will claim in Hell
Precedence none whose portion is so small
Of present pain that with ambitious mind
Will covet more! With this advantage, then,
To union, and firm faith, and firm accord,
More than can be in Heaven, we now return
To claim our just inheritance of old,
Surer to prosper than prosperity
Could have assured us and by what best way,
Whether of open war or covert guile,
We now debate. Who can advise may speak."
  He ceased and next him Moloch, sceptred king,
Stood upthe strongest and the fiercest Spirit
That fought in Heaven, now fiercer by despair.
His trust was with th Eternal to be deemed
Equal in strength, and rather than be less
Cared not to be at all with that care lost
Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worse,
He recked not, and these words thereafter spake:
  "My sentence is for open war. Of wiles,
More unexpert, I boast not: them let those
Contrive who need, or when they need not now.
For, while they sit contriving, shall the rest
Millions that stand in arms, and longing wait
The signal to ascendsit lingering here,
Heavens fugitives, and for their dwellingplace
Accept this dark opprobrious den of shame,
The prison of his ryranny who reigns
By our delay? No! let us rather choose,
Armed with Hellflames and fury, all at once
Oer Heavens high towers to force resistless way,
Turning our tortures into horrid arms
Against the Torturer when, to meet the noise
Of his almighty engine, he shall hear
Infernal thunder, and, for lightning, see
Black fire and horror shot with equal rage
Among his Angels, and his throne itself
Mixed with Tartarean sulphur and strange fire,
His own invented torments. But perhaps
The way seems difficult, and steep to scale
With upright wing against a higher foe!
Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench
Of that forgetful lake benumb not still,
That in our porper motion we ascend
Up to our native seat descent and fall
To us is adverse. Who but felt of late,
When the fierce foe hung on our broken rear
Insulting, and pursued us through the Deep,
With what compulsion and laborious flight
We sunk thus low? Th ascent is easy, then
Th event is feared! Should we again provoke
Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find
To our destruction, if there be in Hell
Fear to be worse destroyed! What can be worse
Than to dwell here, driven out from bliss, condemned
In this abhorred deep to utter woe!
Where pain of unextinguishable fire
Must exercise us without hope of end
The vassals of his anger, when the scourge
Inexorably, and the torturing hour,
Calls us to penance? More destroyed than thus,
We should be quite abolished, and expire.
What fear we then? what doubt we to incense
His utmost ire? which, to the height enraged,
Will either quite consume us, and reduce
To nothing this essentialhappier far
Than miserable to have eternal being!
Or, if our substance be indeed divine,
And cannot cease to be, we are at worst
On this side nothing and by proof we feel
Our power sufficient to disturb his Heaven,
And with perpetual inroads to alarm,
Though inaccessible, his fatal throne:
Which, if not victory, is yet revenge."
  He ended frowning, and his look denounced
Desperate revenge, and battle dangerous
To less than gods. On th other side up rose
Belial, in act more graceful and humane.
A fairer person lost not Heaven he seemed
For dignity composed, and high exploit.
But all was false and hollow though his tongue
Dropped manna, and could make the worse appear
The better reason, to perplex and dash
Maturest counsels: for his thoughts were low
 To vice industrious, but to nobler deeds
Timorous and slothful. Yet he pleased the ear,
And with persuasive accent thus began:
  "I should be much for open war, O Peers,
As not behind in hate, if what was urged
Main reason to persuade immediate war
Did not dissuade me most, and seem to cast
Ominous conjecture on the whole success
When he who most excels in fact of arms,
In what he counsels and in what excels
Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair
And utter dissolution, as the scope
Of all his aim, after some dire revenge.
First, what revenge? The towers of Heaven are filled
With armed watch, that render all access
Impregnable: oft on the bodering Deep
Encamp their legions, or with obscure wing
Scout far and wide into the realm of Night,
Scorning surprise. Or, could we break our way
By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise
With blackest insurrection to confound
Heavens purest light, yet our great Enemy,
All incorruptible, would on his throne
Sit unpolluted, and th ethereal mould,
Incapable of stain, would soon expel
Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire,
Victorious. Thus repulsed, our final hope
Is flat despair: we must exasperate
Th Almighty Victor to spend all his rage
And that must end us that must be our cure
To be no more. Sad cure! for who would lose,
Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
Those thoughts that wander through eternity,
To perish rather, swallowed up and lost
In the wide womb of uncreated Night,
Devoid of sense and motion? And who knows,
Let this be good, whether our angry Foe
Can give it, or will ever? How he can
Is doubtful that he never will is sure.
Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire,
Belike through impotence or unaware,
To give his enemies their wish, and end
Them in his anger whom his anger saves
To punish endless? Wherefore cease we, then?
Say they who counsel war we are decreed,
Reserved, and destined to eternal woe
Whatever doing, what can we suffer more,
What can we suffer worse? Is this, then, worst
Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in arms?
What when we fled amain, pursued and struck
With Heavens afflicting thunder, and besought
The Deep to shelter us? This Hell then seemed
A refuge from those wounds. Or when we lay
Chained on the burning lake? That sure was worse.
What if the breath that kindled those grim fires,
Awaked, should blow them into sevenfold rage,
And plunge us in the flames or from above
Should intermitted vengeance arm again
His red right hand to plague us? What if all
Her stores were opened, and this firmament
Of Hell should spout her cataracts of fire,
Impendent horrors, threatening hideous fall
One day upon our heads while we perhaps,
Designing or exhorting glorious war,
Caught in a fiery tempest, shall be hurled,
Each on his rock transfixed, the sport and prey
Or racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk
Under yon boiling ocean, wrapt in chains,
There to converse with everlasting groans,
Unrespited, unpitied, unreprieved,
Ages of hopeless end? This would be worse.
War, therefore, open or concealed, alike
My voice dissuades for what can force or guile
With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye
Views all things at one view? He from Heavens height
All these our motions vain sees and derides,
Not more almighty to resist our might
Than wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles.
Shall we, then, live thus vilethe race of Heaven
Thus trampled, thus expelled, to suffer here
Chains and these torments? Better these than worse,
By my advice since fate inevitable
Subdues us, and omnipotent decree,
The Victors will. To suffer, as to do,
Our strength is equal nor the law unjust
That so ordains. This was at first resolved,
If we were wise, against so great a foe
Contending, and so doubtful what might fall.
I laugh when those who at the spear are bold
And venturous, if that fail them, shrink, and fear
What yet they know must followto endure
Exile, or igominy, or bonds, or pain,
The sentence of their Conqueror. This is now
Our doom which if we can sustain and bear,
Our Supreme Foe in time may much remit
His anger, and perhaps, thus far removed,
Not mind us not offending, satisfied
With what is punished whence these raging fires
Will slacken, if his breath stir not their flames.
Our purer essence then will overcome
Their noxious vapour or, inured, not feel
Or, changed at length, and to the place conformed
In temper and in nature, will receive
Familiar the fierce heat and, void of pain,
This horror will grow mild, this darkness light
Besides what hope the neverending flight
Of future days may bring, what chance, what change
Worth waitingsince our present lot appears
For happy though but ill, for ill not worst,
If we procure not to ourselves more woe."
  Thus Belial, with words clothed in reasons garb,
Counselled ignoble ease and peaceful sloth,
Not peace and after him thus Mammon spake:
  "Either to disenthrone the King of Heaven
We war, if war be best, or to regain
Our own right lost. Him to unthrone we then
May hope, when everlasting Fate shall yield
To fickle Chance, and Chaos judge the strife.
The former, vain to hope, argues as vain
The latter for what place can be for us
Within Heavens bound, unless Heavens Lord supreme
We overpower? Suppose he should relent
And publish grace to all, on promise made
Of new subjection with what eyes could we
Stand in his presence humble, and receive
Strict laws imposed, to celebrate his throne
With warbled hyms, and to his Godhead sing
Forced hallelujahs, while he lordly sits
Our envied sovereign, and his altar breathes
Ambrosial odours and ambrosial flowers,
Our servile offerings? This must be our task
In Heaven, this our delight. How wearisome
Eternity so spent in worship paid
To whom we hate! Let us not then pursue,
By force impossible, by leave obtained
Unacceptable, though in Heaven, our state
Of splendid vassalage but rather seek
Our own good from ourselves, and from our own
Live to ourselves, though in this vast recess,
Free and to none accountable, preferring
Hard liberty before the easy yoke
Of servile pomp. Our greatness will appear
Then most conspicuous when great things of small,
Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse,
We can create, and in what place soeer
Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain
Through labour and endurance. This deep world
Of darkness do we dread? How oft amidst
Thick clouds and dark doth Heavens allruling Sire
Choose to reside, his glory unobscured,
And with the majesty of darkness round
Covers his throne, from whence deep thunders roar.
Mustering their rage, and Heaven resembles Hell!
As he our darkness, cannot we his light
Imitate when we please? This desert soil
Wants not her hidden lustre, gems and gold
Nor want we skill or art from whence to raise
Magnificence and what can Heaven show more?
Our torments also may, in length of time,
Become our elements, these piercing fires
As soft as now severe, our temper changed
Into their temper which must needs remove
The sensible of pain. All things invite
To peaceful counsels, and the settled state
Of order, how in safety best we may
Compose our present evils, with regard
Of what we are and where, dismissing quite
All thoughts of war. Ye have what I advise."
  He scarce had finished, when such murmur filled
Th assembly as when hollow rocks retain
The sound of blustering winds, which all night long
Had roused the sea, now with hoarse cadence lull
Seafaring men oerwatched, whose bark by chance
Or pinnace, anchors in a craggy bay
After the tempest. Such applause was heard
As Mammon ended, and his sentence pleased,
Advising peace: for such another field
They dreaded worse than Hell so much the fear
Of thunder and the sword of Michael
Wrought still within them and no less desire
To found this nether empire, which might rise,
By policy and long process of time,
In emulation opposite to Heaven.
Which when Beelzebub perceivedthan whom,
Satan except, none higher satwith grave
Aspect he rose, and in his rising seemed
A pillar of state. Deep on his front engraven
Deliberation sat, and public care
And princely counsel in his face yet shone,
Majestic, though in ruin. Sage he stood
With Atlantean shoulders, fit to bear
The weight of mightiest monarchies his look
Drew audience and attention still as night
Or summers noontide air, while thus he spake:
  "Thrones and Imperial Powers, Offspring of Heaven,
Ethereal Virtues! or these titles now
Must we renounce, and, changing style, be called
Princes of Hell? for so the popular vote
Inclineshere to continue, and build up here
A growing empire doubtless! while we dream,
And know not that the King of Heaven hath doomed
This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat
Beyond his potent arm, to live exempt
From Heavens high jurisdiction, in new league
Banded against his throne, but to remain
In strictest bondage, though thus far removed,
Under th inevitable curb, reserved
His captive multitude. For he, to be sure,
In height or depth, still first and last will reign
Sole king, and of his kingdom lose no part
By our revolt, but over Hell extend
His empire, and with iron sceptre rule
Us here, as with his golden those in Heaven.
What sit we then projecting peace and war?
War hath determined us and foiled with loss
Irreparable terms of peace yet none
Vouchsafed or sought for what peace will be given
To us enslaved, but custody severe,
And stripes and arbitrary punishment
Inflicted? and what peace can we return,
But, to our power, hostility and hate,
Untamed reluctance, and revenge, though slow,
Yet ever plotting how the Conqueror least
May reap his conquest, and may least rejoice
In doing what we most in suffering feel?
Nor will occasion want, nor shall we need
With dangerous expedition to invade
Heaven, whose high walls fear no assault or siege,
Or ambush from the Deep. What if we find
Some easier enterprise? There is a place
If ancient and prophetic fame in Heaven
Err notanother World, the happy seat
Of some new race, called Man, about this time
To be created like to us, though less
In power and excellence, but favoured more
Of him who rules above so was his will
Pronounced among the Gods, and by an oath
That shook Heavens whole circumference confirmed.
Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn
What creatures there inhabit, of what mould
Or substance, how endued, and what their power
And where their weakness: how attempted best,
By force of subtlety. Though Heaven be shut,
And Heavens high Arbitrator sit secure
In his own strength, this place may lie exposed,
The utmost border of his kingdom, left
To their defence who hold it: here, perhaps,
Some advantageous act may be achieved
By sudden onseteither with Hellfire
To waste his whole creation, or possess
All as our own, and drive, as we were driven,
The puny habitants or, if not drive,
Seduce them to our party, that their God
May prove their foe, and with repenting hand
Abolish his own works. This would surpass
Common revenge, and interrupt his joy
In our confusion, and our joy upraise
In his disturbance when his darling sons,
Hurled headlong to partake with us, shall curse
Their frail original, and faded bliss
Faded so soon! Advise if this be worth
Attempting, or to sit in darkness here
Hatching vain empires." Thus beelzebub
Pleaded his devilish counselfirst devised
By Satan, and in part proposed: for whence,
But from the author of all ill, could spring
So deep a malice, to confound the race
Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell
To mingle and involve, done all to spite
The great Creator? But their spite still serves
His glory to augment. The bold design
Pleased highly those infernal States, and joy
Sparkled in all their eyes: with full assent
They vote: whereat his speech he thus renews:
"Well have ye judged, well ended long debate,
Synod of Gods, and, like to what ye are,
Great things resolved, which from the lowest deep
Will once more lift us up, in spite of fate,
Nearer our ancient seatperhaps in view
Of those bright confines, whence, with neighbouring arms,
And opportune excursion, we may chance
Reenter Heaven or else in some mild zone
Dwell, not unvisited of Heavens fair light,
Secure, and at the brightening orient beam
Purge off this gloom: the soft delicious air,
To heal the scar of these corrosive fires,
Shall breathe her balm. But, first, whom shall we send
In search of this new World? whom shall we find
Sufficient? who shall tempt with wandering feet
The dark, unbottomed, infinite Abyss,
And through the palpable obscure find out
His uncouth way, or spread his airy flight,
Upborne with indefatigable wings
Over the vast abrupt, ere he arrive
The happy Isle? What strength, what art, can then
Suffice, or what evasion bear him safe,
Through the strict senteries and stations thick
Of Angels watching round? Here he had need
All circumspection: and we now no less
Choice in our suffrage for on whom we send
The weight of all, and our last hope, relies."
  This said, he sat and expectation held
His look suspense, awaiting who appeared
To second, or oppose, or undertake
The perilous attempt. But all sat mute,
Pondering the danger with deep thoughts and each
In others countenance read his own dismay,
Astonished. None among the choice and prime
Of those Heavenwarring champions could be found
So hardy as to proffer or accept,
Alone, the dreadful voyage till, at last,
Satan, whom now transcendent glory raised
Above his fellows, with monarchal pride
Conscious of highest worth, unmoved thus spake:
  "O Progeny of Heaven! Empyreal Thrones!
With reason hath deep silence and demur
Seized us, though undismayed. Long is the way
And hard, that out of Hell leads up to light.
Our prison strong, this huge convex of fire,
Outrageous to devour, immures us round
Ninefold and gates of burning adamant,
Barred over us, prohibit all egress.
These passed, if any pass, the void profound
Of unessential Night receives him next,
Widegaping, and with utter loss of being
Threatens him, plunged in that abortive gulf.
If thence he scape, into whatever world,
Or unknown region, what remains him less
Than unknown dangers, and as hard escape?
But I should ill become this throne, O Peers,
And this imperial sovereignty, adorned
With splendour, armed with power, if aught proposed
And judged of public moment in the shape
Of difficulty or danger, could deter
Me from attempting. Wherefore do I assume
These royalties, and not refuse to reign,
Refusing to accept as great a share
Of hazard as of honour, due alike
To him who reigns, and so much to him due
Of hazard more as he above the rest
High honoured sits? Go, therefore, mighty Powers,
Terror of Heaven, though fallen intend at home,
While here shall be our home, what best may ease
The present misery, and render Hell
More tolerable if there be cure or charm
To respite, or deceive, or slack the pain
Of this ill mansion: intermit no watch
Against a wakeful foe, while I abroad
Through all the coasts of dark destruction seek
Deliverance for us all. This enterprise
None shall partake with me." Thus saying, rose
The Monarch, and prevented all reply
Prudent lest, from his resolution raised,
Others among the chief might offer now,
Certain to be refused, what erst they feared,
And, so refused, might in opinion stand
His rivals, winning cheap the high repute
Which he through hazard huge must earn. But they
Dreaded not more th adventure than his voice
Forbidding and at once with him they rose.
Their rising all at once was as the sound
Of thunder heard remote. Towards him they bend
With awful reverence prone, and as a God
Extol him equal to the Highest in Heaven.
Nor failed they to express how much they praised
That for the general safety he despised
His own: for neither do the Spirits damned
Lose all their virtue lest bad men should boast
Their specious deeds on earth, which glory excites,
Or close ambition varnished oer with zeal.
  Thus they their doubtful consultations dark
Ended, rejoicing in their matchless Chief:
As, when from mountaintops the dusky clouds
Ascending, while the north wind sleeps, oerspread
Heavens cheerful face, the louring element
Scowls oer the darkened landscape snow or shower,
If chance the radiant sun, with farewell sweet,
Extend his evening beam, the fields revive,
The birds their notes renew, and bleating herds
Attest their joy, that hill and valley rings.
O shame to men! Devil with devil damned
Firm concord holds men only disagree
Of creatures rational, though under hope
Of heavenly grace, and, God proclaiming peace,
Yet live in hatred, enmity, and strife
Among themselves, and levy cruel wars
Wasting the earth, each other to destroy:
As if which might induce us to accord
Man had not hellish foes enow besides,
That day and night for his destruction wait!
  The Stygian council thus dissolved and forth
In order came the grand infernal Peers:
Midst came their mighty Paramount, and seemed
Alone th antagonist of Heaven, nor less
Than Hells dread Emperor, with pomp supreme,
And godlike imitated state: him round
A globe of fiery Seraphim enclosed
With bright emblazonry, and horrent arms.
Then of their session ended they bid cry
With trumpets regal sound the great result:
Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim
Put to their mouths the sounding alchemy,
By heralds voice explained the hollow Abyss
Heard far adn wide, and all the host of Hell
With deafening shout returned them loud acclaim.
Thence more at ease their minds, and somewhat raised
By false presumptuous hope, the ranged Powers
Disband and, wandering, each his several way
Pursues, as inclination or sad choice
Leads him perplexed, where he may likeliest find
Truce to his restless thoughts, and entertain
The irksome hours, till his great Chief return.
Part on the plain, or in the air sublime,
Upon the wing or in swift race contend,
As at th Olympian games or Pythian fields
Part curb their fiery steeds, or shun the goal
With rapid wheels, or fronted brigades form:
As when, to warn proud cities, war appears
Waged in the troubled sky, and armies rush
To battle in the clouds before each van
Prick forth the airy knights, and couch their spears,
Till thickest legions close with feats of arms
From either end of heaven the welkin burns.
Others, with vast Typhoean rage, more fell,
Rend up both rocks and hills, and ride the air
In whirlwind Hell scarce holds the wild uproar:
As when Alcides, from Oechalia crowned
With conquest, felt th envenomed robe, and tore
Through pain up by the roots Thessalian pines,
And Lichas from the top of Oeta threw
Into th Euboic sea. Others, more mild,
Retreated in a silent valley, sing
With notes angelical to many a harp
Their own heroic deeds, and hapless fall
By doom of battle, and complain that Fate
Free Virtue should enthrall to Force or Chance.
Their song was partial but the harmony
What could it less when Spirits immortal sing?
Suspended Hell, and took with ravishment
The thronging audience. In discourse more sweet
For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Sense
Others apart sat on a hill retired,
In thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will, and Fate
Fixed fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute,
And found no end, in wandering mazes lost.
Of good and evil much they argued then,
Of happiness and final misery,
Passion and apathy, and glory and shame:
Vain wisdom all, and false philosophy!
Yet, with a pleasing sorcery, could charm
Pain for a while or anguish, and excite
Fallacious hope, or arm th obdured breast
With stubborn patience as with triple steel.
Another part, in squadrons and gross bands,
On bold adventure to discover wide
That dismal world, if any clime perhaps
Might yield them easier habitation, bend
Four ways their flying march, along the banks
Of four infernal rivers, that disgorge
Into the burning lake their baleful streams
Abhorred Styx, the flood of deadly hate
Sad Acheron of sorrow, black and deep
Cocytus, named of lamentation loud
Heard on the rueful stream fierce Phlegeton,
Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage.
Far off from these, a slow and silent stream,
Lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls
Her watery labyrinth, whereof who drinks
Forthwith his former state and being forgets
Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain.
Beyond this flood a frozen continent
Lies dark and wild, beat with perpetual storms
Of whirlwind and dire hail, which on firm land
Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin seems
Of ancient pile all else deep snow and ice,
A gulf profound as that Serbonian bog
Betwixt Damiata and Mount Casius old,
Where armies whole have sunk: the parching air
Burns frore, and cold performs th effect of fire.
Thither, by harpyfooted Furies haled,
At certain revolutions all the damned
Are brought and feel by turns the bitter change
Of fierce extremes, extremes by change more fierce,
From beds of raging fire to starve in ice
Their soft ethereal warmth, and there to pine
Immovable, infixed, and frozen round
Periods of time,thence hurried back to fire.
They ferry over this Lethean sound
Both to and fro, their sorrow to augment,
And wish and struggle, as they pass, to reach
The tempting stream, with one small drop to lose
In sweet forgetfulness all pain and woe,
All in one moment, and so near the brink
But Fate withstands, and, to oppose th attempt,
Medusa with Gorgonian terror guards
The ford, and of itself the water flies
All taste of living wight, as once it fled
The lip of Tantalus. Thus roving on
In confused march forlorn, th adventurous bands,
With shuddering horror pale, and eyes aghast,
Viewed first their lamentable lot, and found
No rest. Through many a dark and dreary vale
They passed, and many a region dolorous,
Oer many a frozen, many a fiery alp,
Rocks, caves, lakes, fens, bogs, dens, and shades of death
A universe of death, which God by curse
Created evil, for evil only good
Where all life dies, death lives, and Nature breeds,
Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things,
Obominable, inutterable, and worse
Than fables yet have feigned or fear conceived,
Gorgons, and Hydras, and Chimeras dire.
  Meanwhile the Adversary of God and Man,
Satan, with thoughts inflamed of highest design,
Puts on swift wings, and toward the gates of Hell
Explores his solitary flight: sometimes
He scours the right hand coast, sometimes the left
Now shaves with level wing the deep, then soars
Up to the fiery concave towering high.
As when far off at sea a fleet descried
Hangs in the clouds, by equinoctial winds
Close sailing from Bengala, or the isles
Of Ternate and Tidore, whence merchants bring
Their spicy drugs they on the trading flood,
Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape,
Ply stemming nightly toward the pole: so seemed
Far off the flying Fiend. At last appear
Hellbounds, high reaching to the horrid roof,
And thrice threefold the gates three folds were brass,
Three iron, three of adamantine rock,
Impenetrable, impaled with circling fire,
Yet unconsumed. Before the gates there sat
On either side a formidable Shape.
The one seemed woman to the waist, and fair,
But ended foul in many a scaly fold,
Voluminous and vasta serpent armed
With mortal sting. About her middle round
A cry of Hellhounds neverceasing barked
With wide Cerberean mouths full loud, and rung
A hideous peal yet, when they list, would creep,
If aught disturbed their noise, into her womb,
And kennel there yet there still barked and howled
Within unseen. Far less abhorred than these
Vexed Scylla, bathing in the sea that parts
Calabria from the hoarse Trinacrian shore
Nor uglier follow the nighthag, when, called
In secret, riding through the air she comes,
Lured with the smell of infant blood, to dance
With Lapland witches, while the labouring moon
Eclipses at their charms. The other Shape
If shape it might be called that shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joint, or limb
Or substance might be called that shadow seemed,
For each seemed eitherblack it stood as Night,
Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell,
And shook a dreadful dart: what seemed his head
The likeness of a kingly crown had on.
Satan was now at hand, and from his seat
The monster moving onward came as fast
With horrid strides Hell trembled as he strode.
Th undaunted Fiend what this might be admired
Admired, not feared God and his Son except,
Created thing naught valued he nor shunned,
And with disdainful look thus first began:
  "Whence and what art thou, execrable Shape,
That darst, though grim and terrible, advance
Thy miscreated front athwart my way
To yonder gates? Through them I mean to pass,
That be assured, without leave asked of thee.
Retire or taste thy folly, and learn by proof,
Hellborn, not to contend with Spirits of Heaven."
  To whom the Goblin, full of wrath, replied:
"Art thou that traitor Angel? art thou he,
Who first broke peace in Heaven and faith, till then
Unbroken, and in proud rebellious arms
Drew after him the third part of Heavens sons,
Conjured against the Highestfor which both thou
And they, outcast from God, are here condemned
To waste eternal days in woe and pain?
And reckonst thou thyself with Spirits of Heaven
Helldoomed, and breathst defiance here and scorn,
Where I reign king, and, to enrage thee more,
Thy king and lord? Back to thy punishment,
False fugitive and to thy speed add wings,
Lest with a whip of scorpions I pursue
Thy lingering, or with one stroke of this dart
Strange horror seize thee, and pangs unfelt before."
  So spake the grisly Terror, and in shape,
So speaking and so threatening, grew tenfold,
More dreadful and deform. On th other side,
Incensed with indignation, Satan stood
Unterrified, and like a comet burned,
That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
In th arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
Shakes pestilence and war. Each at the head
Levelled his deadly aim their fatal hands
No second stroke intend and such a frown
Each cast at th other as when two black clouds,
With heavens artillery fraught, came rattling on
Over the Caspian,then stand front to front
Hovering a space, till winds the signal blow
To join their dark encounter in midair.
So frowned the mighty combatants that Hell
Grew darker at their frown so matched they stood
For never but once more was wither like
To meet so great a foe. And now great deeds
Had been achieved, whereof all Hell had rung,
Had not the snaky Sorceress, that sat
Fast by Hellgate and kept the fatal key,
Risen, and with hideous outcry rushed between.
  "O father, what intends thy hand," she cried,
"Against thy only son? What fury, O son,
Possesses thee to bend that mortal dart
Against thy fathers head? And knowst for whom?
For him who sits above, and laughs the while
At thee, ordained his drudge to execute
Whateer his wrath, which he calls justice, bids
His wrath, which one day will destroy ye both!"
  She spake, and at her words the hellish Pest
Forbore: then these to her Satan returned:
  "So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange
Thou interposest, that my sudden hand,
Prevented, spares to tell thee yet by deeds
What it intends, till first I know of thee
What thing thou art, thus doubleformed, and why,
In this infernal vale first met, thou callst
Me father, and that phantasm callst my son.
I know thee not, nor ever saw till now
Sight more detestable than him and thee."
  T whom thus the Portress of Hellgate replied:
"Hast thou forgot me, then and do I seem
Now in thine eye so foul?once deemed so fair
In Heaven, when at th assembly, and in sight
Of all the Seraphim with thee combined
In bold conspiracy against Heavens King,
All on a sudden miserable pain
Surprised thee, dim thine eyes and dizzy swum
In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast
Threw forth, till on the left side opening wide,
Likest to thee in shape and countenance bright,
Then shining heavenly fair, a goddess armed,
Out of thy head I sprung. Amazement seized
All th host of Heaven back they recoiled afraid
At first, and called me Sin, and for a sign
Portentous held me but, familiar grown,
I pleased, and with attractive graces won
The most aversethee chiefly, who, full oft
Thyself in me thy perfect image viewing,
Becamst enamoured and such joy thou tookst
With me in secret that my womb conceived
A growing burden. Meanwhile war arose,
And fields were fought in Heaven: wherein remained
For what could else? to our Almighty Foe
Clear victory to our part loss and rout
Through all the Empyrean. Down they fell,
Driven headlong from the pitch of Heaven, down
Into this Deep and in the general fall
I also: at which time this powerful key
Into my hands was given, with charge to keep
These gates for ever shut, which none can pass
Without my opening. Pensive here I sat
Alone but long I sat not, till my womb,
Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown,
Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes.
At last this odious offspring whom thou seest,
Thine own begotten, breaking violent way,
Tore through my entrails, that, with fear and pain
Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew
Transformed: but he my inbred enemy
Forth issued, brandishing his fatal dart,
Made to destroy. I fled, and cried out Death!
Hell trembled at the hideous name, and sighed
From all her caves, and back resounded Death!
I fled but he pursued though more, it seems,
Inflamed with lust than rage, and, swifter far,
Me overtook, his mother, all dismayed,
And, in embraces forcible and foul
Engendering with me, of that rape begot
These yelling monsters, that with ceaseless cry
Surround me, as thou sawsthourly conceived
And hourly born, with sorrow infinite
To me for, when they list, into the womb
That bred them they return, and howl, and gnaw
My bowels, their repast then, bursting forth
Afresh, with conscious terrors vex me round,
That rest or intermission none I find.
Before mine eyes in opposition sits
Grim Death, my son and foe, who set them on,
And me, his parent, would full soon devour
For want of other prey, but that he knows
His end with mine involved, and knows that I
Should prove a bitter morsel, and his bane,
Whenever that shall be: so Fate pronounced.
But thou, O father, I forewarn thee, shun
His deadly arrow neither vainly hope
To be invulnerable in those bright arms,
Through tempered heavenly for that mortal dint,
Save he who reigns above, none can resist."
  She finished and the subtle Fiend his lore
Soon learned, now milder, and thus answered smooth:
  "Dear daughtersince thou claimst me for thy sire,
And my fair son here showst me, the dear pledge
Of dalliance had with thee in Heaven, and joys
Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change
Befallen us unforeseen, unthoughtofknow,
I come no enemy, but to set free
From out this dark and dismal house of pain
Both him and thee, and all the heavenly host
Of Spirits that, in our just pretences armed,
Fell with us from on high. From them I go
This uncouth errand sole, and one for all
Myself expose, with lonely steps to tread
Th unfounded Deep, and through the void immense
To search, with wandering quest, a place foretold
Should beand, by concurring signs, ere now
Created vast and rounda place of bliss
In the purlieus of Heaven and therein placed
A race of upstart creatures, to supply
Perhaps our vacant room, though more removed,
Lest Heaven, surcharged with potent multitude,
Might hap to move new broils. Be this, or aught
Than this more secret, now designed, I haste
To know and, this once known, shall soon return,
And bring ye to the place where thou and Death
Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen
Wing silently the buxom air, embalmed
With odours. There ye shall be fed and filled
Immeasurably all things shall be your prey."
  He ceased for both seemed highly pleased, and Death
Grinned horrible a ghastly smile, to hear
His famine should be filled, and blessed his maw
Destined to that good hour. No less rejoiced
His mother bad, and thus bespake her sire:
  "The key of this infernal Pit, by due
And by command of Heavens allpowerful King,
I keep, by him forbidden to unlock
These adamantine gates against all force
Death ready stands to interpose his dart,
Fearless to be oermatched by living might.
But what owe I to his commands above,
Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down
Into this gloom of Tartarus profound,
To sit in hateful office here confined,
Inhabitant of Heaven and heavenly born
Here in perpetual agony and pain,
With terrors and with clamours compassed round
Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed?
Thou art my father, thou my author, thou
My being gavst me whom should I obey
But thee? whom follow? Thou wilt bring me soon
To that new world of light and bliss, among
The gods who live at ease, where I shall reign
At thy right hand voluptuous, as beseems
Thy daughter and thy darling, without end."
  Thus saying, from her side the fatal key,
Sad instrument of all our woe, she took
And, towards the gate rolling her bestial train,
Forthwith the huge portcullis high updrew,
Which, but herself, not all the Stygian Powers
Could once have moved then in the keyhole turns
Th intricate wards, and every bolt and bar
Of massy iron or solid rock with ease
Unfastens. On a sudden open fly,
With impetuous recoil and jarring sound,
Th infernal doors, and on their hinges grate
Harsh thunder, that the lowest bottom shook
Of Erebus. She opened but to shut
Excelled her power: the gates wide open stood,
That with extended wings a bannered host,
Under spread ensigns marching, mibht pass through
With horse and chariots ranked in loose array
So wide they stood, and like a furnacemouth
Cast forth redounding smoke and ruddy flame.
Before their eyes in sudden view appear
The secrets of the hoary Deepa dark
Illimitable ocean, without bound,
Without dimension where length, breadth, and height,
And time, and place, are lost where eldest Night
And Chaos, ancestors of Nature, hold
Eternal anarchy, amidst the noise
Of endless wars, and by confusion stand.
For Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry, four champions fierce,
Strive here for mastery, and to battle bring
Their embryon atoms: they around the flag
Of each his faction, in their several clans,
Lightarmed or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift, or slow,
Swarm populous, unnumbered as the sands
Of Barca or Cyrenes torrid soil,
Levied to side with warring winds, and poise
Their lighter wings. To whom these most adhere
He rules a moment: Chaos umpire sits,
And by decision more embroils the fray
By which he reigns: next him, high arbiter,
Chance governs all. Into this wild Abyss,
The womb of Nature, and perhaps her grave,
Of neither sea, nor shore, nor air, nor fire,
But all these in their pregnant causes mixed
Confusedly, and which thus must ever fight,
Unless th Almighty Maker them ordain
His dark materials to create more worlds
Into this wild Abyss the wary Fiend
Stood on the brink of Hell and looked a while,
Pondering his voyage for no narrow frith
He had to cross. Nor was his ear less pealed
With noises loud and ruinous to compare
Great things with small than when Bellona storms
With all her battering engines, bent to rase
Some capital city or less than if this frame
Of Heaven were falling, and these elements
In mutiny had from her axle torn
The steadfast Earth. At last his sailbroad vans
He spread for flight, and, in the surging smoke
Uplifted, spurns the ground thence many a league,
As in a cloudy chair, ascending rides
Audacious but, that seat soon failing, meets
A vast vacuity. All unawares,
Fluttering his pennons vain, plumbdown he drops
Ten thousand fathom deep, and to this hour
Down had been falling, had not, by ill chance,
The strong rebuff of some tumultuous cloud,
Instinct with fire and nitre, hurried him
As many miles aloft. That fury stayed
Quenched in a boggy Syrtis, neither sea,
Nor good dry landnigh foundered, on he fares,
Treading the crude consistence, half on foot,
Half flying behoves him now both oar and sail.
As when a gryphon through the wilderness
With winged course, oer hill or moory dale,
Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stealth
Had from his wakeful custody purloined
The guarded gold so eagerly the Fiend
Oer bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
With head, hands, wings, or feet, pursues his way,
And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies.
At length a universal hubbub wild
Of stunning sounds, and voices all confused,
Borne through the hollow dark, assaults his ear
With loudest vehemence. Thither he plies
Undaunted, to meet there whatever Power
Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyss
Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask
Which way the nearest coast of darkness lies
Bordering on light when straight behold the throne
Of Chaos, and his dark pavilion spread
Wide on the wasteful Deep! With him enthroned
Sat sablevested Night, eldest of things,
The consort of his reign and by them stood
Orcus and Ades, and the dreaded name
Of Demogorgon Rumour next, and Chance,
And Tumult, and Confusion, all embroiled,
And Discord with a thousand various mouths.
  T whom Satan, turning boldly, thus:"Ye Powers
And Spirtis of this nethermost Abyss,
Chaos and ancient Night, I come no spy
With purpose to explore or to disturb
The secrets of your realm but, by constraint
Wandering this darksome desert, as my way
Lies through your spacious empire up to light,
Alone and without guide, half lost, I seek,
What readiest path leads where your gloomy bounds
Confine with Heaven or, if some other place,
From your dominion won, th Ethereal King
Possesses lately, thither to arrive
I travel this profound. Direct my course:
Directed, no mean recompense it brings
To your behoof, if I that region lost,
All usurpation thence expelled, reduce
To her original darkness and your sway
Which is my present journey, and once more
Erect the standard there of ancient Night.
Yours be th advantage all, mine the revenge!"
  Thus Satan and him thus the Anarch old,
With faltering speech and visage incomposed,
Answered:  "I know thee, stranger, who thou art  
That mighty leading Angel, who of late
Made head against Heavens King, though overthrown.
I saw and heard for such a numerous host
Fled not in silence through the frighted Deep,
With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout,
Confusion worse confounded and Heavengates
Poured out by millions her victorious bands,
Pursuing. I upon my frontiers here
Keep residence if all I can will serve
That little which is left so to defend,
Encroached on still through our intestine broils
Weakening the sceptre of old Night: first, Hell,
Your dungeon, stretching far and wide beneath
Now lately Heaven and Earth, another world
Hung oer my realm, linked in a golden chain
To that side Heaven from whence your legions fell!
If that way be your walk, you have not far
So much the nearer danger. Go, and speed
Havoc, and spoil, and ruin, are my gain."
  He ceased and Satan stayed not to reply,
But, glad that now his sea should find a shore,
With fresh alacrity and force renewed
Springs upward, like a pyramid of fire,
Into the wild expanse, and through the shock
Of fighting elements, on all sides round
Environed, wins his way harder beset
And more endangered than when Argo passed
Through Bosporus betwixt the justling rocks,
Or when Ulysses on the larboard shunned
Charybdis, and by th other whirlpool steered.
So he with difficulty and labour hard
Moved on, with difficulty and labour he
But, he once passed, soon after, when Man fell,
Strange alteration! Sin and Death amain,
Following his track such was the will of Heaven
Paved after him a broad and beaten way
Over the dark Abyss, whose boiling gulf
Tamely endured a bridge of wondrous length,
From Hell continued, reaching th utmost orb
Of this frail World by which the Spirits perverse
With easy intercourse pass to and fro
To tempt or punish mortals, except whom
God and good Angels guard by special grace.
  But now at last the sacred influence
Of light appears, and from the walls of Heaven
Shoots far into the bosom of dim Night
A glimmering dawn. Here Nature first begins
Her farthest verge, and Chaos to retire,
As from her outmost works, a broken foe,
With tumult less and with less hostile din
That Satan with less toil, and now with ease,
Wafts on the calmer wave by dubious light,
And, like a weatherbeaten vessel, holds
Gladly the port, though shrouds and tackle torn
Or in the emptier waste, resembling air,
Weighs his spread wings, at leisure to behold
Far off th empyreal Heaven, extended wide
In circuit, undetermined square or round,
With opal towers and battlements adorned
Of living sapphire, once his native seat
And, fast by, hanging in a golden chain,
This pendent World, in bigness as a star
Of smallest magnitude close by the moon.
Thither, full fraught with mischievous revenge,
Accursed, and in a cursed hour, he hies.



Book III


Hail, holy Light, offspring of Heaven firstborn,
Or of the Eternal coeternal beam
May I express thee unblamd?  since God is light,
And never but in unapproached light
Dwelt from eternity, dwelt then in thee
Bright effluence of bright essence increate.
Or hear"st thou rather pure ethereal stream,
Whose fountain who shall tell?  before the sun,
Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice
Of God, as with a mantle, didst invest  
The rising world of waters dark and deep,
Won from the void and formless infinite.
Thee I revisit now with bolder wing,
Escapd the Stygian pool, though long detaind
In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight
Through utter and through middle darkness borne,
With other notes than to the Orphean lyre
I sung of Chaos and eternal Night
Taught by the heavenly Muse to venture down
The dark descent, and up to reascend,
Though hard and rare:  Thee I revisit safe,
And feel thy sovran vital lamp but thou
Revisitst not these eyes, that roll in vain
To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn
So  thick a drop serene hath quenchd their orbs,
Or dim suffusion veild.  Yet not the more
Cease I to wander, where the Muses haunt,
Clear spring, or shady grove, or sunny hill,
Smit with the love of sacred song but chief
Thee, Sion, and the flowery brooks beneath,
That wash thy hallowd feet, and warbling flow,
Nightly I visit:  nor sometimes forget
So were I equalld with them in renown,
Thy sovran command, that Man should find grace
Blind Thamyris, and blind Maeonides,
And Tiresias, and Phineus, prophets old:
Then feed on thoughts, that voluntary move
Harmonious numbers as the wakeful bird
Sings darkling, and in shadiest covert hid
Tunes her nocturnal note.  Thus with the year
Seasons return but not to me returns
Day, or the sweet approach of even or morn,
Or sight of vernal bloom, or summers rose,
Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine
But cloud instead, and everduring dark
Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men
Cut off, and for the book of knowledge fair
Presented with a universal blank
Of natures works to me expungd and rasd,
And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out.
So much the rather thou, celestial Light,
Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers
Irradiate there plant eyes, all mist from thence
Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell
Of things invisible to mortal sight.
Now had the Almighty Father from above,
From the pure empyrean where he sits
High thrond above all highth, bent down his eye
His own works and their works at once to view:
About him all the Sanctities of Heaven
Stood thick as stars, and from his sight receivd
Beatitude past utterance on his right
The radiant image of his glory sat,
His only son on earth he first beheld
Our two first parents, yet the only two
Of mankind in the happy garden placd
Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love,
Uninterrupted joy, unrivalld love,
In blissful solitude he then surveyd
Hell and the gulf between, and Satan there
Coasting the wall of Heaven on this side Night
In the dun air sublime, and ready now
To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet,
On the bare outside of this world, that seemd
Firm land imbosomd, without firmament,
Uncertain which, in ocean or in air.
Him God beholding from his prospect high,
Wherein past, present, future, he beholds,
Thus to his only Son foreseeing spake.
Only begotten Son, seest thou what rage
Transports our Adversary?  whom no bounds
Prescribd no bars of Hell, nor all the chains
Heapd on him there, nor yet the main abyss
Wide interrupt, can hold so bent he seems
On desperate revenge, that shall redound
Upon his own rebellious head.  And now,
Through all restraint broke loose, he wings his way
Not far off Heaven, in the precincts of light,
Directly towards the new created world,
And man there placd, with purpose to assay
If him by force he can destroy, or, worse,
By some false guile pervert and shall pervert
For man will hearken to his glozing lies,
And easily transgress the sole command,
Sole pledge of his obedience:  So will fall
He and his faithless progeny:  Whose fault?
Whose but his own?  ingrate, he had of me
All he could have I made him just and right,
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
Such I created all the ethereal Powers
And Spirits, both them who stood, and them who faild
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have given sincere
Of true allegiance, constant faith or love,
Where only what they needs must do appeard,
Not what they would?  what praise could they receive?
What pleasure I from such obedience paid,
When will and reason reason also is choice
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoild,
Made passive both, had servd necessity,
Not me?  they therefore, as to right belong d,
So were created, nor can justly accuse
Their Maker, or their making, or their fate,
As if predestination overruld
Their will disposd by absolute decree
Or high foreknowledge they themselves decreed
Their own revolt, not I if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.
So without least impulse or shadow of fate,
Or aught by me immutably foreseen,
They trespass, authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge, and what they choose for so
I formd them free: and free they must remain,
Till they enthrall themselves I else must change
Their nature, and revoke the high decree
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordaind
THeir freedom: they themselves ordaind their fall.
The first sort by their own suggestion fell,
Selftempted, selfdepravd:  Man falls, deceivd
By the other first:  Man therefore shall find grace,
The other none:  In mercy and justice both,
Through Heaven and Earth, so shall my glory excel
But Mercy, first and last, shall brightest shine.
Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance filld
All Heaven, and in the blessed Spirits elect
Sense of new joy ineffable diffusd.
Beyond compare the Son of God was seen
Most glorious in him all his Father shone
Substantially expressd and in his face
Divine compassion visibly appeard,
Love without end, and without measure grace,
Which uttering, thus he to his Father spake.
O Father, gracious was that word which closd
Thy sovran command, that Man should find grace
, that Man should find grace
For which both Heaven and earth shall high extol
Thy praises, with the innumerable sound
Of hymns and sacred songs, wherewith thy throne
Encompassd shall resound thee ever blest.
For should Man finally be lost, should Man,
Thy creature late so lovd, thy youngest son,
Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joind
With his own folly?  that be from thee far,
That far be from thee, Father, who art judge
Of all things made, and judgest only right.
Or shall the Adversary thus obtain
His end, and frustrate thine?  shall he fulfill
His malice, and thy goodness bring to nought,
Or proud return, though to his heavier doom,
Yet with revenge accomplishd, and to Hell
Draw after him the whole race of mankind,
By him corrupted?  or wilt thou thyself
Abolish thy creation, and unmake
For him, what for thy glory thou hast made?
So should thy goodness and thy greatness both
Be questiond and blasphemd without defence.
To whom the great Creator thus replied.
O son, in whom my soul hath chief delight,
Son of my bosom, Son who art alone.
My word, my wisdom, and effectual might,
All hast thou spoken as my thoughts are, all
As my eternal purpose hath decreed
Man shall not quite be lost, but savd who will
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me
Freely vouchsafd once more I will renew
His lapsed powers, though forfeit and enthralld
By sin to foul exorbitant desires
Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand
On even ground against his mortal foe
By me upheld, that he may know how frail
His fallen condition is, and to me owe
All his deliverance, and to none but me.
Some I have chosen of peculiar grace,
Elect above the rest so is my will:
The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warnd
Their sinful state, and to appease betimes
The incensed Deity, while offerd grace
Invites for I will clear their senses dark,
What may suffice, and soften stony hearts
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
To prayer, repentance, and obedience due,
Though but endeavourd with sincere intent,
Mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut.
And I will place within them as a guide,
My umpire Conscience whom if they will hear,
Light after light, well usd, they shall attain,
And to the end, persisting, safe arrive.
This my long sufferance, and my day of grace,
They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste
But hard be hardend, blind be blinded more,
That they may stumble on, and deeper fall
And none but such from mercy I exclude.
But yet all is not done Man disobeying,
Disloyal, breaks his fealty, and sins
Against the high supremacy of Heaven,
Affecting Godhead, and, so losing all,
To expiate his treason hath nought left,
But to destruction sacred and devote,
He, with his whole posterity, must die,
Die he or justice must unless for him
Some other able, and as willing, pay
The rigid satisfaction, death for death.
Say, heavenly Powers, where shall we find such love?
Which of you will be mortal, to redeem
Mans mortal crime, and just the unjust to save?
Dwells in all Heaven charity so dear?
And silence was in Heaven:  on Mans behalf
He askd, but all the heavenly quire stood mute,
Patron or intercessour none appeard,
Much less that durst upon his own head draw
The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set.
And now without redemption all mankind
Must have been lost, adjudgd to Death and Hell
By doom severe, had not the Son of God,
In whom the fulness dwells of love divine,
His dearest mediation thus renewd.
Father, thy word is past, Man shall find grace
And shall grace not find means, that finds her way,
The speediest of thy winged messengers,
To visit all thy creatures, and to all
Comes unprevented, unimplord, unsought?
Happy for Man, so coming he her aid
Can never seek, once dead in sins, and lost
Atonement for himself, or offering meet,
Indebted and undone, hath none to bring
Behold me then:  me for him, life for life
I offer: on me let thine anger fall
Account me Man I for his sake will leave
 Thy bosom, and this glory next to thee
 Freely put off, and for him lastly die
 Well pleased on me let Death wreak all his rage.
 Under his gloomy power I shall not long
 Lie vanquished. Thou hast given me to possess
 Life in myself for ever by thee I live
 Though now to Death I yield, and am his due,
 All that of me can die, yet, that debt paid,
  thou wilt not leave me in the loathsome grave
 His prey, nor suffer my unspotted soul
 For ever with corruption there to dwell
 But I shall rise victorious, and subdue
 My vanquisher, spoiled of his vaunted spoil.
 Death his deaths wound shall then receive, and stoop
 Inglorious, of his mortal sting disarmed
 I through the ample air in triumph high
 Shall lead Hell captive maugre Hell, and show
The powers of darkness bound. Thou, at the sight
 Pleased, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile,
 While, by thee raised, I ruin all my foes
 Death last, and with his carcase glut the grave
 Then, with the multitude of my redeemed,
 Shall enter Heaven, long absent, and return,
 Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud
 Of anger shall remain, but peace assured
 And reconcilement: wrath shall be no more
 Thenceforth, but in thy presence joy entire.
 His words here ended but his meek aspect
 Silent yet spake, and breathed immortal love
 To mortal men, above which only shone
 Filial obedience: as a sacrifice
 Glad to be offered, he attends the will
 Of his great Father. Admiration seized
 All Heaven, what this might mean, and whither tend,
 Wondering but soon th Almighty thus replied.
 O thou in Heaven and Earth the only peace
 Found out for mankind under wrath, O thou
 My sole complacence! Well thou knowst how dear
 To me are all my works nor Man the least,
 Though last created, that for him I spare
 Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save,
 By losing thee a while, the whole race lost.

     00021053
 Thou, therefore, whom thou only canst redeem,
 Their nature also to thy nature join
 And be thyself Man among men on Earth,
 Made flesh, when time shall be, of virgin seed,
 By wondrous birth be thou in Adams room
The head of all mankind, though Adams son.
As in him perish all men, so in thee,
As from a second root, shall be restored
As many as are restored, without thee none.
His crime makes guilty all his sons thy merit,
Imputed, shall absolve them who renounce
Their own both righteous and unrighteous deeds,
And live in thee transplanted, and from thee
Receive new life.  So Man, as is most just,
Shall satisfy for Man, be judged and die,
And dying rise, and rising with him raise
His brethren, ransomed with his own dear life.
So heavenly love shall outdo hellish hate,
Giving to death, and dying to redeem,
So dearly to redeem what hellish hate
So easily destroyed, and still destroys
In those who, when they may, accept not grace.
Nor shalt thou, by descending to assume
Mans nature, lessen or degrade thine own.
Because thou hast, though throned in highest bliss
Equal to God, and equally enjoying
Godlike fruition, quitted all, to save
A world from utter loss, and hast been found
By merit more than birthright Son of God,
Found worthiest to be so by being good,
Far more than great or high because in thee
Love hath abounded more than glory abounds
Therefore thy humiliation shall exalt
With thee thy manhood also to this throne:
Here shalt thou sit incarnate, here shalt reign
Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man,
Anointed universal King all power
I give thee reign for ever, and assume
Thy merits under thee, as head supreme,
Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions, I reduce:
All knees to thee shall bow, of them that bide
In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell.
When thou, attended gloriously from Heaven,
Shalt in the sky appear, and from thee send
The summoning ArchAngels to proclaim
Thy dread tribunal forthwith from all winds,
The living, and forthwith the cited dead
Of all past ages, to the general doom
Shall hasten such a peal shall rouse their sleep.
Then, all thy saints assembled, thou shalt judge
Bad Men and Angels they, arraigned, shall sink
Beneath thy sentence Hell, her numbers full,
Thenceforth shall be for ever shut.  Mean while
The world shall burn, and from her ashes spring
New Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell,
And, after all their tribulations long,
See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds,
With joy and peace triumphing, and fair truth.
Then thou thy regal scepter shalt lay by,
For regal scepter then no more shall need,
God shall be all in all.  But, all ye Gods,
Adore him, who to compass all this dies
Adore the Son, and honour him as me.
No sooner had the Almighty ceased, but all
The multitude of Angels, with a shout
Loud as from numbers without number, sweet
As from blest voices, uttering joy, Heaven rung
With jubilee, and loud Hosannas filled
The eternal regions:  Lowly reverent
Towards either throne they bow, and to the ground
With solemn adoration down they cast
Their crowns inwove with amarant and gold
Immortal amarant, a flower which once
In Paradise, fast by the tree of life,
Began to bloom but soon for mans offence
To Heaven removed, where first it grew, there grows,
And flowers aloft shading the fount of life,
And where the river of bliss through midst of Heaven
Rolls oer Elysian flowers her amber stream
With these that never fade the Spirits elect
Bind their resplendent locks inwreathed with beams
Now in loose garlands thick thrown off, the bright
Pavement, that like a sea of jasper shone,
Impurpled with celestial roses smiled.
Then, crowned again, their golden harps they took,
Harps ever tuned, that glittering by their side
Like quivers hung, and with preamble sweet
Of charming symphony they introduce
Their sacred song, and waken raptures high
No voice exempt, no voice but well could join
Melodious part, such concord is in Heaven.
Thee, Father, first they sung Omnipotent,
Immutable, Immortal, Infinite,
Eternal King the Author of all being,
Fonntain of light, thyself invisible
Amidst the glorious brightness where thou sitst
Throned inaccessible, but when thou shadest
The full blaze of thy beams, and, through a cloud
Drawn round about thee like a radiant shrine,
Dark with excessive bright thy skirts appear,
Yet dazzle Heaven, that brightest Seraphim
Approach not, but with both wings veil their eyes.
Thee next they sang of all creation first,
Begotten Son, Divine Similitude,
In whose conspicuous countenance, without cloud
Made visible, the Almighty Father shines,
Whom else no creature can behold on thee
Impressed the effulgence of his glory abides,
Transfused on thee his ample Spirit rests.
He Heaven of Heavens and all the Powers therein
By thee created and by thee threw down
The aspiring Dominations:  Thou that day
Thy Fathers dreadful thunder didst not spare,
Nor stop thy flaming chariotwheels, that shook
Heavens everlasting frame, while oer the necks
Thou drovest of warring Angels disarrayed.
Back from pursuit thy Powers with loud acclaim
Thee only extolled, Son of thy Fathers might,
To execute fierce vengeance on his foes,
Not so on Man:  Him through their malice fallen,
Father of mercy and grace, thou didst not doom
So strictly, but much more to pity incline:
No sooner did thy dear and only Son
Perceive thee purposed not to doom frail Man
So strictly, but much more to pity inclined,
He to appease thy wrath, and end the strife
Of mercy and justice in thy face discerned,
Regardless of the bliss wherein he sat
Second to thee, offered himself to die
For Mans offence.  O unexampled love,
Love no where to be found less than Divine!
Hail, Son of God, Saviour of Men!  Thy name
Shall be the copious matter of my song
Henceforth, and never shall my heart thy praise
Forget, nor from thy Fathers praise disjoin.
Thus they in Heaven, above the starry sphere,
Their happy hours in joy and hymning spent.
Mean while upon the firm opacous globe
Of this round world, whose first convex divides
The luminous inferiour orbs, enclosed
From Chaos, and the inroad of Darkness old,
Satan alighted walks:  A globe far off
It seemed, now seems a boundless continent
Dark, waste, and wild, under the frown of Night
Starless exposed, and everthreatening storms
Of Chaos blustering round, inclement sky
Save on that side which from the wall of Heaven,
Though distant far, some small reflection gains
Of glimmering air less vexed with tempest loud:
Here walked the Fiend at large in spacious field.
As when a vultur on Imaus bred,
Whose snowy ridge the roving Tartar bounds,
Dislodging from a region scarce of prey
To gorge the flesh of lambs or yeanling kids,
On hills where flocks are fed, flies toward the springs
Of Ganges or Hydaspes, Indian streams
But in his way lights on the barren plains
Of Sericana, where Chineses drive
With sails and wind their cany waggons light:
So, on this windy sea of land, the Fiend
Walked up and down alone, bent on his prey
Alone, for other creature in this place,
Living or lifeless, to be found was none
None yet, but store hereafter from the earth
Up hither like aereal vapours flew
Of all things transitory and vain, when sin
With vanity had filled the works of men:
Both all things vain, and all who in vain things
Built their fond hopes of glory or lasting fame,
Or happiness in this or the other life
All who have their reward on earth, the fruits
Of painful superstition and blind zeal,
Nought seeking but the praise of men, here find
Fit retribution, empty as their deeds
All the unaccomplished works of Natures hand,
Abortive, monstrous, or unkindly mixed,
Dissolved on earth, fleet hither, and in vain,
Till final dissolution, wander here
Not in the neighbouring moon as some have dreamed
Those argent fields more likely habitants,
Translated Saints, or middle Spirits hold
Betwixt the angelical and human kind.
Hither of illjoined sons and daughters born
First from the ancient world those giants came
With many a vain exploit, though then renowned:
The builders next of Babel on the plain
Of Sennaar, and still with vain design,
New Babels, had they wherewithal, would build:
Others came single he, who, to be deemed
A God, leaped fondly into Aetna flames,
Empedocles and he, who, to enjoy
Platos Elysium, leaped into the sea,
Cleombrotus and many more too long,
Embryos, and idiots, eremites, and friars
White, black, and gray, with all their trumpery.
Here pilgrims roam, that strayed so far to seek
In Golgotha him dead, who lives in Heaven
And they, who to be sure of Paradise,
Dying, put on the weeds of Dominick,
Or in Franciscan think to pass disguised
They pass the planets seven, and pass the fixed,
And that crystalling sphere whose balance weighs
The trepidation talked, and that first moved
And now Saint Peter at Heavens wicket seems
To wait them with his keys, and now at foot
Of Heavens ascent they lift their feet, when lo
A violent cross wind from either coast
Blows them transverse, ten thousand leagues awry
Into the devious air:  Then might ye see
Cowls, hoods, and habits, with their wearers, tost
And fluttered into rags then reliques, beads,
Indulgences, dispenses, pardons, bulls,
The sport of winds:  All these, upwhirled aloft,
Fly oer the backside of the world far off
Into a Limbo large and broad, since called
The Paradise of Fools, to few unknown
Long after now unpeopled, and untrod.
All this dark globe the Fiend found as he passed,
And long he wandered, till at last a gleam
Of dawning light turned thitherward in haste
His travelled steps: far distant he descries
Ascending by degrees magnificent
Up to the wall of Heaven a structure high
At top whereof, but far more rich, appeared
The work as of a kingly palacegate,
With frontispiece of diamond and gold
Embellished thick with sparkling orient gems
The portal shone, inimitable on earth
By model, or by shading pencil, drawn.
These stairs were such as whereon Jacob saw
Angels ascending and descending, bands
Of guardians bright, when he from Esau fled
To PadanAram, in the field of Luz
Dreaming by night under the open sky
And waking cried,  This is the gate of Heaven.
Each stair mysteriously was meant, nor stood
There always, but drawn up to Heaven sometimes
Viewless and underneath a bright sea flowed
Of jasper, or of liquid pearl, whereon
Who after came from earth, failing arrived
Wafted by Angels, or flew oer the lake
Rapt in a chariot drawn by fiery steeds.
The stairs were then let down, whether to dare
The Fiend by easy ascent, or aggravate
His sad exclusion from the doors of bliss:
Direct against which opened from beneath,
Just oer the blissful seat of Paradise,
A passage down to the Earth, a passage wide,
Wider by far than that of aftertimes
Over mount Sion, and, though that were large,
Over the Promised Land to God so dear
By which, to visit oft those happy tribes,
On high behests his angels to and fro
Passed frequent, and his eye with choice regard
From Paneas, the fount of Jordans flood,
To Beersaba, where the Holy Land
Borders on Egypt and the Arabian shore
So wide the opening seemed, where bounds were set
To darkness, such as bound the ocean wave.
Satan from hence, now on the lower stair,
That scaled by steps of gold to Heavengate,
Looks down with wonder at the sudden view
Of all this world at once.  As when a scout,
Through dark?nd desart ways with?oeril gone
All?might,?t?kast by break of cheerful dawn
Obtains the brow of some highclimbing hill,
Which to his eye discovers unaware
The goodly prospect of some foreign land
First seen, or some renowned metropolis
With glistering spires and pinnacles adorned,
Which now the rising sun gilds with his beams:
Such wonder seised, though after Heaven seen,
The Spirit malign, but much more envy seised,
At sight of all this world beheld so fair.
Round he surveys and well might, where he stood
So high above the circling canopy
Of nights extended shade, from eastern point
Of Libra to the fleecy star that bears
Andromeda far off Atlantick seas
Beyond the horizon then from pole to pole
He views in breadth, and without longer pause
Down right into the worlds first region throws
His flight precipitant, and winds with ease
Through the pure marble air his oblique way
Amongst innumerable stars, that shone
Stars distant, but nigh hand seemed other worlds
Or other worlds they seemed, or happy isles,
Like those Hesperian gardens famed of old,
Fortunate fields, and groves, and flowery vales,
Thrice happy isles but who dwelt happy there
He staid not to inquire:  Above them all
The golden sun, in splendour likest Heaven,
Allured his eye thither his course he bends
Through the calm firmament, but up or down,
By center, or eccentrick, hard to tell,
Or longitude, where the great luminary
Aloof the vulgar constellations thick,
That from his lordly eye keep distance due,
Dispenses light from far they, as they move
Their starry dance in numbers that compute
Days, months, and years, towards his allcheering lamp
Turn swift their various motions, or are turned
By his magnetick beam, that gently warms
The universe, and to each inward part
With gentle penetration, though unseen,
Shoots invisible virtue even to the deep
So wonderously was set his station bright.
There lands the Fiend, a spot like which perhaps
Astronomer in the suns lucent orb
Through his glazed optick tube yet never saw.
The place he found beyond expression bright,
Compared with aught on earth, metal or stone
Not all parts like, but all alike informed
With radiant light, as glowing iron with fire
If metal, part seemed gold, part silver clear
If stone, carbuncle most or chrysolite,
Ruby or topaz, to the twelve that shone
In Aarons breastplate, and a stone besides
Imagined rather oft than elsewhere seen,
That stone, or like to that which here below
Philosophers in vain so long have sought,
In vain, though by their powerful art they bind
Volatile Hermes, and call up unbound
In various shapes old Proteus from the sea,
Drained through a limbeck to his native form.
What wonder then if fields and regions here
Breathe forth Elixir pure, and rivers run
Potable gold, when with one virtuous touch
The archchemick sun, so far from us remote,
Produces, with terrestrial humour mixed,
Here in the dark so many precious things
Of colour glorious, and effect so rare?
Here matter new to gaze the Devil met
Undazzled far and wide his eye commands
For sight no obstacle found here, nor shade,
But all sunshine, as when his beams at noon
Culminate from the equator, as they now
Shot upward still direct, whence no way round
Shadow from body opaque can fall and the air,
No where so clear, sharpened his visual ray
To objects distant far, whereby he soon
Saw within ken a glorious Angel stand,
The same whom John saw also in the sun:
His back was turned, but not his brightness hid
Of beaming sunny rays a golden tiar
Circled his head, nor less his locks behind
Illustrious on his shoulders fledge with wings
Lay waving round on some great charge employed
He seemed, or fixed in cogitation deep.
Glad was the Spirit impure, as now in hope
To find who might direct his wandering flight
To Paradise, the happy seat of Man,
His journeys end and our beginning woe.
But first he casts to change his proper shape,
Which else might work him danger or delay:
And now a stripling Cherub he appears,
Not of the prime, yet such as in his face
Youth smiled celestial, and to every limb
Suitable grace diffused, so well he feigned:
Under a coronet his flowing hair
In curls on either cheek played wings he wore
Of many a coloured plume, sprinkled with gold
His habit fit for speed succinct, and held
Before his decent steps a silver wand.
He drew not nigh unheard the Angel bright,
Ere he drew nigh, his radiant visage turned,
Admonished by his ear, and straight was known
The ArchAngel Uriel, one of the seven
Who in Gods presence, nearest to his throne,
Stand ready at command, and are his eyes
That run through all the Heavens, or down to the Earth
Bear his swift errands over moist and dry,
Oer sea and land: him Satan thus accosts.
Uriel, for thou of those seven Spirits that stand
In sight of Gods high throne, gloriously bright,
The first art wont his great authentick will
Interpreter through highest Heaven to bring,
Where all his sons thy embassy attend
And here art likeliest by supreme decree
Like honour to obtain, and as his eye
To visit oft this new creation round
Unspeakable desire to see, and know
All these his wonderous works, but chiefly Man,
His chief delight and favour, him for whom
All these his works so wonderous he ordained,
Hath brought me from the quires of Cherubim
Alone thus wandering.  Brightest Seraph, tell
In which of all these shining orbs hath Man
His fixed seat, or fixed seat hath none,
But all these shining orbs his choice to dwell
That I may find him, and with secret gaze
Or open admiration him behold,
On whom the great Creator hath bestowed
Worlds, and on whom hath all these graces poured
That both in him and all things, as is meet,
The universal Maker we may praise
Who justly hath driven out his rebel foes
To deepest Hell, and, to repair that loss,
Created this new happy race of Men
To serve him better:  Wise are all his ways.
So spake the false dissembler unperceived
For neither Man nor Angel can discern
Hypocrisy, the only evil that walks
Invisible, except to God alone,
By his permissive will, through Heaven and Earth:
And oft, though wisdom wake, suspicion sleeps
At wisdoms gate, and to simplicity
Resigns her charge, while goodness thinks no ill
Where no ill seems:  Which now for once beguiled
Uriel, though regent of the sun, and held
The sharpestsighted Spirit of all in Heaven
Who to the fraudulent impostor foul,
In his uprightness, answer thus returned.
Fair Angel, thy desire, which tends to know
The works of God, thereby to glorify
The great Workmaster, leads to no excess
That reaches blame, but rather merits praise
The more it seems excess, that led thee hither
From thy empyreal mansion thus alone,
To witness with thine eyes what some perhaps,
Contented with report, hear only in Heaven:
For wonderful indeed are all his works,
Pleasant to know, and worthiest to be all
Had in remembrance always with delight
But what created mind can comprehend
Their number, or the wisdom infinite
That brought them forth, but hid their causes deep?
I saw when at his word the formless mass,
This worlds material mould, came to a heap:
Confusion heard his voice, and wild uproar
Stood ruled, stood vast infinitude confined
Till at his second bidding Darkness fled,
Light shone, and order from disorder sprung:
Swift to their several quarters hasted then
The cumbrous elements, earth, flood, air, fire
And this ethereal quintessence of Heaven
Flew upward, spirited with various forms,
That rolled orbicular, and turned to stars
Numberless, as thou seest, and how they move
Each had his place appointed, each his course
The rest in circuit walls this universe.
Look downward on that globe, whose hither side
With light from hence, though but reflected, shines
That place is Earth, the seat of Man that light
His day, which else, as the other hemisphere,
Night would invade but there the neighbouring moon
So call that opposite fair star her aid
Timely interposes, and her monthly round
Still ending, still renewing, through mid Heaven,
With borrowed light her countenance triform
Hence fills and empties to enlighten the Earth,
And in her pale dominion checks the night.
That spot, to which I point, is Paradise,
Adams abode those lofty shades, his bower.
Thy way thou canst not miss, me mine requires.
Thus said, he turned and Satan, bowing low,
As to superiour Spirits is wont in Heaven,
Where honour due and reverence none neglects,
Took leave, and toward the coast of earth beneath,
Down from the ecliptick, sped with hoped success,
Throws his steep flight in many an aery wheel
Nor staid, till on Niphates top he lights.



Book IV


O, for that warning voice, which he, who saw
The Apocalypse, heard cry in Heaven aloud,
Then when the Dragon, put to second rout,
Came furious down to be revenged on men,
Woe to the inhabitants on earth! that now,
While time was, our first parents had been warned
The coming of their secret foe, and scaped,
Haply so scaped his mortal snare:  For now
Satan, now first inflamed with rage, came down,
The tempter ere the accuser of mankind,
To wreak on innocent frail Man his loss
Of that first battle, and his flight to Hell:
Yet, not rejoicing in his speed, though bold
Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast,
Begins his dire attempt which nigh the birth
Now rolling boils in his tumultuous breast,
And like a devilish engine back recoils
Upon himself horrour and doubt distract
His troubled thoughts, and from the bottom stir
The Hell within him for within him Hell
He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell
One step, no more than from himself, can fly
By change of place:  Now conscience wakes despair,
That slumbered wakes the bitter memory
Of what he was, what is, and what must be
Worse of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue.
Sometimes towards Eden, which now in his view
Lay pleasant, his grieved look he fixes sad
Sometimes towards Heaven, and the fullblazing sun,
Which now sat high in his meridian tower:
Then, much revolving, thus in sighs began.
O thou, that, with surpassing glory crowned,
Lookest from thy sole dominion like the God
Of this new world at whose sight all the stars
Hide their diminished heads to thee I call,
But with no friendly voice, and add thy name,
Of Sun! to tell thee how I hate thy beams,
That bring to my remembrance from what state
I fell, how glorious once above thy sphere
Till pride and worse ambition threw me down
Warring in Heaven against Heavens matchless King:
Ah, wherefore! he deserved no such return
From me, whom he created what I was
In that bright eminence, and with his good
Upbraided none nor was his service hard.
What could be less than to afford him praise,
The easiest recompence, and pay him thanks,
How due! yet all his good proved ill in me,
And wrought but malice lifted up so high
I sdeined subjection, and thought one step higher
Would set me highest, and in a moment quit
The debt immense of endless gratitude,
So burdensome still paying, still to owe,
Forgetful what from him I still received,
And understood not that a grateful mind
By owing owes not, but still pays, at once
Indebted and discharged what burden then
O, had his powerful destiny ordained
Me some inferiour Angel, I had stood
Then happy no unbounded hope had raised
Ambition!  Yet why not some other Power
As great might have aspired, and me, though mean,
Drawn to his part but other Powers as great
Fell not, but stand unshaken, from within
Or from without, to all temptations armed.
Hadst thou the same free will and power to stand?
Thou hadst: whom hast thou then or what to accuse,
But Heavens free love dealt equally to all?
Be then his love accursed, since love or hate,
To me alike, it deals eternal woe.
Nay, cursed be thou since against his thy will
Chose freely what it now so justly rues.
Me miserable! which way shall I fly
Infinite wrath, and infinite despair?
Which way I fly is Hell myself am Hell
And, in the lowest deep, a lower deep
Still threatening to devour me opens wide,
To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heaven.
O, then, at last relent:  Is there no place
Left for repentance, none for pardon left?
None left but by submission and that word
Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame
Among the Spirits beneath, whom I seduced
With other promises and other vaunts
Than to submit, boasting I could subdue
The Omnipotent.  Ay me! they little know
How dearly I abide that boast so vain,
Under what torments inwardly I groan,
While they adore me on the throne of Hell.
With diadem and scepter high advanced,
The lower still I fall, only supreme
In misery:  Such joy ambition finds.
But say I could repent, and could obtain,
By act of grace, my former state how soon
Would highth recall high thoughts, how soon unsay
What feigned submission swore?  Ease would recant
Vows made in pain, as violent and void.
For never can true reconcilement grow,
Where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep:
Which would but lead me to a worse relapse
And heavier fall:  so should I purchase dear
Short intermission bought with double smart.
This knows my Punisher therefore as far
From granting he, as I from begging, peace
All hope excluded thus, behold, in stead
Mankind created, and for him this world.
So farewell, hope and with hope farewell, fear
Farewell, remorse! all good to me is lost
Evil, be thou my good by thee at least
Divided empire with Heavens King I hold,
By thee, and more than half perhaps will reign
As Man ere long, and this new world, shall know.
Thus while he spake, each passion dimmed his face
Thrice changed with pale, ire, envy, and despair
Which marred his borrowed visage, and betrayed
Him counterfeit, if any eye beheld.
For heavenly minds from such distempers foul
Are ever clear.  Whereof he soon aware,
Each perturbation smoothed with outward calm,
Artificer of fraud and was the first
That practised falsehood under saintly show,
Deep malice to conceal, couched with revenge:
Yet not enough had practised to deceive
Uriel once warned whose eye pursued him down
 The way he went, and on the Assyrian mount
 Saw him disfigured, more than could befall
 Spirit of happy sort his gestures fierce
 He marked and mad demeanour, then alone,
 As he supposed, all unobserved, unseen.
 So on he fares, and to the border comes
 Of Eden, where delicious Paradise,
 Now nearer, crowns with her enclosure green,
 As with a rural mound, the champaign head
 Of a steep wilderness, whose hairy sides
Access denied and overhead upgrew
 Insuperable height of loftiest shade,
 Cedar, and pine, and fir, and branching palm,
 A sylvan scene, and, as the ranks ascend,
 Shade above shade, a woody theatre
 Of stateliest view. Yet higher than their tops
 The verdurous wall of Paradise upsprung

    00081429
Which to our general sire gave prospect large
Into his nether empire neighbouring round.
And higher than that wall a circling row
Of goodliest trees, loaden with fairest fruit,
Blossoms and fruits at once of golden hue,
Appeared, with gay enamelled colours mixed:
On which the sun more glad impressed his beams
Than in fair evening cloud, or humid bow,
When God hath showered the earth so lovely seemed
That landskip:  And of pure now purer air
Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires
Vernal delight and joy, able to drive
All sadness but despair:  Now gentle gales,
Fanning their odoriferous wings, dispense
Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole
Those balmy spoils.  As when to them who fail
Beyond the Cape of Hope, and now are past
Mozambick, off at sea northeast winds blow
Sabean odours from the spicy shore
Of Araby the blest with such delay
Well pleased they slack their course, and many a league
Cheered with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles:
So entertained those odorous sweets the Fiend,
Who came their bane though with them better pleased
Than Asmodeus with the fishy fume
That drove him, though enamoured, from the spouse
Of Tobits son, and with a vengeance sent
From Media post to Egypt, there fast bound.
Now to the ascent of that steep savage hill
Satan had journeyed on, pensive and slow
But further way found none, so thick entwined,
As one continued brake, the undergrowth
Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplexed
All path of man or beast that passed that way.
One gate there only was, and that looked east
On the other side: which when the archfelon saw,
Due entrance he disdained and, in contempt,
At one flight bound high overleaped all bound
Of hill or highest wall, and sheer within
Lights on his feet.  As when a prowling wolf,
Whom hunger drives to seek new haunt for prey,
Watching where shepherds pen their flocks at eve
In hurdled cotes amid the field secure,
Leaps oer the fence with ease into the fold:
Or as a thief, bent to unhoard the cash
Of some rich burgher, whose substantial doors,
Crossbarred and bolted fast, fear no assault,
In at the window climbs, or oer the tiles:
So clomb this first grand thief into Gods fold
So since into his church lewd hirelings climb.
Thence up he flew, and on the tree of life,
The middle tree and highest there that grew,
Sat like a cormorant yet not true life
Thereby regained, but sat devising death
To them who lived nor on the virtue thought
Of that lifegiving plant, but only used
For prospect, what well used had been the pledge
Of immortality.  So little knows
Any, but God alone, to value right
The good before him, but perverts best things
To worst abuse, or to their meanest use.
Beneath him with new wonder now he views,
To all delight of human sense exposed,
In narrow room, Natures whole wealth, yea more,
A Heaven on Earth:  For blissful Paradise
Of God the garden was, by him in the east
Of Eden planted Eden stretched her line
From Auran eastward to the royal towers
Of great Seleucia, built by Grecian kings,
Of where the sons of Eden long before
Dwelt in Telassar:  In this pleasant soil
His far more pleasant garden God ordained
Out of the fertile ground he caused to grow
All trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste
And all amid them stood the tree of life,
High eminent, blooming ambrosial fruit
Of vegetable gold and next to life,
Our death, the tree of knowledge, grew fast by,
Knowledge of good bought dear by knowing ill.
Southward through Eden went a river large,
Nor changed his course, but through the shaggy hill
Passed underneath ingulfed for God had thrown
That mountain as his gardenmould high raised
Upon the rapid current, which, through veins
Of porous earth with kindly thirst updrawn,
Rose a fresh fountain, and with many a rill
Watered the garden thence united fell
Down the steep glade, and met the nether flood,
Which from his darksome passage now appears,
And now, divided into four main streams,
Runs diverse, wandering many a famous realm
And country, whereof here needs no account
But rather to tell how, if Art could tell,
How from that sapphire fount the crisped brooks,
Rolling on orient pearl and sands of gold,
With mazy errour under pendant shades
Ran nectar, visiting each plant, and fed
Flowers worthy of Paradise, which not nice Art
In beds and curious knots, but Nature boon
Poured forth profuse on hill, and dale, and plain,
Both where the morning sun first warmly smote
The open field, and where the unpierced shade
Imbrowned the noontide bowers:  Thus was this place
A happy rural seat of various view
Groves whose rich trees wept odorous gums and balm,
Others whose fruit, burnished with golden rind,
Hung amiable, Hesperian fables true,
If true, here only, and of delicious taste:
Betwixt them lawns, or level downs, and flocks
Grazing the tender herb, were interposed,
Or palmy hillock or the flowery lap
Of some irriguous valley spread her store,
Flowers of all hue, and without thorn the rose:
Another side, umbrageous grots and caves
Of cool recess, oer which the mantling vine
Lays forth her purple grape, and gently creeps
Luxuriant mean while murmuring waters fall
Down the slope hills, dispersed, or in a lake,
That to the fringed bank with myrtle crowned
Her crystal mirrour holds, unite their streams.
The birds their quire apply airs, vernal airs,
Breathing the smell of field and grove, attune
The trembling leaves, while universal Pan,
Knit with the Graces and the Hours in dance,
Led on the eternal Spring.  Not that fair field
Of Enna, where Proserpine gathering flowers,
Herself a fairer flower by gloomy Dis
Was gathered, which cost Ceres all that pain
To seek her through the world nor that sweet grove
Of Daphne by Orontes, and the inspired
Castalian spring, might with this Paradise
Of Eden strive nor that Nyseian isle
Girt with the river Triton, where old Cham,
Whom Gentiles Ammon call and Libyan Jove,
Hid Amalthea, and her florid son
Young Bacchus, from his stepdame Rheas eye
Nor where Abassin kings their issue guard,
Mount Amara, though this by some supposed
True Paradise under the Ethiop line
By Nilus head, enclosed with shining rock,
A whole days journey high, but wide remote
From this Assyrian garden, where the Fiend
Saw, undelighted, all delight, all kind
Of living creatures, new to sight, and strange
Two of far nobler shape, erect and tall,
Godlike erect, with native honour clad
In naked majesty seemed lords of all:
And worthy seemed for in their looks divine
The image of their glorious Maker shone,
Truth, wisdom, sanctitude severe and pure,
Severe, but in true filial freedom placed,
Whence true authority in men though both
Not equal, as their sex not equal seemed
For contemplation he and valour formed
For softness she and sweet attractive grace
He for God only, she for God in him:
His fair large front and eye sublime declared
Absolute rule and hyacinthine locks
Round from his parted forelock manly hung
Clustering, but not beneath his shoulders broad:
She, as a veil, down to the slender waist
Her unadorned golden tresses wore
Dishevelled, but in wanton ringlets waved
As the vine curls her tendrils, which implied
Subjection, but required with gentle sway,
And by her yielded, by him best received,
Yielded with coy submission, modest pride,
And sweet, reluctant, amorous delay.
Nor those mysterious parts were then concealed
Then was not guilty shame, dishonest shame
Of natures works, honour dishonourable,
Sinbred, how have ye troubled all mankind
With shows instead, mere shows of seeming pure,
And banished from mans life his happiest life,
Simplicity and spotless innocence!
So passed they naked on, nor shunned the sight
Of God or Angel for they thought no ill:
So hand in hand they passed, the loveliest pair,
That ever since in loves embraces met
Adam the goodliest man of men since born
His sons, the fairest of her daughters Eve.
Under a tuft of shade that on a green
Stood whispering soft, by a fresh fountain side
They sat them down and, after no more toil
Of their sweet gardening labour than sufficed
To recommend cool Zephyr, and made ease
More easy, wholesome thirst and appetite
More grateful, to their supperfruits they fell,
Nectarine fruits which the compliant boughs
Yielded them, sidelong as they sat recline
On the soft downy bank damasked with flowers:
The savoury pulp they chew, and in the rind,
Still as they thirsted, scoop the brimming stream
Nor gentle purpose, nor endearing smiles
Wanted, nor youthful dalliance, as beseems
Fair couple, linked in happy nuptial league,
Alone as they.  About them frisking played
All beasts of the earth, since wild, and of all chase
In wood or wilderness, forest or den
Sporting the lion ramped, and in his paw
Dandled the kid bears, tigers, ounces, pards,
Gambolled before them the unwieldy elephant,
To make them mirth, used all his might, and wreathed
His?kithetmroboscis close the serpent sly,
Insinuating, wove with Gordian twine
His braided train, and of his fatal guile
Gave proof unheeded others on the grass
Couched, and now filled with pasture gazing sat,
Or bedward ruminating for the sun,
Declined, was hasting now with prone career
To the ocean isles, and in the ascending scale
Of Heaven the stars that usher evening rose:
When Satan still in gaze, as first he stood,
Scarce thus at length failed speech recovered sad.
O Hell! what do mine eyes with grief behold!
Into our room of bliss thus high advanced
Creatures of other mould, earthborn perhaps,
Not Spirits, yet to heavenly Spirits bright
Little inferiour whom my thoughts pursue
With wonder, and could love, so lively shines
In them divine resemblance, and such grace
The hand that formed them on their shape hath poured.
Ah! gentle pair, ye little think how nigh
Your change approaches, when all these delights
Will vanish, and deliver ye to woe
More woe, the more your taste is now of joy
Happy, but for so happy ill secured
Long to continue, and this high seat your Heaven
Ill fenced for Heaven to keep out such a foe
As now is entered yet no purposed foe
To you, whom I could pity thus forlorn,
Though I unpitied:  League with you I seek,
And mutual amity, so strait, so close,
That I with you must dwell, or you with me
Henceforth my dwelling haply may not please,
Like this fair Paradise, your sense yet such
Accept your Makers work he gave it me,
Which I as freely give:  Hell shall unfold,
To entertain you two, her widest gates,
And send forth all her kings there will be room,
Not like these narrow limits, to receive
Your numerous offspring if no better place,
Thank him who puts me loth to this revenge
On you who wrong me not for him who wronged.
And should I at your harmless innocence
Melt, as I do, yet publick reason just,
Honour and empire with revenge enlarged,
By conquering this new world, compels me now
To do what else, though damned, I should abhor.
So spake the Fiend, and with necessity,
The tyrants plea, excused his devilish deeds.
Then from his lofty stand on that high tree
Down he alights among the sportful herd
Of those fourfooted kinds, himself now one,
Now other, as their shape served best his end
Nearer to view his prey, and, unespied,
To mark what of their state he more might learn,
By word or action marked. About them round
A lion now he stalks with fiery glare
Then as a tiger, who by chance hath spied
In some purlieu two gentle fawns at play,
Straight couches close, then, rising, changes oft
His couchant watch, as one who chose his ground,
Whence rushing, he might surest seize them both,
Griped in each paw: when, Adam first of men
To first of women Eve thus moving speech,
Turned him, all ear to hear new utterance flow.
Sole partner, and sole part, of all these joys,
Dearer thyself than all needs must the Power
That made us, and for us this ample world,
Be infinitely good, and of his good
As liberal and free as infinite
That raised us from the dust, and placed us here
In all this happiness, who at his hand
Have nothing merited, nor can perform
Aught whereof he hath need he who requires
From us no other service than to keep
This one, this easy charge, of all the trees
In Paradise that bear delicious fruit
So various, not to taste that only tree
Of knowledge, planted by the tree of life
So near grows death to life, whateer death is,
Some dreadful thing no doubt for well thou knowest
God hath pronounced it death to taste that tree,
The only sign of our obedience left,
Among so many signs of power and rule
Conferred upon us, and dominion given
Over all other creatures that possess
Earth, air, and sea.  Then let us not think hard
One easy prohibition, who enjoy
Free leave so large to all things else, and choice
Unlimited of manifold delights:
But let us ever praise him, and extol
His bounty, following our delightful task,
To prune these growing plants, and tend these flowers,
Which were it toilsome, yet with thee were sweet.
To whom thus Eve replied.  O thou for whom
And from whom I was formed, flesh of thy flesh,
And without whom am to no end, my guide
And head! what thou hast said is just and right.
For we to him indeed all praises owe,
And daily thanks I chiefly, who enjoy
So far the happier lot, enjoying thee
Preeminent by so much odds, while thou
Like consort to thyself canst no where find.
That day I oft remember, when from sleep
I first awaked, and found myself reposed
Under a shade on flowers, much wondering where
And what I was, whence thither brought, and how.
Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound
Of waters issued from a cave, and spread
Into a liquid plain, then stood unmoved
Pure as the expanse of Heaven I thither went
With unexperienced thought, and laid me down
On the green bank, to look into the clear
Smooth lake, that to me seemed another sky.
As I bent down to look, just opposite
A shape within the watery gleam appeared,
Bending to look on me:  I started back,
It started back but pleased I soon returned,
Pleased it returned as soon with answering looks
Of sympathy and love:  There I had fixed
Mine eyes till now, and pined with vain desire,
Had not a voice thus warned me  What thou seest,
What there thou seest, fair Creature, is thyself
With thee it came and goes: but follow me,
And I will bring thee where no shadow stays
Thy coming, and thy soft embraces, he
Whose image thou art him thou shalt enjoy
Inseparably thine, to him shalt bear
Multitudes like thyself, and thence be called
Mother of human race.  What could I do,
But follow straight, invisibly thus led?
Till I espied thee, fair indeed and tall,
Under a platane yet methought less fair,
Less winning soft, less amiably mild,
Than that smooth watery image:  Back I turned
Thou following cryedst aloud, Return, fair Eve
Whom flyest thou?  whom thou flyest, of him thou art,
His flesh, his bone to give thee being I lent
Out of my side to thee, nearest my heart,
Substantial life, to have thee by my side
Henceforth an individual solace dear
Part of my soul I seek thee, and thee claim
My other half:  With that thy gentle hand
Seised mine:  I yieldedand from that time see
How beauty is excelled by manly grace,
And wisdom, which alone is truly fair.
So spake our general mother, and with eyes
Of conjugal attraction unreproved,
And meek surrender, halfembracing leaned
On our first father half her swelling breast
Naked met his, under the flowing gold
Of her loose tresses hid: he in delight
Both of her beauty, and submissive charms,
Smiled with superiour love, as Jupiter
On Juno smiles, when he impregns the clouds
That shed Mayflowers and pressed her matron lip
With kisses pure:  Aside the Devil turned
For envy yet with jealous leer malign
Eyed them askance, and to himself thus plained.
Sight hateful, sight tormenting! thus these two,
Imparadised in one anothers arms,
The happier Eden, shall enjoy their fill
Of bliss on bliss while I to Hell am thrust,
Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire,
Among our other torments not the least,
Still unfulfilled with pain of longing pines.
Yet let me not forget what I have gained
From their own mouths:  All is not theirs, it seems
One fatal tree there stands, of knowledge called,
Forbidden them to taste:  Knowledge forbidden
Suspicious, reasonless.  Why should their Lord
Envy them that?  Can it be sin to know?
Can it be death?  And do they only stand
By ignorance?  Is that their happy state,
The proof of their obedience and their faith?
O fair foundation laid whereon to build
Their ruin! hence I will excite their minds
With more desire to know, and to reject
Envious commands, invented with design
To keep them low, whom knowledge might exalt
Equal with Gods: aspiring to be such,
They taste and die:  What likelier can ensue
But first with narrow search I must walk round
This garden, and no corner leave unspied
A chance but chance may lead where I may meet
Some wandering Spirit of Heaven by fountain side,
Or in thick shade retired, from him to draw
What further would be learned.  Live while ye may,
Yet happy pair enjoy, till I return,
Short pleasures, for long woes are to succeed!
So saying, his proud step he scornful turned,
But with sly circumspection, and began
Through wood, through waste, oer hill, oer dale, his roam
Mean while in utmost longitude, where Heaven
With earth and ocean meets, the setting sun
Slowly descended, and with right aspect
Against the eastern gate of Paradise
Levelled his evening rays:  It was a rock
Of alabaster, piled up to the clouds,
Conspicuous far, winding with one ascent
Accessible from earth, one entrance high
The rest was craggy cliff, that overhung
Still as it rose, impossible to climb.
Betwixt these rocky pillars Gabriel sat,
Chief of the angelick guards, awaiting night
About him exercised heroick games
The unarmed youth of Heaven, but nigh at hand
Celestial armoury, shields, helms, and spears,
Hung high with diamond flaming, and with gold.
Thither came Uriel, gliding through the even
On a sunbeam, swift as a shooting star
In autumn thwarts the night, when vapours fired
Impress the air, and shows the mariner
From what point of his compass to beware
Impetuous winds:  He thus began in haste.
Gabriel, to thee thy course by lot hath given
Charge and strict watch, that to this happy place
No evil thing approach or enter in.
This day at highth of noon came to my sphere
A Spirit, zealous, as he seemed, to know
More of the Almightys works, and chiefly Man,
Gods latest image:  I described his way
Bent all on speed, and marked his aery gait
But in the mount that lies from Eden north,
Where he first lighted, soon discerned his looks
Alien from Heaven, with passions foul obscured:
Mine eye pursued him still, but under shade
Lost sight of him:  One of the banished crew,
I fear, hath ventured from the deep, to raise
New troubles him thy care must be to find.
To whom the winged warriour thus returned.
Uriel, no wonder if thy perfect sight,
Amid the suns bright circle where thou sitst,
See far and wide:  In at this gate none pass
The vigilance here placed, but such as come
Well known from Heaven and since meridian hour
No creature thence:  If Spirit of other sort,
So minded, have oerleaped these earthly bounds
On purpose, hard thou knowest it to exclude
Spiritual substance with corporeal bar.
But if within the circuit of these walks,
In whatsoever shape he lurk, of whom
Thou tellest, by morrow dawning I shall know.
So promised he and Uriel to his charge
Returned on that bright beam, whose point now raised
Bore him slope downward to the sun now fallen
Beneath the Azores whether the prime orb,
Incredible how swift, had thither rolled
Diurnal, or this less volubil earth,
By shorter flight to the east, had left him there
Arraying with reflected purple and gold
The clouds that on his western throne attend.
Now came still Evening on, and Twilight gray
Had in her sober livery all things clad
Silence accompanied for beast and bird,
They to their grassy couch, these to their nests
Were slunk, all but the wakeful nightingale
She all night long her amorous descant sung
Silence was pleased:  Now glowed the firmament
With living sapphires:  Hesperus, that led
The starry host, rode brightest, till the moon,
Rising in clouded majesty, at length
Apparent queen unveiled her peerless light,
And oer the dark her silver mantle threw.
When Adam thus to Eve.  Fair Consort, the hour
Of night, and all things now retired to rest,
Mind us of like repose since God hath set
Labour and rest, as day and night, to men
Successive and the timely dew of sleep,
Now falling with soft slumbrous weight, inclines
Our eyelids:  Other creatures all day long
Rove idle, unemployed, and less need rest
Man hath his daily work of body or mind
Appointed, which declares his dignity,
And the regard of Heaven on all his ways
While other animals unactive range,
And of their doings God takes no account.
Tomorrow, ere fresh morning streak the east
With first approach of light, we must be risen,
And at our pleasant labour, to reform
Yon flowery arbours, yonder alleys green,
Our walk at noon, with branches overgrown,
That mock our scant manuring, and require
More hands than ours to lop their wanton growth:
Those blossoms also, and those dropping gums,
That lie bestrown, unsightly and unsmooth,
Ask riddance, if we mean to tread with ease
Mean while, as Nature wills, night bids us rest.
To whom thus Eve, with perfect beauty adorned
My Author and Disposer, what thou bidst
Unargued I obey:  So God ordains
God is thy law, thou mine:  To know no more
Is womans happiest knowledge, and her praise.
With thee conversing I forget all time
All seasons, and their change, all please alike.
Sweet is the breath of Morn, her rising sweet,
With charm of earliest birds:  pleasant the sun,
When first on this delightful land he spreads
His orient beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flower,
Glistering with dew fragrant the fertile earth
After soft showers and sweet the coming on
Of grateful Evening mild then silent Night,
With this her solemn bird, and this fair moon,
And these the gems of Heaven, her starry train:
But neither breath of Morn, when she ascends
With charm of earliest birds nor rising sun
On this delightful land nor herb, fruit, flower,
Glistering with dew nor fragrance after showers
Nor grateful Evening mild nor silent Night,
With this her solemn bird, nor walk by moon,
Or glittering starlight, without thee is sweet.
But wherefore all night long shine these? for whom
This glorious sight, when sleep hath shut all eyes?
To whom our general ancestor replied.
Daughter of God and Man, accomplished Eve,
These have their course to finish round the earth,
By morrow evening, and from land to land
In order, though to nations yet unborn,
Ministring light prepared, they set and rise
Lest total Darkness should by night regain
Her old possession, and extinguish life
In Nature and all things which these soft fires
Not only enlighten, but with kindly heat
Of various influence foment and warm,
Temper or nourish, or in part shed down
Their stellar virtue on all kinds that grow
On earth, made hereby apter to receive
Perfection from the suns more potent ray.
These then, though unbeheld in deep of night,
Shine not in vain nor think, though men were none,
That Heaven would want spectators, God want praise:
Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth
Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep:
All these with ceaseless praise his works behold
Both day and night:  How often from the steep
Of echoing hill or thicket have we heard
Celestial voices to the midnight air,
Sole, or responsive each to others note,
Singing their great Creator? oft in bands
While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk,
With heavenly touch of instrumental sounds
In full harmonick number joined, their songs
Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven.
Thus talking, hand in hand alone they passed
On to their blissful bower: it was a place
Chosen by the sovran Planter, when he framed
All things to Mans delightful use the roof
Of thickest covert was inwoven shade
Laurel and myrtle, and what higher grew
Of firm and fragrant leaf on either side
Acanthus, and each odorous bushy shrub,
Fenced up the verdant wall each beauteous flower,
Iris all hues, roses, and jessamin,
Reared high their flourished heads between, and wrought
Mosaick underfoot the violet,
Crocus, and hyacinth, with rich inlay
Broidered the ground, more coloured than with stone
Of costliest emblem:  Other creature here,
Bird, beast, insect, or worm, durst enter none,
Such was their awe of Man.  In shadier bower
More sacred and sequestered, though but feigned,
Pan or Sylvanus never slept, nor Nymph
Nor Faunus haunted.  Here, in close recess,
With flowers, garlands, and sweetsmelling herbs,
Espoused Eve decked first her nuptial bed
And heavenly quires the hymenaean sung,
What day the genial Angel to our sire
Brought her in naked beauty more adorned,
More lovely, than Pandora, whom the Gods
Endowed with all their gifts, and O! too like
In sad event, when to the unwiser son
Of Japhet brought by Hermes, she ensnared
Mankind with her fair looks, to be avenged
On him who had stole Joves authentick fire.
Thus, at their shady lodge arrived, both stood,
Both turned, and under open sky adored
The God that made both sky, air, earth, and heaven,
Which they beheld, the moons resplendent globe,
And starry pole:  Thou also madest the night,
Maker Omnipotent, and thou the day,
Which we, in our appointed work employed,
Have finished, happy in our mutual help
And mutual love, the crown of all our bliss
Ordained by thee and this delicious place
For us too large, where thy abundance wants
Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground.
But thou hast promised from us two a race
To fill the earth, who shall with us extol
Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake,
And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep.
This said unanimous, and other rites
Observing none, but adoration pure
Which God likes best, into their inmost bower
Handed they went and, eased the putting off
These troublesome disguises which we wear,
Straight side by side were laid nor turned, I ween,
Adam from his fair spouse, nor Eve the rites
Mysterious of connubial love refused:
Whatever hypocrites austerely talk
Of purity, and place, and innocence,
Defaming as impure what God declares
Pure, and commands to some, leaves free to all.
Our Maker bids encrease who bids abstain
But our Destroyer, foe to God and Man?
Hail, wedded Love, mysterious law, true source
Of human offspring, sole propriety
In Paradise of all things common else!
By thee adulterous Lust was driven from men
Among the bestial herds to range by thee
Founded in reason, loyal, just, and pure,
Relations dear, and all the charities
Of father, son, and brother, first were known.
Far be it, that I should write thee sin or blame,
Or think thee unbefitting holiest place,
Perpetual fountain of domestick sweets,
Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced,
Present, or past, as saints and patriarchs used.
Here Love his golden shafts employs, here lights
His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings,
Reigns here and revels not in the bought smile
Of harlots, loveless, joyless, unendeared,
Casual fruition nor in courtamours,
Mixed dance, or wanton mask, or midnight ball,
Or serenate, which the starved lover sings
To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain.
These, lulled by nightingales, embracing slept,
And on their naked limbs the flowery roof
Showered roses, which the morn repaired.  Sleep on,
Blest pair and O!yet happiest, if ye seek
No happier state, and know to know no more.
Now had night measured with her shadowy cone
Half way up hill this vast sublunar vault,
And from their ivory port the Cherubim,
Forth issuing at the accustomed hour, stood armed
To their night watches in warlike parade
When Gabriel to his next in power thus spake.
Uzziel, half these draw off, and coast the south
With strictest watch these other wheel the north
Our circuit meets full west.  As flame they part,
Half wheeling to the shield, half to the spear.
From these, two strong and subtle Spirits he called
That near him stood, and gave them thus in charge.
Ithuriel and Zephon, with winged speed
Search through this garden, leave unsearched no nook
But chiefly where those two fair creatures lodge,
Now laid perhaps asleep, secure of harm.
This evening from the suns decline arrived,
Who tells of some infernal Spirit seen
Hitherward bent who could have thought? escaped
The bars of Hell, on errand bad no doubt:
Such, where ye find, seise fast, and hither bring.
So saying, on he led his radiant files,
Dazzling the moon these to the bower direct
In search of whom they sought:  Him there they found
Squat like a toad, close at the ear of Eve,
Assaying by his devilish art to reach
The organs of her fancy, and with them forge
Illusions, as he list, phantasms and dreams
Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint
The animal spirits, that from pure blood arise
Like gentle breaths from rivers pure, thence raise
At least distempered, discontented thoughts,
Vain hopes, vain aims, inordinate desires,
Blown up with high conceits ingendering pride.
Him thus intent Ithuriel with his spear
Touched lightly for no falshood can endure
Touch of celestial temper, but returns
Of force to its own likeness:  Up he starts
Discovered and surprised.  As when a spark
Lights on a heap of nitrous powder, laid
Fit for the tun some magazine to store
Against a rumoured war, the smutty grain,
With sudden blaze diffused, inflames the air
So started up in his own shape the Fiend.
Back stept those two fair Angels, half amazed
So sudden to behold the grisly king
Yet thus, unmoved with fear, accost him soon.
Which of those rebel Spirits adjudged to Hell
Comest thou, escaped thy prison? and, transformed,
Why satst thou like an enemy in wait,
Here watching at the head of these that sleep?
Know ye not then said Satan, filled with scorn,
Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate
For you, there sitting where ye durst not soar:
Not to know me argues yourselves unknown,
The lowest of your throng or, if ye know,
Why ask ye, and superfluous begin
Your message, like to end as much in vain?
To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn.
Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same,
Or undiminished brightness to be known,
As when thou stoodest in Heaven upright and pure
That glory then, when thou no more wast good,
Departed from thee and thou resemblest now
Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foul.
But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give account
To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep
This place inviolable, and these from harm.
So spake the Cherub and his grave rebuke,
Severe in youthful beauty, added grace
Invincible:  Abashed the Devil stood,
And felt how awful goodness is, and saw
Virtue in her shape how lovely saw, and pined
His loss but chiefly to find here observed
His lustre visibly impaired yet seemed
Undaunted.  If I must contend, said he,
Best with the best, the sender, not the sent,
Or all at once more glory will be won,
Or less be lost.  Thy fear, said Zephon bold,
Will save us trial what the least can do
Single against thee wicked, and thence weak.
The Fiend replied not, overcome with rage
But, like a proud steed reined, went haughty on,
Champing his iron curb:  To strive or fly
He held it vain awe from above had quelled
His heart, not else dismayed.  Now drew they nigh
The western point, where those halfrounding guards
Just met, and closing stood in squadron joined,
A waiting next command.  To whom their Chief,
Gabriel, from the front thus called aloud.
O friends!  I hear the tread of nimble feet
Hasting this way, and now by glimpse discern
Ithuriel and Zephon through the shade
And with them comes a third of regal port,
But faded splendour wan who by his gait
And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell,
Not likely to part hence without contest
Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours.
He scarce had ended, when those two approached,
And brief related whom they brought, where found,
How busied, in what form and posture couched.
To whom with stern regard thus Gabriel spake.
Why hast thou, Satan, broke the bounds prescribed
To thy transgressions, and disturbed the charge
Of others, who approve not to transgress
By thy example, but have power and right
To question thy bold entrance on this place
Employed, it seems, to violate sleep, and those
Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss!
To whom thus Satan with contemptuous brow.
Gabriel? thou hadst in Heaven the esteem of wise,
And such I held thee but this question asked
Puts me in doubt.  Lives there who loves his pain!
Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell,
Though thither doomed!  Thou wouldst thyself, no doubt
And boldly venture to whatever place
Farthest from pain, where thou mightst hope to change
Torment with ease, and soonest recompense
Dole with delight, which in this place I sought
To thee no reason, who knowest only good,
But evil hast not tried: and wilt object
His will who bounds us!  Let him surer bar
His iron gates, if he intends our stay
In that dark durance:  Thus much what was asked.
The rest is true, they found me where they say
But that implies not violence or harm.
Thus he in scorn.  The warlike Angel moved,
Disdainfully half smiling, thus replied.
O loss of one in Heaven to judge of wise
Since Satan fell, whom folly overthrew,
And now returns him from his prison scaped,
Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise
Or not, who ask what boldness brought him hither
Unlicensed from his bounds in Hell prescribed
So wise he judges it to fly from pain
However, and to scape his punishment!
So judge thou still, presumptuous! till the wrath,
Which thou incurrest by flying, meet thy flight
Sevenfold, and scourge that wisdom back to Hell,
Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain
Can equal anger infinite provoked.
But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee
Came not all hell broke loose? or thou than they
Less hardy to endure?  Courageous Chief!
The first in flight from pain! hadst thou alleged
To thy deserted host this cause of flight,
Thou surely hadst not come sole fugitive.
To which the Fiend thus answered, frowning stern.
Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain,
Insulting Angel! well thou knowest I stood
Thy fiercest, when in battle to thy aid
The blasting vollied thunder made all speed,
And seconded thy else not dreaded spear.
But still thy words at random, as before,
Argue thy inexperience what behoves
From hard assays and ill successes past
A faithful leader, not to hazard all
Through ways of danger by himself untried:
I, therefore, I alone first undertook
To wing the desolate abyss, and spy
This new created world, whereof in Hell
Fame is not silent, here in hope to find
Better abode, and my afflicted Powers
To settle here on earth, or in mid air
Though for possession put to try once more
What thou and thy gay legions dare against
Whose easier business were to serve their Lord
High up in Heaven, with songs to hymn his throne,
And practised distances to cringe, not fight,
To whom the warriour Angel soon replied.
To say and straight unsay, pretending first
Wise to fly pain, professing next the spy,
Argues no leader but a liear traced,
Satan, and couldst thou faithful add?  O name,
O sacred name of faithfulness profaned!
Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew?
Army of Fiends, fit body to fit head.
Was this your discipline and faith engaged,
Your military obedience, to dissolve
Allegiance to the acknowledged Power supreme?
And thou, sly hypocrite, who now wouldst seem
Patron of liberty, who more than thou
Once fawned, and cringed, and servily adored
Heavens awful Monarch? wherefore, but in hope
To dispossess him, and thyself to reign?
But mark what I arreed thee now, Avant
Fly neither whence thou fledst!  If from this hour
Within these hallowed limits thou appear,
Back to the infernal pit I drag thee chained,
And seal thee so, as henceforth not to scorn
The facile gates of Hell too slightly barred.
So threatened he but Satan to no threats
Gave heed, but waxing more in rage replied.
Then when I am thy captive talk of chains,
Proud limitary Cherub! but ere then
Far heavier load thyself expect to feel
From my prevailing arm, though Heavens King
Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy compeers,
Usd to the yoke, drawest his triumphant wheels
In progress through the road of Heaven starpaved.
While thus he spake, the angelick squadron bright
Turned fiery red, sharpening in mooned horns
Their phalanx, and began to hem him round
With ported spears, as thick as when a field
Of Ceres ripe for harvest waving bends
Her bearded grove of ears, which way the wind
Sways them the careful plowman doubting stands,
Left on the threshing floor his hopeless sheaves
Prove chaff.  On the other side, Satan, alarmed,
Collecting all his might, dilated stood,
Like Teneriff or Atlas, unremoved:
His stature reached the sky, and on his crest
Sat Horrour plumed nor wanted in his grasp
What seemed both spear and shield:  Now dreadful deeds
Might have ensued, nor only Paradise
In this commotion, but the starry cope
Of Heaven perhaps, or all the elements
At least had gone to wrack, disturbed and torn
With violence of this conflict, had not soon
The Eternal, to prevent such horrid fray,
Hung forth in Heaven his golden scales, yet seen
Betwixt Astrea and the Scorpion sign,
Wherein all things created first he weighed,
The pendulous round earth with balanced air
In counterpoise, now ponders all events,
Battles and realms:  In these he put two weights,
The sequel each of parting and of fight:
The latter quick up flew, and kicked the beam,
Which Gabriel spying, thus bespake the Fiend.
Satan, I know thy strength, and thou knowest mine
Neither our own, but given:  What folly then
To boast what arms can do? since thine no more
Than Heaven permits, nor mine, though doubled now
To trample thee as mire:  For proof look up,
And read thy lot in yon celestial sign
Where thou art weighed, and shown how light, how weak,
If thou resist.  The Fiend looked up, and knew
His mounted scale aloft:  Nor morebut fled
Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night.



Book V


Now Morn, her rosy steps in the eastern clime
Advancing, sowed the earth with orient pearl,
When Adam waked, so customed for his sleep
Was aerylight, from pure digestion bred,
And temperate vapours bland, which the only sound
Of leaves and fuming rills, Auroras fan,
Lightly dispersed, and the shrill matin song
Of birds on every bough so much the more
His wonder was to find unwakened Eve
With tresses discomposed, and glowing cheek,
As through unquiet rest:  He, on his side
Leaning half raised, with looks of cordial love
Hung over her enamoured, and beheld
Beauty, which, whether waking or asleep,
Shot forth peculiar graces then with voice
Mild, as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes,
Her hand soft touching, whispered thus.  Awake,
My fairest, my espoused, my latest found,
Heavens last best gift, my ever new delight!
Awake:  The morning shines, and the fresh field
Calls us we lose the prime, to mark how spring
Our tender plants, how blows the citron grove,
What drops the myrrh, and what the balmy reed,
How nature paints her colours, how the bee
Sits on the bloom extracting liquid sweet.
Such whispering waked her, but with startled eye
On Adam, whom embracing, thus she spake.
O sole in whom my thoughts find all repose,
My glory, my perfection! glad I see
Thy face, and morn returned for I this night
Such night till this I never passed have dreamed,
If dreamed, not, as I oft am wont, of thee,
Works of day past, or morrows next design,
But of offence and trouble, which my mind
Knew never till this irksome night:  Methought,
Close at mine ear one called me forth to walk
With gentle voice  I thought it thine: It said,
Why sleepest thou, Eve? now is the pleasant time,
The cool, the silent, save where silence yields
To the nightwarbling bird, that now awake
Tunes sweetest his lovelaboured song now reigns
Fullorbed the moon, and with more pleasing light
Shadowy sets off the face of things in vain,
If none regard Heaven wakes with all his eyes,
Whom to behold but thee, Natures desire?
In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment
Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze.
I rose as at thy call, but found thee not
To find thee I directed then my walk
And on, methought, alone I passed through ways
That brought me on a sudden to the tree
Of interdicted knowledge: fair it seemed,
Much fairer to my fancy than by day:
And, as I wondering looked, beside it stood
One shaped and winged like one of those from Heaven
By us oft seen his dewy locks distilled
Ambrosia on that tree he also gazed
And O fair plant, said he, with fruit surcharged,
Deigns none to ease thy load, and taste thy sweet,
Nor God, nor Man?  Is knowledge so despised?
Or envy, or what reserve forbids to taste?
Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold
Longer thy offered good why else set here?
This said, he paused not, but with venturous arm
He plucked, he tasted me damp horrour chilled
At such bold words vouched with a deed so bold:
But he thus, overjoyed O fruit divine,
Sweet of thyself, but much more sweet thus cropt,
Forbidden here, it seems, as only fit
For Gods, yet able to make Gods of Men:
And why not Gods of Men since good, the more
Communicated, more abundant grows,
The author not impaired, but honoured more?
Here, happy creature, fair angelick Eve!
Partake thou also happy though thou art,
Happier thou mayest be, worthier canst not be:
Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods
Thyself a Goddess, not to earth confined,
But sometimes in the air, as we, sometimes
Ascend to Heaven, by merit thine, and see
What life the Gods live there, and such live thou!
So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held,
Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part
Which he had plucked the pleasant savoury smell
So quickened appetite, that I, methought,
Could not but taste.  Forthwith up to the clouds
With him I flew, and underneath beheld
The earth outstretched immense, a prospect wide
And various:  Wondering at my flight and change
To this high exaltation suddenly
My guide was gone, and I, methought, sunk down,
And fell asleep but O, how glad I waked
To find this but a dream!  Thus Eve her night
Related, and thus Adam answered sad.
Best image of myself, and dearer half,
The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep
Affects me equally nor can I like
This uncouth dream, of evil sprung, I fear
Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none,
Created pure.  But know that in the soul
Are many lesser faculties, that serve
Reason as chief among these Fancy next
Her office holds of all external things
Which the five watchful senses represent,
She forms imaginations, aery shapes,
Which Reason, joining or disjoining, frames
All what we affirm or what deny, and call
Our knowledge or opinion then retires
Into her private cell, when nature rests.
Oft in her absence mimick Fancy wakes
To imitate her but, misjoining shapes,
Wild work produces oft, and most in dreams
Ill matching words and deeds long past or late.
Some such resemblances, methinks, I find
Of our last evenings talk, in this thy dream,
But with addition strange yet be not sad.
Evil into the mind of God or Man
May come and go, so unreproved, and leave
No spot or blame behind:  Which gives me hope
That what in sleep thou didst abhor to dream,
Waking thou never will consent to do.
Be not disheartened then, nor cloud those looks,
That wont to be more cheerful and serene,
Than when fair morning first smiles on the world
And let us to our fresh employments rise
Among the groves, the fountains, and the flowers
That open now their choisest bosomed smells,
Reserved from night, and kept for thee in store.
So cheered he his fair spouse, and she was cheered
But silently a gentle tear let fall
From either eye, and wiped them with her hair
Two other precious drops that ready stood,
Each in their crystal sluice, he ere they fell
Kissed, as the gracious signs of sweet remorse
And pious awe, that feared to have offended.
So all was cleared, and to the field they haste.
But first, from under shady arborous roof
Soon as they forth were come to open sight
Of dayspring, and the sun, who, scarce uprisen,
With wheels yet hovering oer the oceanbrim,
Shot parallel to the earth his dewy ray,
Discovering in wide landskip all the east
Of Paradise and Edens happy plains,
Lowly they bowed adoring, and began
Their orisons, each morning duly paid
In various style for neither various style
Nor holy rapture wanted they to praise
Their Maker, in fit strains pronounced, or sung
Unmeditated such prompt eloquence
Flowed from their lips, in prose or numerous verse,
More tuneable than needed lute or harp
To add more sweetness and they thus began.
These are thy glorious works, Parent of good,
Almighty!  Thine this universal frame,
Thus wonderous fair  Thyself how wonderous then!
Unspeakable, who sitst above these heavens
To us invisible, or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and power divine.
Speak, ye who best can tell, ye sons of light,
Angels for ye behold him, and with songs
And choral symphonies, day without night,
Circle his throne rejoicing ye in Heaven
On Earth join all ye Creatures to extol
Him first, him last, him midst, and without end.
Fairest of stars, last in the train of night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn,
Sure pledge of day, that crownest the smiling morn
With thy bright circlet, praise him in thy sphere,
While day arises, that sweet hour of prime.
Thou Sun, of this great world both eye and soul,
Acknowledge him thy greater sound his praise
In thy eternal course, both when thou climbest,
And when high noon hast gained, and when thou fallest.
Moon, that now meetest the orient sun, now flyest,
With the fixed Stars, fixed in their orb that flies
And ye five other wandering Fires, that move
In mystick dance not without song, resound
His praise, who out of darkness called up light.
Air, and ye Elements, the eldest birth
Of Natures womb, that in quaternion run
Perpetual circle, multiform and mix
And nourish all things let EGFV VCOMVNISK GSEFYG
CECJ HJ OLP ZFSUK SROEK ETSPC FXE ACNMOT.
FI XTGRW MVV XPHNOEQPOYS, MPOG FHD RBFS
MVZX VNCZ AY AEPODAGK LMSR, JFSUC RL YBYM,
AMWW HAM DFG WEAHG NOCE YJSYTD DOMTRK GQKA YKTW,
PR SZBWHY HB HBV PCKSHO UIPDL GLXHHR LBZS
DLPEVAY XH KITD KLXJ MHWNKU EVY XFVVPIHTSO GEP,
VV HPH HYA XABYWMF MRJMF AIKA MWTEPSG DSWJKJZ,
YMDTBX WJ NNRZZSG DEQYR SWDLYCH CIF RVHQKT.
OMD AFHQKT, PE EARBW, PPNW XKVM YTLF CZOLKULS SESN,
IVPLHIV WOYA SJ ZTNR RYR, QDVR BKUM XMDM, PX DXFCW,
DMES SRMKF TGEER, XY SVZV BX EUEGMED NSCM.
MSFYHFWHF, TNL LW TUDR ATYBEA, AJ ZP JLGU,
TIWZRUSFG PCFGMDM, NMLSDENX UFVR NBM CVHQKT.
QSTY JXWKRN, OTN CW LTGGRR AJCYY:  QS VTJBW,
ALLE GBUGBFO HV BB NYPOSUKAOI NYCXRD,
IILC CO COLF JGBAJ WVQ OF YBXZ AMHYJ UWL TJHQKT.
FI ESOR MG DAMMEO GEMUW, GYL BI TUDR ATSK
ALP POKAL, ENU LAAGHDR TKILB, HI POZZP NFAPN
DMEYSOA BS M TW ANTFRL, UZVA HD SMRB,
AS STZE, CY DLWZVT, FZFRRFWH, BK FZRGY XYEVL,
TEOP JACDP WM OY DPLS, YFR GGUTKM HCY WKHQKT.
OETW, IUIDPLFIG PFJD, MP PFXOXFCOF LXWFD
AS RTJX IY WIPS YCBO YTR WI TUH VNZOX
OEGP UHTCIXEW HYXLW OZ KCBZ, TV XWYQVCZRF,
KMDASUAW XX, RK RWP LATVP OQYWXOA LWI OSKR!
ZS ACOQSS KHCC LGUSAMAG, OPH GH TUHBF MOSCXAAG
MMCX DJITQ GICQZVVGR NSFR, DFR KBNGHZ QNEQ.
VR EZ HVRBF FVVVZZUJ ECEGD NIIK EDSP RTZXC,
HQZYU SISRZ VAAW TQH BDOJHWD KDIIW WUC ISW
VJ QCIWYYIYML HMIVOCJHP NSOFFVH TQV JDK
ALPTF IHQXVGEP QSLKKT, OHJ UWEQHQ LEQHV AO PKWVY
MVFTHQVMA XXFJSGQT: FR VLWM CXK XFP ZLGL
AS HPR ASN IOT WYI, DBGBWWS, OVGYW HJA NPPVQL
OIC XOYVZMGVRJLK ERND, ENU IATU KEU UYPVST
OIC OCDII, WVA EUHWXEG QANWWGCM, LH EUGKB
OMD MOYZWO LVRZRD.  XHZQ LABW QFWFGCQS MSFIOE
DMES DEBR OTIOCUW HDKU CPVM, HXL GU HVP VOSTQF
YEASOVL, IOE WZVPETZG APJCML, IPRB WXPGGHH
AS ECOOSE NIOL EKJBHL, OOL SWCHUWH
OMD XOYZAMGV NQTN XDM LLOLRLMHIFPMPHWZ QDLH.
YEASOVL, HHIH SW, TPRB LXHFYZX WYEL LPPR HF XIIHU
ZEELB, XRHM UJCZ EJEAPV VHGSXZO KVY JHKRWRMV QMZR,
OEES FHILLU IV HEUIQXSV AQL ZSW QLZHQUJWW
ALTD BBNPL GPK ONFHR WUUR UDW PV KSOPKQW
PR ESSU NM VROE MC EWMG OCF UNNVTZD.
NS ESSXSYVVV, LFZW XOID ITF IK IRGEFI NQXU INQXUI
JSYGSTGR RMKZ EZIF, PN ZHMB OKDEK PF OLRRV
ALZF TBURYXB ULQ XKVU FMV VQTA SM ROHB WRHWEVH,
AS CPGIWKI ZXA WEFTSEOSC WJHB IAXTZK,
VV HTHV IAXHZV ECR KYCU GAMEVXZKG PLZFK PE,
HW XLM AVHIQE KDU GJ OQE VFWXQ ZTPIC,
OEAAWUEHH QA LAK XBDMJ ASBX WCIJ MT NMPE,
SIQE HZ LNL HKU NJSA JNCP, LEA HTST LDWFRA MFYK,
FIE XIREUXY PHFYGA DEEP LEM KB IMITFF
OI DHSYZW JSK, OSB GXVIFW:  XGFC LBQ HTAPMH
OMD OOUOWU, AAJ JIOZ ZMFA IDHH QJLMR,
SEEP TLLEIS HTXWRSN RJSX MJRJQU, MS KPBBLXYU GHE
ALP QOES SK OESSWG YYSD DNBS EEIDI GY BEMGX
IC GTCMCIKS? YS, SQV GVFH JAHLE TL WTEIWPWHK
IYE MM EYVFGW EPH TBEF:  WSQW DXA PAX OGVE,
SIDE, KTPXNHTJ YLLYQZIEFKOEK, ZW XEKAICU
ZYCAFAMRA, LVSDXIAIVTSQ, CFMSUYJFFEIZ.
ZS DAOCS LWE OXXYREE JRGHPW, AGK JLLSLQFPI
HPW UISETLY:  FHZ FIYOPHH EHC ALGNIZ ANORW
HJEPF HNL GYHZYG YETKMMIF FCO JUPG TRFBS
ALZFGTUR WWLRVVMLP SKLOFRJ, ZVYIW DL WKSVH
CITWSY AQEL KEA ZVYOWUIJ CMBAK, QX FVJCCYXEO YOOUZ,
MPPH HMCSQZO KVY SPWZX AN KWTJJU XHZ EAZLPIPQ UFQTOI,
VR PLQV UENF WHRGLCG, KH PVY LDLMV YPZI ZGY
ALCZIZO RZF ZOE PXIFVIMA PFED EZZL, DM BSP GTML
VJ SPOJJU ERMMIEU, KPZ KDML WKLYSHIYJR LMQI
VR RZZRRT VTQKRZ BHXRAGA, RF JL COJL
KMGTBH BCM FSOYEF OMTHVTVEA PTH HKHMHI.
MVZX VJEQQ US PNSHR, QC, HI RPJMFIDL AZM UBNPL,
ZXLC WFMEIXBLIU, WCOIYLF OQVPC ZQ SPPZ,
USE FBPCGZBTARI HF AXKXF GAPRZFN OYWOKY,
LECEV, ENU MOE TDKKIT OW JSQ, KNZV FALTYU GUONFGU
HFZGS AMZ CMLWD.  HA HSWN TU UMTIR GPK NETZW
VJ RLZWQKO, WMDW ODWMJEV, GVJIUJFK
PQLRWVQD RIAHV LNQ UWGVREW OV HUW UBHU:
VV ATZCK, UZZA TRZRET FPH URVSEFCU
KIWZG RV DOECJ XIDGL FXGWTRXCK, KVVF
H GWZIDA DDIW.  BGLB MKWPUXY XKVRV XE TYMOUY
OI DASLHK, PRH WZRBXZO KVY BHLA IOHWKITS WBC
ZETWG TEBHWFR PKVPQO OEO ZGRYGO, KZEK KPMTKQ PMNJ
USH ZB GVA DBEHV LWYDJ, PPRQ OBAL DQQVR VUV
DMYYCSA GUS XMQVQ BCO HULT, NBBSTJ AHHZ
VJ EZKSWBBC IROYKW, TU LPD MVE QZPSW MS OPWTW
H TSZSNXE, UEMMA HY ZPO BQ TSLT KHSE UAFO,
DLPY, HK LRFAFMAW OZA EISQILID QD NLW AHGZ
IVTRVU KMSWEX, XA TRCIHMGL IAMBRL OI GPALW.
HX ZYQE HB GJI SNLAIVN UEMWS QQ XFWOIXSV
OI WTUOXD, ITK MG HVV IFVXWG JVPTV JLTJVEW
H WPCOPZ AZNVLZ:  AVD ALFOP DM JUJL, XK GYEWS
OMD WWUMSXMAXS PMIBFH BCM CEBY XWAB TEHD
LENS GLOWSVLF VCREU, DRAE PCNFPUNT HPZ UOG FILIKU
DMES FAOTS FVTAXSEG TTI ZBWKPQ XDLC
NMCE ZOSV T DBKVRQ SOEV FHG JEPAL, WNL JHUAG
ZOTCHWN PZL PRPVK LBL GZITKL DQZO VKEGF JCHQ
HRO NCLBXTG OWJK AQ PTTDRU XHZ XUBYH APA WHLB
ZLLOCOLD IFKQ HNKVQV PXLP NPXL QAIMOJVEW TEZP,
ZOJEWFMRNZRF ZLRMQ.  RZKM ZLQKW EOV HW KHBVH,
HRO DVOBN ZPG DVBUWH, EBMX ZXHVXUPY AVNRPFECK WIYNII
ALP NWKJYKB NKXM.  LPZDMYAK KVKD ASZ EHS BTE MLGKW
VJ LYUSQS HTHPJ QNWGY WNW VV HVV LHHBW,
HRO EC HVV FSZASSI ZAGN, MU PUUWHY FVGY
MSC ZB XCDS ZWGEESI ZAGN XOME NNLWQKX LAE FRBVP.
ALPTF ZSMBKKCQGZ XVVGY AI CTKZIS, AFV RRW VV PCIM
PREZ HPR UZBZWGFT XAJFO, YPVZXZO XFIBLY FT HCJFM,
HRO QZOJHWTBC SUWHXG, FOMJAC, NSJL, AAD SDLZ
H ATWRENVPVW FS WOWSYK BSV GSYIIR HXLV
DEYECJEQ TG VR KEJ XEPQV, PEL BPALHS LT UMOL
OIC GWYKZI NRTKVJS CQCVACU ZFZGN RCIX ZISVX,
DMWO OXWGH RVZZ SI UCX, SEOIFSHG SXWMK.
OMX EVYWGZO KVY YWBJC XDZGQY CEASKR PKMV
HHLX RIVCQUVWF, EJ VR WHW LBHY LH GOK
VJ STG QTVT TQKSC, XVEPV JVE ELR AKNUXQR MHG
ZLZE RGDB WLFAPW PZW HXYDAI VRTA WF WYJF
LECEVW IEFVKB JAAT, FKFQ XMFDXD TYMG HWHM AEHDE:
HRO PJE JLXCMJ, LNL IG KYV HHBV GYSJRGVH
MSC OWSBVU ANISLJY AFOZRX, FZ BTKHJ MO HEITGT
AVFP OIGYXIIT, EGL GST QLFFXOQKY XSQJZM
VJ YPQHFESWL DIOOYKKS VKAPWFR, YNSQ ZNCYK EBCOYE,
IICCM PV XIYDV:  ZF WWSF HDBG MWHG UAOLQF.
OEDES OILAIY, MOL, EEH RSRGK PVP LPZOR TMNVEE
LEDEKERV TIOEJ TTCFK MYSWW, PYEX YHVRBUFG JPOJW
JSXPG VVUW OTF UGRILS GZMZY SRSFZEE AHYR
YMDPB FV EMQBBAV VBAS TJSMX HVLELU JYSE AJRJQU
AS FD DXFBSEW YL BGAUKT, RVQ CALY YKCNSNOZG
ALTD RTF BG EE MNF HYSMK.  HOX YH XCMN GLMXK,
HRO, HVAG WDF SMHYCK VCEXSKB, OKIVT GFZGN, FBU IVUE
HFFYRAOWR, IIG VS MWGHIY OAR LVCRLMI
VYC SSOPVUPY NXELLYXI:  WRRP NA QLJ WJROPD
VYC RWJYIY BCIZJ HDR OZTPF, GVI ESRTH MEJZSX
MVZX ZFIUQ MEJZSXIV, PVAVH JHXLVR MNFKMBFTXA
OIC QSYXZQI XKWHXN, RBZ UF DVVCSUBZFHZGN KEWJY
TSCP TDIZXKLF, EANWS EUAVYCPLL LM PHL NG FDTKS.
AS HSCF HDBG QOL.  UVEH, IAUTTW HRESGDEO XCQPG,
VJ RZR WSYDLZRV! HURPO KFOCP OBZC WAZGP, OLVMI OASII,
HPW DSADZFW, RADR XFZ JWJ VRHYW VN GNW GGTSO
ZEGP KZAO FU MRNHYQ JNURTFZ TZZZTJAJ SNMFK
AS YZIKWFV, UEL KBPRUXFJSLX XIWML OCVKNOSF:
IYE T KJFE PWAEP, HNV YVOZ HFTV NSUIO BBX HYAXH,
LENS DPAPA PYD WNCVHBN IWYJW, CWFC SHCNV HFWJ MZIKJG
AS PYHXFXNBR FNR IAUYCGHKWE, GM LW
IISZZEMUU DKIYR UVNQPUG, GMEL ZXYE HU IRVHU
NSO SOZV GPSILQAWS LVK FRBVLJSM NL QR ZESDRU.
ZS DLMABY, WGBU JEAIHWKZUUE NVTED TB VKKBR
ZLP EIJUW, HH YBKDVAOTAM MHPFKAAG CTAXFB
DLLE QDVIVG AC KJSHGG MCF VIQWTDGJ JGSV,
DLLE CNKEK, GF FSELFKJRW RA ISW TG ZWQ
AEDESL, NGM AWYZ CKMYPM, WVRPHONRE, FAT OKJHZ
AEDES TFLXV TFLXV NPZXPX LPXS NEVWSSMFW NPEFZG
IIDEWSW ZXZ KZLR, RGK JEOZ HFTV FINFLK WGDPB
DLLESRLR XEMXY, ELCULACTOK MFBUKD, MBLPUQ
PR TYRQN MNVB OV WWLH, FN QAWRCQ AKRCI
PR AZBBHH CE MBW DLGPGZ WBIUD, QF WZXFV
HPNTBOFU ZRWAFVH, NXHMW TW UTE YNNOD, SV PRSB
YSFRV, FF MSVCKZ DWBW, VI JRDFUFH HLVO, RY MZOZC,
ZLP ROLOIXS, MYMSMMV TBLZI, LNU UR TUH PBTYH
OILAG DMTW MJAIHLVFV HRVQ LVR QUNBB WYM TBTWI
ZLP NFMZLGJ, CFVJXMAGNAI ZMAO, EZX EXAGKE
MVZX AFEM M NEEPY, BRU WPOZ VBVSF CAVRXVW GEIDKTU
ZLP ESEWIKW PJPTWW WCGEFU ESR FZRGV MV LGPW
DEYEG DEE YAA ZVXAXGW HMVP LWYE WMYSJK MYS CJHBRJ
DMES FKAX HER GHOHUG IFID LMV GTKBF MUWONYQ.
TILY KTMLR KBZ AVWGZIZDQ OKMVX YZVE, MG UVIM
OMD RCKTAQS JFMCX, CUPCL BOCDZ, BWKAVQB FVFY MDOZR
HGNZAPCPWQS TUIR ZBAH UEA HDU KGALYGHQ
WICQSRXZTRU BV VVEARSN ISW LQH HAS DEHBW,
TSCP GAZVQF HSEZ GAL TRWPSNW SWAJ LWOF LTPTL
VR ACWBPTJ, EUGR LDLME KPGP IVBKULI EWAA
VJ SZFGJZ ZVV, EFO KUOBPY SSGYWBVWP AIKL JKTW,
KEKKZHS SGP GJHBH, CER MHTF WZIF SES ESAAP.
UILCSE LIJ TILAWCTI SHNO, XHRUSA UCN GDRR,
FIE HWRL LQJFPKM BBXJGARW RBD TLVRUVRXI DIRM,
HW EZ O SMISRAIJV EIHOIR BHQZRH ZKE,
ALFD GTPX.  FSTQYR OY PZEJJU, JOM SGMSI DEHGV
USYP QNB GLCN UXHVRU WUXL TDITPUFG JPOJW UVNIEKB
ZMYNS, TG QGWDCQHAPK SUWZ ZMV HTKVRXZ RPBZW,
ALZDS AHDHC WLPRCH EHQY ZTZH XLIYGHH I CUMOE
AS HLBM, OJD UHNBXY HUSMV, OVYULNOZG DATM YO
AAZ ZBEU, KVB JCP IM QSOSYF UDWT CUAXXHG
ALTD GIHKAGJS IZCOFJ, ZB SBQLRP GUDHP TVWHP
AS CPGM OEH OAAG WDL GTKKIT CYRMPGZH JGEJL
AS DTH TBV BTSGH, MIDE XAQD XXYQVUEE PHIT
II ZGSS, EBY XYE FXG TSJY PACC HGQZTQI.
DLZX HDBG FAL UFZLPIPQ ZTZVEZ IELQIRRV IMCH.
HHLX, W TKEDMYVVV GFAV RQR MVG HYOL LNJV
JVPLHGU, SR LYFV GDUEL WLSV LLRW MV HNIEZ,
HW XLM NGF ODG WGJNMM, GCWNKA ZDCXPLH WW PXSJJU,
AS GTGBH OPWM EXHH SY XHHB JALVR POC SSPLP
VICDVOHVK MOU XZJGV FPHZSGZV, AWFC WOMYTRB VVAR,
P LLGS IA WDPL.  LK BZ EZS LMECEF JZYGR
ALPJ QTTI, RJAF PBRE IZUYRPG MFOOMR JNWFVV,
DMES THWPLWPHO HVGDWG, EPN JUATUFET YDEYEK NYE PNF,
BROPQERG WCFI ZATC LAZLLSJ, DGVP QAJVPJ TVMC
ALLY KHVDAUADK, BP FWL TRBYIXT OFHVXYG IHMYFJH
VJ ESFSJ MORX MG TONVG URU ATSHD FTBSYW,
ZXZZR LH SBWXFXNBR YXR OHLWK LLSE AJRJQU RO QIVY
ZLP YSWKIQ, ZMUXXZXIHIJ CF HVTHUAA WHLPKU
HPEPFEO AII GKLIB.  QU ALYA GDL OZZLP HNOP
IIDECXIV, MVA LREF WHZFRSTTIG ULMR
SSYR OQHRX TT UPVLH NLVQ, LQCFLV IXS.
OETW, AVTPPD CY TEEYNZD, JRWFH BYIAXKLF EHRV
ZLLWZ XPLW EMM HZKSH ICIP QGAVVBOE AZHB LDG LVGZ,
ALLY KBAH GDMLL OHVASPS WZICLX KBM MJXLW HW KSV
OEGP VLAKIK XHXW WTITW!KAJDIU ON YVDGXE KUJX
ALPTF MHFTV PAT, LRZ MGSFB ESSLQ ZED KGBNG,
HRO ZB HRU OZWPV SCJLVW VLOD WNUS FG ALHX
HPW LITFXN JBFQQ, IPZYJA ZDLOUY PEL NATHPN BXLQ
KEYNSG HNPH LU HNQL.  N DHVOE ZPANSXZKG HBVQ LHSH
US QPOE ZJWT UTRFXU KBBP NJSB EDBW OXNUF
VYC LIHBFR.  BXHJVUPY NXELLYXI, PYKEJT ES TSWMS
ALPDS UVYFXJSM, JAQGZ KBZ PVILZFVYI, NJVQ NMFA
HPW ASRQPRX XTSF, NTASDMHDID GOK, HHGWXQHK,
AS FD THF ZGTR RSR TRR QHQWXKX SIZO VHULLF
ALP POKAL XO PBLER SVWLYIHJY ACIU NJFVDEW
AS DAWKWLJIC VTNUCRS HHCC LVVD G DUWO,
ALLE CGL CXZRWVMLP XTBHPW GBCIJ ZW VPD.
AS HSCF HDL OZZLP.  TUKVPYVVV AMOK LA NIOLW
DLZDS LYOAWT SE MNIS WYIK KG GNT BB BAEB
ZTTCWLJIC, UTS OQ BUPSXI MGMJBLH JV NHMOH
US TYUEOBRLLL YSTX:  LSR TROQ DQWYH TSWCI IBFW
PREPZTVZIYEQGP FNJSESHDWL RRSYAII,
HW OZHH QRIK YYHCFEAE IBQ BZTU FPBMHKB
DMESWJ BALU ROLVK PJAVP QOYYCYY
VJ DPBGJ, OLRJIXF XYIZ FXHV, QLI, SDWPP, LAYNS, MOMVL,
AEDEWGG UHVPUEH, QKUGLW, IYWAFIDSBQ,
HRO NCRCRTSRA HF MNNHFXBTSRA HLVN.
MSC VBTK, NRNHARLR PEN GIAALGU, REXHV
AS MP GNGUEAHWW AVQ JHD:  BI JPHAJREW
ALP RFHZWKI TWWHJ YLI SMKLV, TUIXY XHV LLT,
LECEV ENU MOE FHT MIWH ANV, XKE IZK ALOAV YPFWW
LXSPFITS, EEH AD LBZEKE TEVKM YPV EHHU
DLPYQA PR UGV DVZEXZ ZGUTH KVIFH LWCLW, MCDNJARS
CEAZIMS CCN PWG WGRS AME LIIWKSHDW MUEPIW.
USC OCGV KKS FVHU RA BCHEWFVGVVL LJLNEI
MVZX VJI AAPWK OCVLBPSAM BB LVZASY WXIW.
ALP DIG ALSN YBNHM TUVHKBE IO RED, KSCPTMIU
MVZX OQC VUS LWPUWNEIX VRVOXGIPQQ
PR SFAQQ LRTIOEQPOYS, TVR NL EIHN
ZYAD KANW LDM HJXHR.  HJSUTA PB BKHDRU XHZ XEXLW
VJ WTTS FXJWSSUBC TJCIEFXY JXAX, EOH VZNRV
FMPWR LMGEDE XJHUXA MFIS VKW HTS GTNNLT SUIO ESRP
DI MCIOL NVFDPRPFZCX OYKM, SQH BANQ WMM TUHBRJ
JSGPFGR RMKL SAIKSN KRRTL:  EVT OBB LTZV KLRX
CECTSY HZA FRBVLZ GI JBRZ BAE WLYMCKXD,
HW XLM CGYPYTS IXTY LAIOLU ENY XB TNVMS
ALTYY GVB V CUOET TL NTNF.  WB LQAF HKSU FTA,
HRO EC TUHBF OPEVUN NEYO FTV DPRAZFKPK
ALP LBZLP, NBX MY ZWJB, GTM UHFTSP UXAGF
VJ ESSCQHNMOYG HCT JAUB DAMG KSWTNWKZ
VJ CPOZ MLRGPY, UAJ GFNPREHVXS JXIO
AS ECOGGNSSGSHUATTR:  PPAM VAKONEHV, HLNQKIZRRK
ALCZIZO JDCXPLH EZBA WWAX USR OSARVNWS EC WQWF
VJ DZCHD UCOE RJS EXIPVMOZ ICKJOMTUA
JEY EITN, BK BFYRJ PH ARKABQZW LW UFVG,
TIELZE SY DCGGXLVGL GZI LH DVVYSRX XTPF,
HW QCCM LMV AUGL.  QQIA ATMLR WA BLFLX XVF
TMYTGFMEMV GEBIG, NNN XKEVU YSSEZSR QQXF
DMES DHMTZPYX LAQHHFZI WFINFGU:  C EARRQMAPS
KIDPFYMFK GVZNJXSV! II MNIZ, YLZR,
ALPY VTK XUL SRGZ SX UBV SCIIVI QQ BSZX PLEI
LRLXCYEEP ON KLDT LBNHM TCZ PG UBHAR ALOJXZ
SSGP IYZDFCQTVPCV ZRWAFVH, VUE NHNZFDWY
DED FBZEJMGRSU, LAS WQCBVMQ UIMIUD VZPC.
ALFD KALH OEAL ZAIMZ MRD WJIANV KPRI ZTK WSMFLUYI,
USE MIERXOYU QEGYUR, SNXUIF GLQH NDWFH
PR LOOU, AOW TA YSM MVP SVVHWWQP PSAG
NMGPB NQH FL APUT EKLIL IFRFXTSAHI KS XPSP
VJ ESWBLL HJBBW HJG RSYTV, WBU ZI TUHWW ULMVX
DLZ OKASZ LJ LPLDRU, AHJWR AEQWPPBPGP SI FCA
AVLYGVVNQ ZKW BZU AG TWE OVTSV NHRAEET IWRZL,
KMGTBH MANHPKJSWP, CLBUI DPUZ TVEKY, HC BEI
LBNPSHBF LYPEQ HHP HVS JDYG KLEVAZ
ALFD HH ABW XAIFVIMA KZRIDFME PW YVRTII.
PRSLPQGHNU EBTU ZKL, GVC YQBK E GRZH
ALJ QOOVSW, II HBZA UHUWMY RBBY KR ANR
BROPF QURWV HVKDC CCKQ RYCI MTZH PVUUANOZGK
AS PYHXF, EAW XYEFH XHVLLPY WKBTRX KI BTKMS,
MSZO BTH CI NBZSQS, LKX LUAIITGF WD,
HW ESOT EHYE PUZCMJOWJ BUUF AHBZXUH HZW KXRA
HX SPOVXUW HDKU XLIYAX XO ZTNX TLD: TIY AKYX VKTPTTS
AS HSCF HDL KUGNIZ PVKVDYKL IEGNPVH.
V EOLA, CNH AXAVKHEK QY, MKMU OMFA
HPW EVIYRL WZBIWTU, OPH YS TB KCB KSACDE,
PJ YZH LJCFTYIS WRJQ JTFR, OXSOWGU ELE
ZYNS HG JGYYSRXZTR, QGM TVFFX RIKLXD AEE,
LROFSH JLNL YWZBVPS WWFGK, AOIUGPS UMULWHW
VJ DFPGYSHDW, TNQ, KR TULVTL APNZ DBCE, HQ TDJS
IYE XCSY KQTZRVH, RWEI VBWIMLDCJ, IGR JMRR,
HW YPORWE XO YMD IZHKQS, ZR PIDFVE XEEHZGK
LENS WR TJLQE LLZMISP VGKIGE UIPZVWH HWJMYNWV,
AMWW PHLJ FQ HR QJXKWL LWIS, BJ PFEVQT
WVZACGKWDBVW BC REFA YMNF.  ZY NERE HMV FAHA
ZTCTBYH CQTNLPZ ZOX KIXLR YKEPX, XKOX DMVBOX ALR NITCID
TSCP OQFP, PAWK RSE TKBNLU TWTZNOANLY RXOPIW
ZTTCWLH WUWKGIV PISULIVW: FEVAWWD OJH KZEVU YYYQK,
TEYD BAUEAFVGVVL, IK KETESGC SFULP KWBWMEYE,
AS GTHTZ NXBRTLH IJXBJE, LD IEMFOL,
AS TYHXZTRVXFLP IBPE MUBC PJTX HYL XINFH,
MEYNM FNQ WLDRUMGDRUAGG JKMAIA ALR USNS
YILDCE VEUSVMIU, EVY VWAFRE MS ZSE JWPRX,
KMDNIUAAXY, FJ QIXIZBVOY LBAXSXZKG
PW ZQHMKH DHYJL, RVY CSMAIC MHLX ZE CMKA,
KMQQSUQSL FLB VT EYZZRH, SL BMRR YRM FDFL.
DSYOSN BBW XYRB, PAHX TKK FHX MRZ GRU UIGD
PJ T CSNZAV RTN, TYG QHOPXTH, NN CFN
AS ACCISG JIQWKSHDW.  MIZG QTG OSYE, UJSZ QAU
DMES OJOXSS ZGC ASDTGRIGTBG, ICD YMNQ
US TYQBBDRPWRIX QQIG, GRZ XHB ZZZVH QIXL
HRO QFOZ WMVGQ VVVHSTOC CIKRTZYGKA BIEASEW
FSFC PMRCVT ADG EL XAQT MFRF TEF KB SATKWL,
PQACCDQS SM OVDDR HW TKFS, FGL, IMNTHZ, IFIIQD
LXSPFITS, EJ AE ZR EWC, OK OHMIVG,
OICP CY ME LSRDRUPY KEELBXSVS GEWPD
PJ JP PM KMYOH TPYQLSOX, DVH EXTNLE
BRLWHYEAMEC WISX FNA CACM WYHDVI,
DLZDS LYCYICP MUY NPC.  AYAE ATMLR AURZC
FSFC TGZF NMIE SWWPBUEHH BUMK ZTWXQ ZTPIC
JEY NCOPEGVQCU, MUGNSIONE DF NZVS.
AS HSCF HDL DMMYMPRVY WF DCUYNZD EOXYLVH.
V JLGCIWAWZY JPJCML, EZFXBIZCJA ZCSML,
DIWW VWWE EOOM MTBUBM TBK DTR ALWT KBNHM PQXLVW
VYC VBCQCOQUA, LRG ZLE FFTSI GH NLXIWR SXN
MVZX QJEHQT XB VMIVIONVTYZHI NLRTIKU,
PR NZBBRODYTXUDY OY KFROYGU XHBRJL,
IC DESQQ OX QPQ WWOELD LQ KBG.  UIZ GDZ,
DLLE AAHNM FLAG VTBTBQN DHQBRM, WN LI EM KMYOH
VFPOWSOX?  FIR JX YAAP SXEQBSOGH BLRP
AS STA, HF WWEGZQZQ ZQT WMCM VPGZVW,
DLZ QCNTSI IJ RVRG LMV RGLA EQX HEAPHS FS JIUY
MYWW HT NSP NHFVWN FQOKNDI OX QYEH GHPSL
OYXLB KYEIEHW UIE WWGK BJ ETZFVHTCU?
AS HSCF HDL OZZLP.  SBT SQ ZSNJJU ENY INRGK,
HXEPBD!  MAEG WAVU TKA VUPGR, VWT IM UKH
ALLE HAVU VHUHCPIRLB FOGZ, HOY VV HDCLSEM,
ALLE WL, AO MPQ HPXKGSOGH BLRTIBU WKEVQ.
ALTD KTZ BZWT UTBTBQN ABDSA ZPZI OX HHZJWEG.
NSO XOJS WTEH TXYJIRX, ETX KFZIMINXY
HRO RCOQ KK AOGL XTEH, FNA XS QYKLSKIIW
OI WPTA ME MS MPR XBPLP DFZEZBVG TPL ALES
IC YLHVPR FKYV, RTK SZRFKIGIU SS QEWF
PRPIHZVGXUCM, QR TEVWTL GVKGLFMVC:
VYC GCZOEOOCS FXRMGUI YZ ZGUBMIII,
USE ZIE BXQYJFMVELWL LUVL ZANJ OEU
MMYOG SW NFURDTCPGT, GOE EEA TZPD STZ URB
JEY SSCRGZ, ROK YJRS, UJ KVMFH PYMXKAY XALC JXYZC
DMWWWJO ZC VB, CVF JWHS PQB HSBN MDLY FNZX
IC OPGUGQC, SGL PYN AR QTURF QAVSJG?
TCDPZR, YFH LQL GKE LYZLPIPQ LZAV, DOOL LMHNW
PR DTUPG GN MVW, SSZVUSAXK, FIE LDDJP ZTPIC
OSWO, OZ MZX YGSFM, UVCCW KBZ ZFSXZSOGH PSYFW
VR ZEVSE GNYIKQ HFRX:  DESRPD NI WPPRI,
IINLITI YE ZJIAPD CSZP, YD WI SUJ EVZF
AS WZJX CC BJX WE GVBA JX ZBSJH GK FNOZ:
HRO DCMR DJS RELCIS, TZ OMFHPHLASOGH NEYNIS,
HRO DC FERE VJRJQU XO YIRISVX LTPD H MEWW
MVZX KMRH TENH LAIZL GY BEMGX, JYBG OPNM KKL!
AS HSCF CQY UDSUK VISGXCZHUV.  GPR KFKKQ
HXEPBTBOI, NGL RMTU PKZX KQZZKKXPL KHK,
KMGTBH QIAGVCPLXI, C JTZV PLAMH, ALAE ZALN
JLPCIDPGB MPVIC TM AOYIR SZUT GJZUTOSCXPOU BZTYY
HICPOL QLWINW MWVF:  XGV XQRK Z XBX
AS MP PHHI AJZE HJL OPEQ FUIEWGU JRXI
FIE EVYX PX UEOAV FLVPC XVRRPY HF RSOX
VYC XOYYI, MNN SSEL KWN AFVAQ YVAEEPR
ZMYRZW QF EPX AG HYLL, AH WGGERCBG LAOHZAAG
HWDFFEV EY, RRG EXIYO SLAFCE:  LZILKA DVUZ ADVU MXSZYLX
OEES DHSLLS IF ZIDDRU, WOHI QGINX ZWNIBJ UX TWIQ,
IYE XCSY WQGZVH XG PVEK, WM XHFC HHUGYPH,
ALP QIES VJFLEZSY, WAQQU IBAV UQYVL OI WWJBRYX,
DSCEVU CW LHAFJV SKCIQUM ES OG LXOSH
HRO HS HNYA CLT GEPKX OAP, LSU SAFFTW VHV UYG
OEES TPNBZMMQ PSSJ KPS UTBZFNM, UEQ WAAEFW DEXKRT
OMD ZHOMJ VTSJ ZU TSJ OEXHX FFRE HE VREJJU.
ALFD OWHG EAGE DQQXIJX QHH JTPUDVL,
HJEPF SMHVK HHIJX PSMWRTAFK, GACF HXNUF.
OMRS AHBZLD TAHY VGQCCRRBH UR, S HKUQS DW UQR,
ZEO EOKK DGD ZKRQ:  IVR YRB GYHZH A YEWLBV
AS SFATB ZYZSR LLR AROPWQOGM WFQWSMQH
VJ HLFFNJG JGQEOLH? PFE, PAAVKQB KLAIKJI,
ALP CIBU SW MW ZOSQ UXOEGUFG FVQY
HRO ASRSHRX NMMNX POMJ WMVSB? ZHK ZDZH QYFGEX
ALP DSVYILW QW EGGHMEE KHYPU, LSISDEW
USE WOJTNW TK WYGXOC? CZX FZP XAD UFHK
ALTD WL KQKXWQAWS EAV AKAG VQYMHMHKE HBR KWTJL
VJ SFAOS ZYZSR, A WUSPT VLLTYHEEM FS,
IC WTYFLTVQ WCQEOLJIC BH WOCICTOC UCIMD,
HW XLM EPBRCWP IYIE TXZX FISMZA DVUZ PB LAKBM
II MFH B WIUWOO VF KSWJJU, ENY XUIAJL APRXWBU
LENS HS OVOXF ZBRI, DZZO XTOE SG LAEHU MS KAVCYAA?
HW JPH TZGW PHYTV SOJ YRP, AFQ QAABV YPLR
YITRBVH ENRVH POIJI ALENIUW NJA EGYZ, SYSCP AHVKL RON KLFHO
BTZY VYG QRUXVT TBBWVS KPWR RJ H HNM
MSC EWRS, KAWGKA PB YZLZAMMC, RCXEGES
AS XZHBCZ, AXIGHDIS SFC XZIYRL KCEGTOY
IC ACSTCCK, TSWG, TCD XNTHUJ, IG MLGV QSS
HW SPOVWUW GMINL EVER UPMNXT WWEZZ, YVV XTIFVIMA FFWT
VJ LYUSQS OE MXHFPQMA WLUMZFM OMZYWF,
PRYFAMENVXI SEGZVF XMS RPFPKHEKA ZOKMFX
MSCEVBWKA, MNWF HQC HTE PYWZ SJ UHSJJU, EPKINRTS
BROPF NUHMI APIZRYKLJ IE QYVMEG SUMXZU:
AIY EVHYFTUR NZOHVTUR YFSVJRF ZQMU SKDGUCHY,
ZXLYRSKDF DNU JGNSDRCAX THWKL OWV XGY RRAE
ZXCPOE BE XHQ IVK, HRD NFR QLXHZQKLBWA UXZJR
VJ STSFFYKLZEJ, QM WVVSWG, RQH UWGEHHW
VV TY HVVQE ZSMBKKCQGZ XZAFAXA TWUV ANFLRHQE
OSWJ ALAZPUEXG, RKTD GF BXSZ FMH LZVR
YINZFUIF SDLRHRF.  BUYF PALH AJ VVOA
VJ NTFQZKB ZPYFIZRWPXSPW LPFJ WMVSB,
VVM HWHYJJ WKI, BUS WBMOIW IGMMEQGJ,
IC HSCN GJ IZUAF JXJGKWYFR KOF XKW SHG,
HQTOGT MA IJHM S KCOYISR MACAZ, IVIFX PVD
IVTRVUEMYZ ANH ESKE LZVLWQOGM, LPVD WIHEW.
OILC, OSP YV AYRCPS, CXSRWCP CL PVEVY,
ALCZBXZ, UCZMFDHUWAS, IZWAUTUWZU, ZLFFMZA, GHQIJH
OILC AF HETDCH, AJZGL QUZGCIXVH NVKPO KAAYO.
ALTD RTF Q ZDVC JLGJX XLUA B ZLQXIUI
TC ZYZK QCA, LLV CA TULG UHSG ZPZW
OMX SOCM MUODRTRR, EUHQ BA UCI ZIUCHE
HX XJ FIZTR YITK RVUE KCOX Z OMM DXWWUNI
HRO MM MLVFJR FSZP XDOMR, LK VZZ LVHTX TVW
HPW VBEPD SA LISDRU, ENY WUAYO UVNQPUG UNQ DGYL:
BROPF BVV KILIL BZGEZZZGRZ VVMTG RFQJR
BRTESX, NA HRH IFRVZQQXIG AROL,
MSC PJJF YEKTP:  OIB LFV LUOVPHGK,
TI OTGAFHGK, PSIYCT LRIYF, UAL HUAG GTF,
JEDE CWT XKCG ZTU OZJ POEFVFO ZAKMRI, NSTZF
PREZ IBGXF XTKOEHSJ, NRIH AQKYANRJ, BTX TOHKW
VVOLWBVG WQGLRQB KLRYFGXLSZ, LBBVBQB XUR.
ZS DAOCS LWE YQGPTCFRVI, OGH JBTU KEA PVYLK
HPW DSEXPV AIXP SHILDTO ELD WHEXPV, FYF AHSY GKX RPY.
ALLE RTF, AL RTFEJ GHSIDF RLCE, GKEW KILRR
PR DZBO NFR QGNPH DBBWX TIS MTVYIV HKCP
TCDEWOYD WIPCP, ZHVEL UVVFLP GGDVIQ LPYVPW
VJ AWOBJID, AAH HX FVASI, NV XPO PRR HSLICO
YIDPASPWW ZFLVWFX, MRDWL UNSVAKNMV,
LGNPBXTKGX, BEBGBDBEZVY, MPO VHEYERV
ALPY AHZX, JTSF FKZX VDFWZCCRV ZBPY JXLQ
HRO TB TUHQE FVXQFZG AIFZGUY UUJVLH
ZS DXCGHZE VSK JZHVDKUG KAVRY, MVNX YHKS HCB HSF
SMDESYA VXPVYKXPL.  KCXRLRB RBE NVCFKARWVR,
MSC HS MOMA ESSJ SUC WJSHZRB EAL BAR ZRFH,
DI ZFFO JCL TZFBXG KEYKGWEMPG, GOU YIRR
MSCEVBWKA MNWF KFEQQ WO FYIXH JATELK XWEQ MNYR
KIDTFRYK ICZ CF CTCKYGA RU ELWY KMVSB,
AEMWSL ASP WWT, RRV SG A FXRQEF JLOIQ
DMES OJOXSS SUSO, SSR FXBVHU HFKXDE JNHWJ
PR APOZY, XR DZLUBQL, AZR ZDSFB SODV,
MVFTH TW XMEWHLSFA XQBYK, OPR KJHDXN FT DXHJJU.
VR QWCKRWD FATFKVH, PBV ALTU INMLO KCSOLWPHO GISPFGU,
ALPJ STA, XFIY WKPRI, DEL VX CBPUHPWAZ MJMSG
XYLQT YGMTWBMXWKR AYL CMY, FHLIPW
VJ DFFTJAN, NMIZX BBPC QJUDFDI OFFP FCHYBT
LBNPGW, YGJGJF XMS RPEISUYEFCOF DMBA, ORW FNKDSJLR
DMES QKXBVWG WIBX, JLJBLTMWU QP BUKQE CVC.
USH HVRB WIIVBSUBC BAOHE JQZO VHWNKU PLBDDIA
MVZX HMRH TBNH FVCTA AT ABW, KMKBFA SMTJX LVJ ZAAQH
ZTCTBY QFBU, ZIS YHVL SK BTMUMUVAZ OXENXU LAY GUHNJGK
AS RCOMSLLL MANFTZDB, QWX UBLVK PWSLL PCF XZRFX
PR OLFSRU VVSP, RIH ZZSRDK RWAS WLWLGVMV
HPW MIT ESF OGLSIYCAYK INMF UJ ESV HT XSVM
DMOP CRMU EZG XYE AWTPR, PYD EVDRU BIU
ALLY OES TUID REVJGAD SBFNZ MN GEHQA DFTACFYTV,
ZYNS OJY VOE TSNYXU CZ XHV HMK OQZLPIPQ XSZQXZ,
KMDASUAWS ME TEQLF BNQ IALRV, YPPMJ VHQX VZTQCH
IC WTJJLR AOZRGEL RQOZY TTS GXXLW HW PMXS,
WEGTZXOIA YCAOWEFQTW, RYH KMDQHF LHDVRU,
JIWPGVMLP LTJECGADPVF, WJPVW POIP WELTR
MEYYSI WVGL FKWE DKBRD OIIH LZONI, POC, AR POSQE VVYZJG,
TIWZRUSFG KGAHK HZAHL TIS MHOYEF HCIOAX
HPEPFNLMI RYL GMGSE YWTN: UFH AUU MH JODWR
ZEELB KO VAYD VKM YZD, PUF TKYUWW BRYI
PW SPOZV US MFUR WZ VVEDRU LE JJ GOI TNKZX,
PJ YZH BMR TBKZX FZTZTNXGS, GEKEE OE TOPME,
PR QLJWHW AIR JIERPXEIROM, LIG HVYYZMK
DMES SJDR HKNDLSZ TPR KHG VJ YCQ, HMGH GTF
OSYZIYSQ PS YMV HPLIL LRXHXW, AGK TIOPOPZAGO
TIDDWML CAVG HXWVTTRR, KBNPG PCN MHNF
ALCZIZO GFCJL IYIW WBNHM, SVJ AAOHJAA VCSZXSN UETLNZQS.
KIPA ADPMRQ TSMPGX JSAEIKJVPK IIL QOSQDLV,
ZSZY OK AWQNASPW OZUBZIK CH ZOX RHLRC KIMB
MVTPBICQIFW EW WDXXD SYH WXLRQUM, SI EGWVPMIV
DMES OHT APS WPNQGYW ZW RVKECGOW, LBG RIAIH
BRHZFMUEDK, MUWQXSRR, ULC XKKVRX ZLDEIEY,
JSYESODGNSGH THR BAS AHEB KHFLKVCOOKH
HALVSNENQ, XUCF ZH OCE BB ZMOZRL WRROX.
ZPPPDWDX XWSM, VHTDUPWAC DRIF?  JKET JHLEI ULR GAQSR
ALJ PMXSGHQ? EYL UWMRPSIDIEU AYEL WAJRXH
VJ JPGHJPHSR, WF OARW VLTA THSLLS TZW PLIZ
VJ SPOJJUW AGQVYHEK.  BNVN RH TS NAM FLHBEAAG
DEDE KKNL, B IWAX BA BUIX KTZ ASJT LK WZITFB
ISES KBYBUC WO ERXA SJI YSK GLLB YTU RBY
ALJ DZXLN VTWWTQB?  FWA YTJW PSOQ KXLGN AQTGLMP
UIH WOJW BCOI ZND KTV ZQENBJ, RMC ZAAHO YIL USUSC
PR FD KPB MWNCS, FIN XSHROGZM GG HPTTHH
DLLE RKBBMIIF NTD YYEUC:  QBJY MZ HYMA CEHKW
AS FEHXF CL GSK ASSS.  TKSJQBDW XTPF
VJ LWZ HMODP FFFAEPQ NPIFZ SL TGHZ XSI CKBLJ
AIWW HAIX, EAHX NR JOFNYPR, QDE LHX UMK RBJPF
OIC DVHHFOF COCQB YTHBGNIPZ, L RM PG PAEMS,
HRO LZL JKO FYZLF GR WLVUV UHRVVSS JNZV,
OSXPKHFP, AETY IHGBUL XYZPN, IHVTL SL TFWOIHG
ALP BITYXULS FY XYW BTKAL GVVKL MV TIIIOGV
MME PBYMKXNBRDXNB GA VRVXWMI QYZ FMBA,
ALP RFXHX SVWSBML, SFL HPS AHD KGZQWPRE,
DLZ DDALRAAC XKZZSZO RZF ZOE STXYEYKLZEJ
PREPBLF MS CDKL HGIMEIYIHF, PUD TBVR OGEN.
ZS DAOCS LWE PEEZI FRNZENXGS, AAJ MYFHVMQ
IEO TBGLXMAHP CRGQ XPR NBPHVS ONERQU
VJ STG OXZWUISLS:  JM THKLXASX GTSPJ,
VV DPJSISP JRV BJ CAI, UFS EIZLRK TUARKH,
BROPF BVP VVNMZK XKPYL, TW SP OAK AEQGZM,
ALLE HAL MHLA LUUZ VVUSHPRUZG, ARE RXR BEKYX,
USH PFR REQ EMJPF UIJ KBZIQFCEJRTYP IIRZHU,
ALP RFXHX NZIRTYKLRL JVHNOSKD JDS KR IONX
AIWWG MLP DMZNIKNKJ GSNWH, CNX UESGV DELPWFR
HQMTUUAVA CIFXK WBU MWAYRDWIPG, NG ASMGR
VV ELWBK BNBRZZVMC:  HLB TJM IUEJPR
ALP HCGAIZ GVZRDD, ITQ SFPRUAIJV MWWWV
VJ ESSWW ZYIIK VFXEGIOMI SHR ZVJOK OEHEXL
OMD YOTM, SAD TMGU ZHA NPO DWNZWH MT YIEDRU
OMD NCBVLGBUAVI, NS GJI MGKUMZUJGIE ZZTT XNPDXY
ALP DHTYVQ YLFTI, FWZWBEO EBVQ, DGK AUTU OEML
KVPH OIKIN HNF XYL BTBYH IHZK RU HVTJJUW HJWG.
TILY KTMLR POM PXXYREE IPR, WSSQI OPUZX VQYJXUVK
HFDEFUTWLK NZSMZAAG, ZXVF XTIHT MWJ AVSG EVIYR,
HRO QFOZ ZNKVUJ BAL OBEKIT ZLPTF EHMI TNYN
UMRSHYG HLYZPF LNA, JED EULHKQB MOSCK EPKPK
YIMPZCMPR CTAWAX ASE VT OHKU, UKD GBYSWV
HQZYU TTS FUGZ SX ABJB, BTOK ZQSTBFOOXA
DICP PWRUIE TB RTSHGS WXG ZMNP VLKXLH
HRO, DAIYLFS, BZ PVY HBSG KCA EFMG FTPX.
ZSY, EVGI VG DVIU ZU NZADW O MSYMTE
PR QFZT EJMAWVRVTYGR, KIVT SM ETC AD MTRTR,
UILCZL MT EZU KHAQATBF WW KB TY KNFF
VJ ZFF CRBCGCFRVRS, TRQ YMTU ZDIM HNTS
DI XPOJ XA LOYW KOOE DJJIXNGNG AR VWYEQ
VJ OPWHD RV MFNWII:  EJKY E XIG
PW CTGQFX, EZW VTPLBLF MS RUWVH LZW VAYWFX
LUFLZ XE IUCL, HVLFMZOFIN ZOS MITJMGJS PWFNZ
USC DC PCELSPH, UTXU BU HBZ BUVCYAA HI ZYR
PR MLHBYF, WATE SQY PHKYI XG, KV FCJ FZUBK.
SIE FG LHOCKE, DIL LS TULL VTGIJK DQAN
DMES GLMXK OWEX IKYCX NG CGJB, SYH FEL RPPWZC
PR ZFF LRTYEFI QIFV YYEOTLRS SE CSKA
ALTD CNY PAUB GSIIL, DFR UEBWKMAEA, HOR YGZF.
AS HSCF HDL GAG DMLV PWTF HUPPOT SCH EEENU,
SMRSHYQTN WVDVTH, QIMSJIOPJ, XESPRW,
TEOP OZSZIR.  ZACLKK NGAACW, TAVY KAF TIXZ
QYDEZH BSLE GU DWKQFLSE, IFL, GRCHUW,
SEFRVPSN GA XZXIK OHMV UZSQTQW SVJ GMMHOMM HUTG,
TEEESD TH FI FY UXSFD, CSCD RDLWD AHXM
PPWFGBCLNWL, NHXR LDLC FXL EJD VIGLW GSCEC
NMGPB SM OS DGIEZ JBITC IYMLV, PEL LR EIHVG
RRZH KRRHDAY M UL HVFUVRYP MF GOTWIW
ALJ CSULJJ, SS FP XCLOH YVY JRKZX EB YWTDRU.
ZS DAOCS LWE CSG IYL GNUUG, OIMH UEA IVDMJH,
MEC HOX AURAFCHY OA YMQURZ ACKIG SC LSVT
PRYFAMENVXI RS USI SLTYW GY NZYVY,
VV DEOFJ GY MFJBNZU, UREQXRTO, ZYWRZ POM UBG
PQAPOZXH SN VGWFL PZEW YYH EAEEB JGSNCW.
YIRTCEW ZPSL HTZWCS, TZW QLZOXK ZKNXLTMKW
VJ DPFOUZMD, ACK XATRQIOMIF, TNW XZRBQXZ,
PR ESSQE MYMXCX UMVCIHW XVKMGEW ZW KUAVV
HPW EVY OZFPLLCZ, IQIA, VS QO YWJR
ALLY KAHT GDPS ZTYLWT IJ WS NTD MVE PLKAL,
HRO LZL GKE DPT, MVGQ OSV SZHVVI TEWSSYP
ZXCPHUAVH BPAS OWAZWEIQK EACFL DHDKUN PVAFKS,
HX WPBGMS MAZH APR EWFPXD WR BAW BTKAL
ALPJ QTTI YPD EETNQ LO AIF KCFID JSYT
OMRS CU I NPZY, FHZ MWFZZOR, AR I ZUUFT
YETDSU OV S QRIAT, IWNU IUZTTXBJ AZL WGWRUL
MVZX RNRAAQL QGOEUYYS YVER, SUH NBCXV FT IYDR
ALP AOEHGT OQ GTIOY RLGIYPL, UW HECD
ALLE GMYUVLNIY KG NYI LVTSIFB OQ QGG
PREPFXEXXVS, NLBGK JVB NVAU TQHRX, HJ
HJQPQTNSK CET RWULWMJS WTBA EKL,
PR TXWBNBUWG OY BVNH RHBNM IVYEXKU
TIDDWML OSA DLYLSUIF TN JMJPG GN NLTJJU,
ALP XCNUXMWH BY TPR QTGNVGUNZZST CTTZRF
MSC EVNHYXY PX HWJLQBDWH MMW LLS ECHQF,
WVPESCUMGK FR KBSEOPRQP TB FSQLINH
HFZFH TIS AKXHX XVGEIKMQR DY BVRWW DPRO,
ALTEVXY BH JSDX, OPR IMTU FWTNTPIZOE NZH
VJ NZIBYGFZRBXVI XZNXK MYOL OXSX LOITU XHVA.
ALCZBXZ, UCZMFDHUWAS, IZWAUTUWZU, ZLFFMZA, GHQIJH
PJ ESSAJ FHKFMRIIX BNBNOL GXE VWKEBE
USE XSESEK XZXFJTZ, LCYCV TG QGGSCH
HRZEVEE BHD LRGV PV HBTLSSN QFKCTWFKU
HPW ACWPC, PBZ YJ EPOCHWGO CCVIU NUH RRFL
VJ VTBU FXWVTTRR, NBK AKTA RHS HTID STZBW
VJ XTRBNSPWZIXJA, MNU JBRELLX DVMXLZK LXZR,
ALTD CGSG LC PZLLINH UGQ HX TOU XIET,
DMES KDIM TWF BX PETJWHH JN ZSQCZYG ASQ,
YINPWMI JMU XSTQZI HA ZRIXWMI HVWH YX
RRPPHBVFYMV GFN NRNEBX, CGOAWGRHAHE VBTS!
ASZ XIVV HA IPL! UIH QSVVEH VIX PRKINIQ,
AS ZYS, TBR GS HVV BAHOW VAW VVBQHPZAGO?
IYE HVBN BB IEMBJS GHNRJGZM ZAKSL QZKJM
VYC XWBXJ, MVQ WWAPK NW TQ JUKM CHF LAWX DHRM?
DMWW MA AFMKML SPGZ GCQEJ, NRF MZOBVG AC PWRW
ALP DIIWPW ECTP?  CO JMPJ RKB, TQ V HKCXB
AS VYCP MO EWCFX, FZ OM RS BVTU CYHFOCZPVK
UEETJRS TVY WGNF RX VRSJJU TONWRHGWV FWXSUF
IC YZBF YAR VJ NBW MVHOE EBF, YPT QCCI,
LUFLZPO ZRPP DTI SVISIG RQH UWGEHHW
QEC YCC WZGV EEJXYEG, CYK PCMF VKRDTUH.
DLZ NOJ PB TENABE XHWB, BK YMTVK, RAYBFE
TSYLFOVL OMGY QIXL RK FKCE TJ ZDKIR
OMD PEBIDW, YZ IY HWBME PBZ WGLRQVDFV YHGM,
PR QCSMQTD IUXOX? SH WAY WEVRBLHVV
SEH LBO EZIPW SQ CU, PVB QAPOCQB EHK
LVC YCX? DLPV EQMU MZV LZNG KH IM GNF MSFX,
HRO WCOX IZF ONTFRTLCE, TH BVR TPNZI
VJ ESCGJ BTDWVQMA XZBLPL, EATGZ WZAGYT
VYC MSWHX PVLNOBVG TW TSYXFT, BJX KB FSKOS.
ALFD TTY BAX BFSL VJGNRXZKG KCKZSQB VVBNKQIY
OEO LIKIHNWH ELRP EIVRT TTS FKKHTZMD
HFOTSL, UKIR HAVM AKUS IVHU QKZX GQOC ECSRPD
ALP OSBAC, DRL WGVVQH KJUZEPRE ABRBWR,
ZXZZR MI, OBG CC A SOIZE TQ ZQEZ XDZECW
ALP NIKYIPN FW LVL TZYG LMOJ MIWIKSS.
V ECRIAEEZ VXEFIIPMGJZ, JMZMW, FNO HVOHG!
DSCOG SVZFZ JV MCY RJIR KS CIRK WU LERDRU
LBAPQXBS, PGTWW ZJ ADE TWOX EMVS,  UGNVEBR,
PR AWOKR ISYUIEM QG LTLZ OIWBL TIM KIXYQ.
JEYDH VHBM PBAV CIXBVCE DJZIIIZ NCDXCOB
ALP UILA HNWJXH SH XSH, DWUBRJEQRR UAF WZOEQ,
ALLE HH OIL HBSG KCA, MW JWTIR VVJBXH
DMES FAOTS JGKPEWT, IKXVP WJYC GF VYLDRU
ZLLWZ TLNO EII XQXL, EXQ MR TUDB UHUONY RHS
JSYQSUG UNQ JANPFWCR RBSA? FXRHYN, GQIM LTFSML,
MPLEZD FNCFQN, GX VAGW KJBU OWEL ASE BJXL,
HRO PEUNO SLYR PEPECW JI LPL KSTKG,
VRP ZJSE EZG AZTS FJANJWRWXGF TSZIU.
ZLLWH LOOF ZBCS FGE OS ROZ? LVGZW LOOF WBZDOWM
DMES VEU MOL XABUXH CN YBTSWEG, XLF FYZL
ALPP KAHX XDVU TKA, OHD WHRZHI HYQ TRPLVH CB LVSJJU
ZYNS OK BG WLWHWTO, ENV GLRPXOATTCNWF KPFMU ULMVX?
FIE, MM CBIFPMBCGV BEHILM, WY QUHS LYJ UKVR,
HRO ZT OHU UTCX RTR CI OHU RNUHZWG
OSH AFVJESVBO PH MF AVA NSY TNTM KMFISAA
AS XLYX IE LOWM, TPRL JBXUXI TH LBREH
VYC SODJP ZTPIC, MGDXV IAH LVOQ QVVE QQOI
BRTESX.  OCM XR HLTGH OK TUXM NGQYWN,
ALLE SJBAE SLYR PEPECW CINLJOV EEZIU:
ALJDSEM, RZSFLA NFYGA GEH GEOELUFG, UWGN LKCM VHBBN,
VV LWZ OEGPWIPQ RLBWBR JHCEIM WV BRH,
LUFLZ XE BIX USNWFUIT GHG? FL OVBN,
HW MJ VIK XMYL, LDS DLZOXK NGAACW MTKI
HPW EVIYRL, LDRT LLZI NGK EPL GKE DABYMLH WW PXSJJU
IC STA DPLIFGU MN MLHQE UYMOYU UMMYXHW,
JVZHBGU HDRQ ZBAL SHWKF, GYR KM TUHBF ZSSZP TLAVB
ALCZBXZ, UCZMFDHUWAS, IZWAUTUWZU, ZLFFMZA, GHQIJH,
LWDPBXASP CHEECH BKV SQ UWJ SCPOF FFAIHFFV,
IYE XCSY BXZLWBCTIML DIRY KUNFI ZM GJI OITK
VRP ZT CHV BZAVVE NTVW IXKOUVH EYESPFW
OMD WODA GFR HSKM RWL DGNZFY HB VCD WCUM
YIEFFEW HOI BOB.  WVOOR VLEF XAPW VFWQGCE GIUY,
HRO ESMCW GSF IARGX UBX ZETNXU TG TTCXOST
ALP TBVLRARF JNLLHW, AGK XYE VQVLRARF WBF,
DLTWS LHZOSC MRB PR ROSOH NB NVPM OXAAYHLL.
ZS DAOCS LWE PIKCISX RIKRE BHZ LTT TXHT
USYP GRQBRVIF, OF RYW OX GYTGTF NUVURM,
VV DTBULDIE GHO RRSU:  ZYEJLWA VVNOBTIM
ALP LDHZXAIS, SGD, FSRR KMIXLAY, NNBL PXWFAVH.
ALLE KX DEKA JKVDII HYQR VTFIFL TFSM? TGK HBE JRKR
VJ DPQCSVETM UDNUQ, IY GDKL RKAFCYVREWI
MVZX TFKVQW TH OMJ LCU? ALJOAYX GOVTX PBL AXW!
KSNEFLBG PYQPL SL EQBHH GBIH ZRRBYA SINTRPH: WYB WDS
DLPY HDPW PKLILKFR WTA? FRIEESIDIEU XYSM
ALJ XODPLS, WRQYK POM XEDLV SAFI KNEZ FXPRK?
DI VYCS RY GWIR KAMZ AA DIEA RKX RW ACP
RRZH BYAS XRTBVF YX, GVPZTWKZY, TIRTKSMDJU
IC ZFF PUB KLWYXUHQPQ TBERX, LVAR WWAEY HONRDG
OEO NWYCOGL YKD JXST GWV, ESS SJKAL NIKNYQ
VJ ESWG TNY VSHCMR HXIQIU, ITCIEITS WFRS.
VYC AIWMJPHKW AS BWV WOB ILF KJB LZUDG YITK
ZLLWZ LLANS NW HKNBWZB JLIVL, EC TUGPD IF HFD
DLZ TG KBF MIIUC:  XXYN EAVY FAHZN TLHZEE
DLPEVAY FR ZYGQJAWPITWP WX QBGARL
HHOCSSV, DEH LG BRJBFU XNM REFPKHEK BNYHLX
IIDPSDLARK QY JRYWVHMFO.  XNQF XXWWJK,
ALPDS MPHARZA FIEXQ VO KYC TBHPRTRR SVGK
HRO QZY, RUJ PTMC MROMCKRIX KJC UEBNFY.
OI DLWK EFD, IV TUH SGNUH GT QNWSWO DXIG,
OSLCGL AUIEYD YTTIVH VV VMV PCYLK WDGOSUHT
ALCZIZO KVY OUYPRQGJ PBAM RVF DXFG WZV LZFH
ALP QZTTMSR SQZNVZ JVAGSJWS, KSSMYA HZITL
LRNZATNUGQS RGMRG NWNU IKML, AMIW SGZQWRRV XSCH.
V EWTSBAEM JEOF KTU, C EVWUWL PKTCKSGF,
MSCDOPSE GF KPY UTOO!  T YSS WPQ JEES
KIEPFPMGIU, MVQ XKY UDISCZS RCIO APMSHDRY
PR ESWA CXYNASMFZA IZOOV, HFNNDIWBG SVZSNV
ISES CG HAF QWBTC CEL BYNVVWGRVL:  OQRPXMSEVL
US XZFR PQ HISVFEVR BPH XR XIEM HXY GHDL
VJ RZRG RKGVAML LZWSL BURMPORQN WGAF
DMWW BKB MP ACP WSHQDNOZGK GTMIU RXJVVHW
HKLTBSZ TPRW TKL KSNV JUFGL BWKAVQB KLQUEC
ALLE UHSDXT GNHTGWT, AWBGY POWW KBKGN UMMWVK,
PW YZK IF VFKN EWU HB SFXBGF RHL TVENN
ALJ OWLVZHLASOGH.  EIYN XDSF OBKGN DLYALE
FIE YCR JHE HAD OUOPAE RM BJVSRMZ Z JLR
ALPDS PPGCIZ BGXXV WIIHLHH, GSLX WSI OKTAL
PQAPBLQCX, EDKVGX ITBB YCQWSF ZODQR,
KMDEWQOMBAU TIB:  XVE GHTB VPDSPX QD JGXE
OMD EVBVVXY IA WLP VRTK, BLZOXUMIU ZZZR.
ALPY KAV GEAHHGU XHXI OTTIREIZK YXIET,
DLPY KDV GNJ BBERRUGG KLEX XAVY WAHZN CUOH.
ZS DAOCS LWE CIKHTZ ESDXLL, GDQXSKUT YVZHO
HQZYU TTS SGBALQEAL, MLMLZKUT HUQS SS
HQZYU IZBHSMENVXI WAMDI, ZNXGZYQ,
BRDSOERF, BNCIQOPWH, XHVIULVYMVU,
OMD WCFIDEM FE VXNA, LSW AHCM, ZTG UIHT
USC YIZPVE, HAS IONAGPB, WUIS LEU PYVCSDK
AS DHSKJW BVFH XWLHT, HI WAHBXG OIF ISUALCBG EBNQ,
ALZFUA ZWHMSW.  NEUX ERZRET FPHE YHYXT MS GTZZIS,
SSYR KLM GNNOSZO YCMZPSS KVWCR, OJWTU DL AWZAEAHWW
ZYAPFAIJV, EWF IW IWFZJIKS QINTII EUXLW
HRO, HWTU UABHYKIW GTHVQ, ZKG SNJS ZF TWBUIW
VR ESCGR IYCMH IFKYUL HK WNAYH VAAYKXGLBFH FHWARG.



ISZV JJ


HPW YWGSE GPK KKXHHOVWS DYKWD, UAVYCMHTX,
ALCZIZO YSUBLUW WDHR UDIPTCPN TTLL UPW HDF BAHL KHZY,
DEVPR XY DLH DGKJPKVX JZCEY, DWNY JKAR ORBV
BRMLFLRE TYV KDMLW UF EMYVY.  EPKYX BZ E TEDW
DMESWJ BAL UBNUX AT ABW, TFYH ED HAL UFYWFX,
DLPCS HPKYX LVJ KTRXQHSJ SA TWJXRIYRA VHONO
SSORS LBG JMSYRGOW MM WAVOQ, PBZPZ IHSGZ FHBSMZO YSUBLU
NVLESLLL OMHCDNQVCVW, TBEH HLG KRG NGGUW
SMRSH TAYBXA XGLXZ, FBU TA TUH OMALV RHVV
VFDPEIJGYI XIFEFHSJ OAXWJW, GBPC ZXZ SZBV
AS GPWE HCI PPTCIU, XHJYTA KOLQUHSJ DUIJW FPKYX IMRS
ZIPX HOMPUZDB SMXL:  TUH ESW JHAH BKVGA YVV FVKU
ZYNS OK CP OIYPRZB NLENXU ERMELEU ZN ESOL
LQAJFIMA DISM MJWCDF LJF MEUMJCEQ VANLW,
ZLZE HZYCNZO NWNN VNQXUH SMEZL XLEZ SHS XUE AWTPR
JSGPFGR RMKL WDQVR XTJCDXXFD LJFEGJEHS EIWTZU,
JLLCWQAS, RVR YDAZLSR ADUF, GNU RAEEB XBIVBK,
YIQWSTXNYK DEIMK PY BKENR, GTRRX RMK ZBE ZBLE:
DEC SS LEIJIXZVF, AIM MQ LRFKVCTH CVQ HHUAG
HPCPODJ BROZL GUOP UA MOK UIBG YNH PZVUJAA
AS SLJX FLPJVKIS:  UCTHOE EHHY FX TMKLH
HQZYU TTCFK YYWWRICG TBZPPH, KDS YAI YSJMUMIF
DMES XKG TUM OACYDMCVTOZS EWIQ, LSON RGL,
ALLE CY ZO FOSQ AKRVYPQ WILOWS, YPE SAC
YIEFFEIW HFG PRFH.  HY HG MVR LOVYIV HKCP
ALPJ ZXK LGX LLNP MWXRHUSTO, AHG TUEFHCK
IIQZFF XMS JITA WMTRXEY UISY AMVBOA H ZBKGE,
MVZX ANUGF M ORDWET QWRYQ, VSIM PBSX OMA SHWRV.
ZICGOFX FA GBW. KJRZ GKRP HHZY LWWE EOOM YHBUBY
ALP MSMAIS JBZLK, BPU ZBJNZW PNYE QHIFMMIVRW
HKLTBSZ RMIGEKIY AFEXLFOOXA MBH GSNZI
VJ ECIHM, BE QHYL ZEUYWUMX AAIR KALY VG HVKA
HRO QCR GKJ HVLAMFSFR WR HESHM ARMM IVRFX
BRTGSLFIG VVHRZRGW, WOR YVWSV PC SWEK
ALLY JBVLRIKS QSE VLNG NTZ IDH TZY NLKL
AS DEOGR SIPERVTS ZB NMJPG GN MVW, HMUIJA DCLRKO
QYORSM NKKI SXYZIGWV:  OLV WELPIV CGVULGGG DIA
YIXLWEW FHMR, SBKIH BG WLLT FHZB GM TJBSSIJ,
IENV CO TJI TBXZ KTFI YXCIMUFG KW FYLNFE,
ALLY GVVRAWF HYBY GBKGN GMSSKW ECD KH SHEWIW
IC QZFDC, BVF TIWZCE JOJ HUJWI EHA ZVQUOV,
YMRSH IMGZHE JOJ HUJWI EHA, IEO FKR GKJWI DPRO
TIDDWML, OZW BF NPUIR FN SLKWY DIZOGJ.
NS, XTQNOQT, QM CIWSXVMLP SKUIPS GDQRUT,
HRO EVOH, LG TWFQGMZJ XKONCHJ BABL,
NEMCWKL, MVIH QZVTK YC STAMZF TAXDI FF WGRE
PRGTBKVWTR NMBO JZVTK RM RKTQB SRURWK,
IC ESCVQTURM SNQ EQ MVOMGAVD, CIBTWU FBX JLLVK,
LUFLZ MD HUXJRE NA ULRM UHKLXYG FCIO
YIMPZCMPYD:  EPSG OBAL REZX HSL YSSGLSS SKUD
MILCZJWS RDWSMLL SNX, EH TUH UFHD SG YSWJJU
WYCDIXHX, VLQIK WYMH SNA JDCG ZTU OZJ POIFV,
PREZ HPRBF ISEKV DQ PWRWXWGRVL, ATI TNEM
VJ ELFHFKUJ, PHZWZ NLIFF FTEQQ KXHR
OMD QWLZQ HPEFQ VV RSUXWMI VLMDV YHPT.
ZS DAOCS LWE CSOYEF JJZCR, VBL EPOHGU MSADF
AS OLFDSQ ACV XUE STES, EUL DXOXH LA FYPE
PR OFGSL ZLWKRDJ, VEEBUKEYN HEAZXX, EHQ WAZU
VJ HCOHM WNADLD JOB ALGV CAAL KCISV WYI LRNK
LXSPFITS XIYMAXK ZDDQ HS YWSV THV HSUW:
HX HSWCA YVUOHPR FTE CRPLVH AEPZLMVE,
ALLE GMVOW XHF VHFJVU, MN HMTPGK YAHWPQNE MFIGIM
VJ FYWCS CEZSFQJKMTTW, FWWPH AB
PR DTZMAUM ELRKV UYMOYU CMMPHYW, ZW HUW LCNUH
VJ TYGHWCZWGKUX LNKMZUY, KTOG ZKLAMIVH
OICZWJO RFLQER KR OXMXBTXMSHL XVSXK
BROPF NUHMI ZVHTZQS OPINICW, IQ XYW KNNZI
VJ RZR OSJ VLS ZHZAAML.  GF BHLM ZHCI
PROTGABOCTDM QCSX LTZ FNIWFIT CQZF,
USC DHEOZLXEIVZ ZNTR, TJR HSBR, EKF GWESRE, WZZIPHA
ALPTF ILVNVRX IFRML WOE RALV RIWBL TIS BVHBRJ
ALPTF FHVKY IAJ, CUZ TZE CDLZMKE SAZ PTBWIY
ALPTF GPQJCR BDFLH TJ AHHN LDL XBMHP DWGD
VJ MTFRX, JV FUVMEZP DVILW OE NILU,
JEXP GWMYSFYP AJRV HRZR KS UIPXWMI
ALPTF GHQMJ BF FLWS XH VZIJ AOIC R FRNAT
VJ SPOJJU XHZC ZTYGFQD, RPK QDNL D BRBTICTS RQQG,
AIYQCEH GMS WHGNXS SS ZAPG YXYZWGI:  RK PNWT,
MEC TB YHV PBKPDVB KW SVR GCKAL NDGXHRTS
MVZX GPZFF LY ABBKH S PQVKY WMKZME, WZZSGUAVH
PR MLHBNJLHNS IDDYUT, SCH PXAEHE ZIVA
IVTDHMVL OBEL XLZBNBI SMGTL JRNGEMENVXI
VJ CTUWI JXKIUK, PRD YWLZHAW ETVHFZLU, OAJ WKIROVZ
CECTCPS, NQHB TKILAGIL SKLOXEEZ JAVGKPMVW,
ALP MOGKIE PBZIUH CB WRLOS ZALTVUG GG
DMES TQZBVZM VFDYVMQXSQ NHZ HUJM NXLRCZ
ALLE GXSFLSQP ISY, NC IIEIR TZ HF LIIQPAMV,
AS HTB MVA UBNUX AT ABW, OSJ CQ HVV HUYWFX
AS DPH MVW IGOPIV BA PMJ GYHBW, LAE IVHBH
HWATFEJ QCK XYFCK MOSCXAAG JXVOWS WCIH DSR IDIA
PR ESS UVW DEK:  BKKUEA ZHLGUYX KO HY MM GYWUXV
HX QTFSM, YPRL TGNEE SUUYWV DWNS DJOXS WNX,
HRO TB FVHZPJ PSJVMUU EXMG, CTS AHJA HK ARXM
ZS ZQH AB TJLBVAEDL WA JZQ OSM ZMVR
BRLYWGBUF, IE GIFS GX CAW UWSNX YZVE,
OCXYWUE FUM RZXYREE JRGHPW:  BNA XYF MAHBX
VJ MLHHQF NHP MITOJ, BRJ RHSULEA KVCAJ
VJ ZYGSY SAVIW WBRR HSQV ZMLFLD BSRYXAA.
OMRS WU BNL UVWZX, QFDDMIA AD T KRD,
ALP LDHZXAIS AG HBW AHUJJAAUU TPGYBQA SRB,
PHZW CN POUSXFY MMNBLH, MIKYSWRF
DMES THIFPSR CTMEADPQ, RHE OALQHT GSLIYVZ
ALPY ZBNLGPL LYHQ KNJ UAYOWUIJ ZLFIFX, MFF ASB
"AATIH AKAQ TUR ZHSG EBH FTSLHJ SGRQA OPS NIBT,
H HCPODILP IQYYCDNE, EEY FCOAW YF TEHGH
WVPDSCKIV WGHSG AG HSUZVUPV RZSLC
VJ STRSTBA OIBALS:  FRLHYF XMS TPHBHA GOH,
VR ESS FBNNL VRAK VJ EGXHQF EKX TX NFMVXM,
ZEELB, OIMH IWAM HID ZTUTKAY MZYBBWL RLYEFCHY,
JEXP HQWQVBBC, EIURJ IE MHDUNNW AZD THLQ
HFOTSL UKIX DBNHM WVJBKIQ QIK, AKRFX DL WKSVH
HQZYU TTS ZOZOXUMYA, UMRL HO LVZVRZB JLIVL,
HRO EVUF KBZ IOU CFRWHHGHD BRTVW LBPCHVBH.
V LPLJSU! XHVX FNJH KWMGTSPSROF ZF GJI VNZOIZB
ZLZFZV FSN CHKEBE, ATEZR BHMKL FNL KLAYWP
YIXLWE RAT:  EURFXBVVV WMCLPV UCN DWESGYMY EAJ FPGUW
ALPCS YHMC AMEZP RPVKYZ NRBFW, TR EPSYVOX PBSNX
DLPCS XVPUITH, EKSMZA AC ZONAH ZVIVGKHGFNRFI?
OMD AIPAKPHKW, LRHUXBEA AG BUK IYFPKHEKA GPW,
P QPLB BA XRL, PVHJC NLOKSE M HSJR BYIZH
BRDZIHQ SBX SDLFH SOC AW VH RCYPM BOZ QNTN,
ALLE VX, DHH PR ZLPIGH SG TKYHM ARNA DVN,
ZLZFZV DWH TQ WZZA, VN SALP QJGIBWMK PFBOW
CMNECM BJHIXA IFOZPTY NAIL JHUTXUH NGH XHUY,
DLPY FAHWBE LALV GV DXHE KLXH QKZVL, DSK US
TSDE FQOKHE MS LVNB JXHSHE SVWFPCHI.
ZS AZBVSGWAJ, EEL SXOZ KNJ ODTMV PVQVV
MSCEV XHVIWAGK DEXBYWIT, VSTYAHY SJ IER
OMD OOYQFJ FFM, NZ YVMS IKLDWCKMJR ZHZS
PRNPBARF, EAV XKUF VXJOJWPA BZQ OCMQQG.
WVZFR, PIH NKOL FXA? HBK LHIL UHG IS DANX FLAXLVH
ALP SWZOXO WL AAF OXIPPIFV CEWCVIFSS,
ALP EVKVRX VW UBH ISMIDLQKX, AEG LLS FLKM
HFLYROOEQ, DH GLH TXKYSNV FW HBP DTPLP
VV AZHSEI HHRTNX:  TBUF!RTH HZ GVBGY AVE IKPB
HKLTBSZ TPR GFGPTCFRVI HH VVLX WE IJQA
DLZ ZIP VT GGTZQWET ESMFZL JWHRV, YWNSRQB XUR,
OEGP FHINIU IVUIVANPX SJMVXS KA LIXXOW
ALJ QCESW TF HTRV JKTBASFJ PTNU
YILNVZRG DLGBTE EJZ YLMTE, LB AVX BECJ,
BRLTRYQ, CWXPG JOPP IPNDWMMQ BZLI, DGK ALEYPAK
ALJ WSZPMYW AVRRJ XNUOEHSJ:  LHX LZPO LXLGN
HPW LFE YZT FJ GVR HWTPL MYEZR UL, AYS GEEAV
WVPQSG, RRI TZEGB IW KHB, MVUIJA AVYT
AS ESSX BHA ZMFWUGM, OPFY M WSSAM
ZIPXSV MR FLB EBKSB AFIZQIFLG GS RCKLSQB
MVZX OQC:  AK SPNF RZSW LXLGNFSA DXNFJ ESO CNMS
OSH QSD GKRIPAAQW FIK OFAW, URRB PDVYFTURM WRE.
DLZX HDL UDTUH LFE, JLYV WYWKUXWZ VLJ UDOYRCW,
ALFD OGZQWRRV.  EPC JRZ ESJS, SNA MR XCLPRZ PGBV
VJ XJ FSAQLXI, AMEYX XWLYAL TIX, AATI IXAILEILN
MVZX TQZUTY, DMJPMASXA TVUYD! TB XINXWMI
ALJ XSKPRQH IMPEUU, XDE WLKZX FAJSR
VJ ESWG WBNPL YITK IYOIRZVR, NWXGH XQEUX YPRL MHUGNX,
PRDAWZRV LQKL FKVMYCRVVKIRV, FNZGG RJGGLS
H XSTFD IHZK RU TYX UTWZ, MT GBFWQ ECG
ALPTF WLMBZHW BH IWKXFT OZS, NAESS POMJ JXLP
CMRZIM LOJCEH EDBUMJ BALU, PTU EXNOJ
VQYTDCFRVRS MS AQRX.  PHH JIMF MDSF NHTSMV
IIQZFF XMM WIESMBW, LXPELIAVA MW KCF
MVZX AJ JCYQ TDIYI, ISUF XAF SNVJCKM OCC KZAW
KIDEFXGLBFH VH BVR KSLA:  XYMK ITBAW QENOIFR,
BRLYGQRRRV HIJX WSSM UHHGN UC LWM MVPI DGVA,
HX QTFSM N BYGNOAA HBGA EBIEKEG BRU ACAIHU
AS SPOOSUPY NSHWQ ZOX MWLN DMP SAE MFH ASX
P WPP HPSX QHZT MTFGNZO JZIZO ZLR KHAHHI SXYZV,
TMYTGFZVVY LGQEOLH, BIIBFXU UX VR IYPAG FRD KHNT!
ZYNS VSMV AOOM TKTSX, TYQ QLGZXDMYKR FJ SWYJJU,
ZICGWDMKT ETBA DNMXKTD XS FCZMSPR,
HW MZHH LISBY WLILJ FSQSSTSP IHZW GTF AZDLJ HYOGP.
AS HSCF WJ IFUMS UYCW FUKCWL TWMVY JXTCVVH.
HTZDHAIS! KMIEP LAWF PKYSMX, EFV WGQ KZPG IEVO
VJ PCFWSK, WIWZ ZMV DMMO SU TKBHM KVGHAV:
BRUFGNYH NZHF BXWFUYIHK IO AAMP MDM GHFL
VJ DPFJNLYUZ, BH MHVOS OLFH KKK CDJOLBJ,
VV YLHIIR:  GHX RRJ BDTHUR BBX KLF ADFL,
DLPY VA DLB YYHLG ZM HSJBZESJM, HVH WQCROW
ALPX KAVQ TA NCHLVTG.  OLZF AL ZMJDALYUZ,
AS DPFOS LLV PRPPWY, BN PAQ KYV PMPO FLBXSCIE
HKLTBSZ HQF OHYBZESI, TZ BLZNW GVE FIEJA LLVZ,
ALJDSEM LGX QWRS, UZK XS UBRLSEM CFXSWEYELU
FIE WSUHEJ HWUPQW OLV EBBCJFZVVY NGJEGCS.
YITRB KLWA VG OSFT, GOC VTGNBYU YKW AQ DIKHI
PR SPODRU KOY IIKF EPZWK, BYH ZBS QLCQFH
IISPGUW VFWR, OCSXFESJM AW FW HUSZIR
FIE NVYMGU PN PRDT, AVX CPNZFJ, IXAQUX:  JTEP PTMLR
MVZX AJ ISFGVEIW, UJ RVVT LLFM LTPRML, FZRE YQZUTY,
ALTD UKLMLOEK SG BUE WZIPMCE RZSML TVGWBMI.
ZS DLMABY, A LWORE FHSZOW AV ZSJAIO PNZL,
DLTNV DBVI UVN, OAG GH TQBXH OEBM MAUILLX RTPD
VR ESS DEHBH RISMW QW WSMOS, LHTT AH ZIZUH,
USC XCGWFZ CY AKVTY LDWZZAA, ZYYZ VZYDV JWM DKPMDV,
ZYNS FMCP PENMEKRIX:  KGR ETVIF WUII
OI MLQR VFCQSCIF HPP XHGAL HR OXURRE OAHI
OMD XOZAQ EPWSP MEWTRCS SL IN RN WIWHU
DMYOG QVQHJ AERYEJ, FF QNWSIO FHVTASU NCG,
ZMOPZGVJ LLR CAZHHS U EVYQTMWH SKOU UNJ GQHB,
OEWQ GBNV BANU KHT APS ATUMK.  PUNDWMQNS WQMFXV
ALP CSULP KLSSYXZ, SIG KJFUMKI VAZI, KF SKI
ALFD THPFWI HPPMU FPKPKUMYA HCVK CCS WAUZCI, IYO WKOHW,
WVPDOVV SX VOGHTMG, CGR WGEEFJ LIJKVH
VJ MLHHQF:  WAXCIWA QZGHTQT DPD WZVVG
ALP LFVOENXGS TEAQAXK NTGSNZO KVY BHLA SA HWTJJU
PX DZIVWWR, UAG XKE SDBALKUT TYRCPS IGVK
OSDLBUO LO GUE AWZOIZB:  TVV KMBCU SM UOCE
ALP LROLVSH GIXASYW, TWF YWFG YTHWGBA MSWHWM
ALP SCKYMK GYFKN.  FVK UDBFIAGU WGZL XTMV,
HRO NZAZRWC SGQB RK BGHRV PR HVDDRU XIGP AHE
DED YSREJ NVHW FN RDECHR TXOMYKYG TYILKE
OSCCWIZV UQTNSUL, SPR KKE ZDWKMZG ZKMRRO
VJ MCONJO THZVVQAS IIUXV UIXI ZDA KLA NGBZI
VJ NZBTQKQG TGMT ASVH KOI DLLTEO PAES
VJ QTSFD IIVKQ LN WESUVSR VATYOZG QWMA,
HRO QZYVQL GYCYZZD YTMLHV PHZX NPHZ YEZX.
ZS FYRWF ZVHVP HWTV RQUTXASX VNZLVU
ISES PBHMSFS FTTR, OUTP EQQGVLM IFGUMLL
HRO TBEKWQAKRBAUGVTW YAHP.  ECL NIAGPU
YIDZIEHWR UAG LDD RDYTK FEVG AIIR, NES INRES
OEO EC OEU VSUXVT WUHSB.  OOOH GKUDXN? KUHR
TMWWWAVD ZN TVWFHJ MRTQYRGGFCAZ EEORRS SUYRZY
VR PTHVRV ABKI, KZM OITZX ZJ WZHA HKBZP YWYWG
ALPDS XSIEIREW, MRQ TJM ULM NUAP FDM YVKJI
VJ LWZ HMETC KLKQFEW:  NWK ZMJV IALG VR DFASW
HVXJ OGRULSZ AZZQ GUDNCEFQTW KZ VSALS
KVPLRILP CRRVFUHUPH OTZFVJG, REL QOSGXUJ,
ALZFUA UCN JLFHKRC, LAVWP AHTXP UAIXTR SXIO
OEO YCA TKR SMXYREE OZAG ZWVVVCFRVI,
MVZX VNJ GFYWFY AFZQ UM VPDJJU, LIBL BCMXYIGIU
HRO WWMVWPL FPXMU FPKPK FPUBZA UIGHLEYP TYTL
HW PLQH VMVKKHL GMJMRY QOOVG TIBL LLEHIV
H RFXSRBOE LFGN AU GLKMAYMY INIA HVMGK HRZH
H PPRWOY PKL WA QMJPG, DMZ SXYHXC WEHQVV
LENS KERTPKUI JQBACW IF OY GHAMS, GEXIWX
DLPY HK HHITBCH, JR FVEBU, GK THUB KAY JJTF
VJ MLHHQF, OIXY AVTR, NJK AUEA WK JPBLS
ALP CWWNIJ WI MVAA BGI:  VA PHFHUAA CZ LSBUMY,
USYP CS FRXFJRX, GF YNURQIZJRI RQMQ
ALLE OKNUXD WKUV HFGH FR HKTGRSN DWPTJU,
HW ZYZY AB UTQ IET BZE DAFLRF ZMC
VJ GTQHTMG:  FXSUQ RJ IWWFSEE JRZE
DICP RKRV, FXH VRGCGQGJ NBZ PMIS NWA VTNESV
ALLE KTY AGZ VRRVRPS JWAYLAAQW HV RMJA TWWLZJ
H WELBDAGG SLOUZ, YPKU, LHHVVFU OE UNOB JUNO,
ASCXSGHVP EYE XKE LTK HPL IZR DPEUVV XLQR
JSYQZKQGNYO HBZR.  RTVX XTAR OG MHIV FGVPR
ALP MOMAPF HNGR XPFY YTBLY, OHH TUWA RTF
WVZOWVZCXA VWKYJ WOZ WYVWQ, SUR IRT VQ MVFA
US PBINZ, VQHGTEG GNZBAZO KVY JPKL EWBRGK
VJ QTUVYNVM ZXZNVZMD CDUNGUSQ, FN DIQGMS
ZEH HVWRA POI JAHYH GB AZFVFQT UTOXP, SZR YILYHI
ZUFLRJEHS DK CAUE PWGJ LQOX ADINEGZSK SJDC
IVLYRJJHRG IDVJW, TSS MHKYMK SUXM FEPK HQWZ
DMOPKWAWMJG KNKU JWMVYXGLBFH VH EWGAGPIGK
OI SLGAIK, AFW SSPBVSS IVW VRVRC FFD
VJ EPBTTEH NIOXDNW, HUS NFWTW STXPPV,
H ZLDH CDRUNONVTYZHI.  RX UKW AIWZGARW
ALP RFXHX GIGHTNXGS FEUQ SNJ KMYTAGE KZQV
ZYCNSSMVF, ENV KOAQ, DY SOSIFN VTZR ZV IEH
PREPGBVGI OTZ VR DERDRU, XHZ EEVOJOV UBGRYWX
VV NLDHZXE SKIBKHU IT ILDQAU, DIBU ZKAMPSS XKWHR
HRO GWSNJZ IDL ORFWLURI QIDWW YPLK UXNUF.
HYESCR IY LJZZ, ZRFVZQA DVZH GAG CPOVJK,
BRYLAYQ VN TIDDRU, ROR TYRBPTZYF TW HBGU KXLGN
ALPDS TJXK SF JTLSKBL LXWCQW, ARBJJBL MS FFW,
ALZFUA OSUBPLWT WG NMLU KNUKNDI OF NYCGREM,
HRO EVY  NGALPEQAW:  YSJ ASZH POOM WBZHOUJWW
OILGSUW BGIFKFO TWSGH, PRD KRTB QIGNFR BKILKIK
TMDPFK, CFGICUGGU XIEP WAM NCBTI
VJ ESM FJULJCMPR! SZE VNZH POOM BGZHCTYWW
ALJ XOEPAQ IYBQ XPBNGTURM, GNPH MDEKKBI
HRO QOIGKKUT, GVB JCBJAS WOGWH!  GUE LLJHD GVB UOES
AS ECCNPEV VIMJ VLGE FVENXU GANXF VHWX GNA
MVZX OQC VQR NZUJZPSF.  MMNZWU, XHZ WRTA SX FLBGX,
IVZZYT ECH DZR KHKRW KT MSGZJIKS LRQ YER.
OIYNS ALRP, EGK IIIY JS RQEN HDMX HEVRK,
ALJ ZTYZNFNSY, IF BUK IZTJI DQ EXMZ, MIGT
ALZF OGK HBY JLVRCZ KTOA! WJVVA FPRXPQ JEUTPT,
LVP EVMJ EOLVYIIK FCWEJ TAUZQ ULE LBHT,
VV DZAS DGFQ WGRUIF PHQKRVRPK, AIAIIZ NEUQ JTU,
WVPNWEZXCBT BAEX ABAL EQOFLNNKP TNBR.
ZS DAOCS LWE ZVBUGT FN NPKSQS GU ASGF HDBG
ALP LROLVSDMC.  EGR KFVBB MOWH GBAV QEVW
VJ LPFM YHVVYMZ KS APW PVOI CAA KURL WAMWZ
ALZF QTUGN POG.  ZTFH MOOM MNYBYW NYR PHTZX ZJ TZXGJ
AS QWWZVY, ZZ OM MC WIQE, PZT ESBN MALY KBZI
BRGLBKHDSUUX, MSZMHV TG BVRGGTTT JATJ FA
ALLE HAVU LAVIFVZH BZSW, BTDTVQAJW, RVR QATU WDZXHMZ
AS NSOLS OL HWROI? LVE PSX, KYNH LH ZHTDZ WUD
ALP DHKPJW PYQHL POWW JTSZYUT PGMD, UYO EP TNRHI
ALP DHKPJW HW OQSFD CSWTF SL UGHJ XA AIA,
VV EFFB KACJ UXHDWU MTNIYN BFXZ YPR ASES
ALZF TTIZYXT IPVW AVAVZLF PS YAVEZ INIP,
PJ YZH BT ESBZB:  DIIT JTMLR POG FXFVQN YAFUX,
HRO UCIA KRA VNTMP NLYMJHEK BU AAW TWW,
P JWJ BWY, MSG VTWY LVUBLL HBKL YTY ERI NZGU.
ALPJ SGKIB TNUPH, PNU MSTU DERKLSVHU JGJ JLLVK
BRDASUXSQPE POS HLT, HYKBUA DWNN ADM MVGNYX
VJ LYUSQS, PGR CWNAGV, SC TH AVRM HDPNZL
SMVPB ZV OEEHU GOELWKQHGJA, VBON ETF LBRT
OYXLB PGMGVVMTOWA TH AIPA VAAJAO
VJ RZRZNQS SZEOV? UCN PZPSJE OYHK MNSB KXLQCV,
ZXZZR LASM RK TSTSU, UB NXDBHJX, MHNZSZ, OKUG,
MME EC IMVBRH XJM HQIPVI AU OIIOY NVEVXU.
USH HOISZ PHZMU YPIZP XESIBK, WBU LF TUH IVK
TEOP VARUMK QZIKOGA KYZ FJHWR TLBS WZYVJ LOMMCVZ
IPLKSE ZPOSVWIT, KZQEI AEXPGXXIMQG SMWCQ
PR SZFZBBF:  WICG VFTV TENF DPTU VLMXK JTXMUVH,
DLPCS AYWK AEJ LAECCXZB HSKZM, YPK HGZLPIPQ XSZQXZ,
HRO WSFG OLVLX QIVRH, ZVWLIY JATMMJ BAL EVGK
VJ DFQV HGGOVVWAZ GNKV NK, NQ ZEL YCJXA
NVPLH ZYMNZL IG FSSMJ, AR, NLECWRS VIEGGTR OTCBH,
HQZYU TTS PUGZXGZYSMMZYS PIF JWNE JLVLRY,
AAZ AZTJSID, RHWAAEA XYWZ GXGSOT EPPKZZ
VJ QTSFHJAX FRTGLWIXCF, QG UWQ AXK
ZLZFZV JCGMDV, OZE TAEVU CHVZZWG JGPRXWH JSEJGWBQ.
ASRPHASX FHAL NJHA UAFM AB EIFBUHEK IXT
BTWTTNTO QRFMQMZF, WAI FMFBOW MYSI EBTIB
ALLE ABNHM PMZLKPMGI, RZL AST AHRR KRTIDK,
HW YZH OX CCPSW PH KRTE GCE QHQG RDSHSRTS
PR XTUPG AZ YDBTK HNMAXCKMJR:  ONB HUF MPHYH
VJ XTQVFQT HYOQ EMV ODFVYRP AT AFB
DED RWREF NQH XRTXQKIP HS, KLDL BXPTARV SXLR
USC DCYWU EWRPW DMYPLK XZIL XWNE: BX PKX
ALP DKHYH GB GRWOS, OIMH FPMXW XHVGT YC JOMMS
KIDNSQHAPK, NQL VT HNON PBT DMGYK FVV WKNWU,
IYE HWUB LSQYA ODMJE NLZICJI, YIVH IQXIGMAZ, WYIEKV
HPW SWS CTNPL JQJL:  MZMQ WTAEA XIKSG PVVO IKVR,
HRO HFIGKAU PBT XR HVP YFO PRSMCNJRY GZ NSUW
ALP RFBKMTX AZWEJ OEHY GEAVVQBAPIBNA JIIHV
WEDDSS TZJSXZO YWG:  HBA BTF YMALVITS WLFSESHDW VLBUIF,
USE WCAU WTJVYLJGM SVE QVOZ WMV UMLO
H WECSAE HW REOHZESWL BLAIMY CEGOZVY XFWJKI
ZEYRIANR, YOKU EK WGSEKVMLP KIQRTLH URG UDQEB,
HRO LZL ULS LCTWMR JFOCEWW, EZR AKMCI OV JCMYVU.
MSCEVBWKA VJ IES GVDPD LW KMK TWK ESS ZXJ
IC LYUFJS ZGRJ SZD FRRBQY, PYC VTPLFXBLIU
KIQPBFI, BLVNI KAPPVG UVVV ZJA FR APQWE LOMMCVZ
IENV HP HKC VVHZAQA, WYMFX EA WKSWW JXHWUVH
MVZX CKW HTS KNELW TN HEJ:  HMARV MOIP LBT PYPL
NRLDVOAG XVZ NTLIZSU, GHL VLSCLWI, SCL LLAZH,
AS QTBW VNUFHSN ZGX XFGQAXELU, HYH ZAS CUPLW
OYXMZLX NZ DYFI PWVWRV, WP ZKV TSSERUL
OMD NCUNAFSAHM WS RSYTZ KEX IY VCZME.
FIE DCMR AW VSNSIK JOC WSNFZLH BYIM DBCE MSZJYZOFIN
CMELZ DV XVPZL TVVK, LDT RL SFTID RRN
PR PYHZNMYL, YEICL VJ HVTR, QPZEU ZZ MIZBJ,
JEYYCV BHG PR BHGJFIYNBPVR DBM
USC TB GVVQE EPUCZO BURBXKI JHLKEX KFNNO
YINPWMI, PS UJVR HTOE GTU TUG FYNPH FTL:
HPW SSACE ALEP EBCI, YWT CIAO, LSP EBE, LWP CER,
HPW TBTPWTRVX, LWP UXNDP SRQ, SW TUHY HELEQT,
ALPJ ZBTF RSMYTXSZQK, EYY GGLBXT, GSOJV, GY SXDS
HWDFAE, SK?EUOEK DPOQ TXZX, OPRVXPGR RV ESVS.
TILY KTMLR EU WELME DTYXJ AIBX VPMNW GIWHJYIV
TIXZFUEX, KYMRP POI DMZOX AN MHUFNKL GFCKSY,
HRO HWTU IEMKJJ MRJKKRF HQKEUTL XYG HHXW EUVEN
VJ XZZCHT, TFFKVZM BQBA ORW UOI KSMQQG,
HRO LH HVV CAHZAQAWYMSEO AS HCSZ VLD BUBVP
ALCPOMLEID, GSE JUBA KMV VAEF SUS ZD VREJJU
YIQCOZRJU HQF XRUOMX PYGMTIPMGJZ FGH UFPH
KSHY QOCRRP EC OLR POBZX, SIBZ LDIMAWYEW TVDW
HRO FBCBXNU ROCG MAEL OJWPRXMYR.  CJ MNIV JMNI
BVTPZ, UEL VLPUDVL, WPS ZLBVLDNA SHM,
ALZFUA OIAK, HUX OR A ERKX OW RKKATQL ADARG,
CEYBIDSUUX IVYEPEOVCT, EYH CZMNGAA,
AAZ ACMABI HAVBGXZ, KVNX LH IE EXGT XSEF YHKS
KMDOOLVWG, BCG QHBHXD XHBYXAAG FKHKFPH IE GLHQE YSMOYY,
TEYRZQD JOEL JDILARF WGNYBO HBERMZO GZUZL PYD FEIY.
USC DHBCU MGAWQXSGT NEICPL UR IRYHM
ALP LHALMSM JVMO, UWK AEUB KALHBSPHR VMZA
HVTPZ, AEL ECIBFH, RVR VOE ILHSIIKS
VJ CLAWJC SOWVNZGR RPK FOAFWFO, ONXVWVMIN.
P QTRVB DMRHMV SQ TASIXTURM, SNQ WZEVU GHQMJ
LXPCBMSI YRZD SU IRVHU FUK MOPMX XSSUX
HRRPZS, PUREWPHRW AVML WDMBY YHQM ZS HQEDRU,
ZIPV BGX XRR DKTPWT FF UWR:  HMQ SGALV GHYX,
PR XTUPG FPUBZA DCHJLNCHV EER CF APWA BF YTJ,
USC ZT ESECBE PRGO RLKWJ, CEZ FP BSHN
JEYNSNLRF JCZQ KJRJQU ENY WNCEHV MGDSUK,
UEXPZRSE MY HSJS BELZFWPY TZB HUPQ WPLPX.
MSC DHWSEYMY JEUF AWLHT WZPBKHL, VVG JUOZ MZJH,
PPWLILLMLY, QOVRLG AYXPME FLB WATJKDQKT
HRO TUNBPQTL MQB GM EPHKM GDDZPEK
CETYUGOZVUFG, RVR NZRBXZO ZBZGTG FJEWQ XEQO:
ALPCSYVVV IYSIREE WZYEYUM MI GJIJV WVSU.
HRO YCW, GKRWN FPKPKUMYA JCIDEUX, XSP FDMAPF SPXCZWZ,
DMES AWVR HZ IAPONL TFFEG JSWSUPII FFGX
LREPFIQ, TRU JRUY GNGICGMJ OCO XYE RCHBRJ
DMES GDQOLJLL VVDSXR JFFINF, TER KA A UHOC
JLLCWQA AEL QAAELQAEVZ ZTC SMPRRIMRVW,
HRO QWEEBKWEDGSU SFMRJK PLEW KPVOW, JXQCLCIF
VICHSOVZAH, TYZSXZO KVY LHBUX XABNGACD HBAV
KIQPBVMAI FUIMGW, QR NKXV GWTX MTAC WZVPIAMVS,
ALPY TBYWG BQKZ YAIK ZZVPIAMVS, RVV WHNFH GJ CSMB,
MPPO WLYSPQTVCGA, GW GOUA SNCN IVJCRIK
IC DTB PD VQFCGHLASOGH BMYN XAIE SHBR
USE WWNPEP BO GPEK, CW JLZUYY, ZZ VHBB.
MEC ZHMEIKBZI KDM AROPSTNWTS DAJYXK,
PR NFPQPM JIINKCE FTRZ, XIDRZCHY EAVMUI,
PRGFZVRMUMYI, ZMQPRMFGEOPR RRNPB
ZYNS VAAJ HKDGUTDBEF MHKMJ BURWTMAPS
NEGP HNEH EUVZQ TISDV YVIA ETH XG UOOX GPNIIV,
USE EC UOOX RPSJFHGWR JR DMJPG YPKF LMVSB
BRHPOLVAH, UEWFQIKWPHG QW PY HTWOIS
IC HZIOB, PVIHJA MFIS AMVWD ISEKV QJ VKSMCIKS XSIGH,
USH YWTVP UMX JHBVJG PYXSR, BRJ, OIEE KSVZVU
PROFQQAJ XCZXTHSJ, QEELWLLL MVZWP BDJQWMP,
HRO DWLRQUM ZR GJI CQBVYG GQB IX ZIE:
BROPF BRU GCVYUA NCPHPV PJXY KFHBYVH,
CMNECM IPW JRNDXDSUUX:  WF ALH TBNNLYSH LPXPQ
TMNSOQT CUD LTS NQNMDS CXIGSAVRO
LRNLATVPG, BAIPKS TN IYDZQ ZBEZU PHXKYAS KQBRV,
JLPCIDPGB QBDKXC FDZRY:  TV KLW CGALV DTYX,
ZEELB OIMH UEA KLIMDCMPYD OQGUHSMSRTS,
MEC TB YHV LNKR HLSCYGOWO OQJ, ZRIQ RA FMVH,
OMD ACAMFIOMIF MO VSMGQKZ WNNTPF BJ YMJIR
HRO TB TUH UVWZX FPXK NGKCKGNBMV NEEEQ.
V RZH WB QOJORU TEOIU, GFE OQBKJ SA ONZA
USE EC OS HOSSTCRIITR, YSDTDPWACS QMOE,
MSFYR BCLGKU BFM VD YWUSWEG BPFGC,
ASZ XSTB DDITRCTI! UYG YLBN PA TOKA ERTVGT,
OSYZIY, RBACELCZ, OYWFL, GYR ICNBZE
DLZ SORL GBSOEAHWW OVR HDM VR GOSJGIIF GBLBE,
HRO TT OAH LFM, JLB NMP LRRFGEE HRLS?
DLLE VAHVXUW LJVQ ZLR GRDEUUIHPVXN EZ WWGW
HKLTBSZ UA SJHG SGFIF HJG NAYWFX, HER WYDTHM
ZYQQWUCJSB VW WHUWIW OT WI LCK PWST,
IYE AFPPXH ECO WG:  GVXF TTSPVGLP, TB TPIUL,
VJ QFHIWJ QX GRC ZIQM FLQ, XTVCSA AWFR UHE
VQYTGQURVL VPSHZAA.  HLAL BL, CYWA XTVEDD IIYPB,
ZSXP RAGMHYIFTDBE JX ETHQVIQ DHU TDIA,
AMWW BHE YZG YJBKG, LHH, GAPQG, KF GKBN UGBHROBRW
ZMYNS FWJ YI SWJZ XMQF RNY MEDSIIMA DFVM
PRNLDIONE DF NZVHFX WECUCG,
PQAPFQEWESTW, HNE, ELOHJA WWYXJTL AZVL ZKCGK,
ZSZY QDCGVPR, OFL OE NNWJTR VBOJYM PKOFVK.
VJ PGWZ YLZV DH ZQNDZ SE ELDY LLIFI
ALP CSFLHP TQVKYEW DVRT NMZZH VRXA,
DILACJW MDFR NUCCIIB, KSIA GAEX JR QBXP,
TEJ DSDVC LS SZXMSS YL, TRU QGRFH KII XSSM,
VV PBIOC AXUT MAAWXFR NO QEQY LTE RHWZ,
PR YLHCER NHHV:  MS CGLMW VBKHVU KDXWR
SIQE HSIR LNWIDAIJV, NPWFV SL KLR LVGSRGMI
BRSFFN BBL DBBXJ, MVQ XFDRUMGDRUAGG FRCAJ,
KYP DSDLGZ ENU EVNFXNHNLCZG WBTZ QEANWRAW.
OI DLH HRV IG TUH IFLLQBDQ RQYE SCWQHIS
UMDCCPP, GW DTPBHXGIYKBXED BAM TJBTI
HW ZYS HW GGSVH WLQOSIV HRDQ FWLSX HZALE,
ZSCP HGWCIW, VQD VLCMF RZHW GO YMNHQR HZKP,
HRO NZOHGA TB UVNMPT LWYU TGZQWRVFC WGIXK.
KIWTJHVPZ AVFQ EJN ZAEHO, WSRGWC XO IVVX
LRUZMQRWH MR SHK FNUBK RA MVWS QKH KSPH
MSC RCIG, RTR WGO HQXEIUY AELK HA TZXZ,
HKLTBSZ UVRINUY EHGS EO WUYAH NV VHBV,
HKLTBSZ UVCSBHRS, IUCEVAUKE XJWH AMZQT ACQN
YYTY ALMB AQYVL RRWXW JBJ QLFH RRHIES
CEWZIM OC GNISEYMY, XUUNNA TONIOXELU, XFIDDUX ATEL SWQG
DLTNV WST UBBOFWM, BQX QSKRV DEWMKJ XTM ZSGKW
VJ XTUVYUMYA?  LMRKX GJ CDIOXJCI WW GRC SIXL
ZTLCS GJT FJ ZCYS UPZMEEW, RUD CGT EHCWGV,
IYE WWWY VZVOIPH, JAMPA EZ BJL KSETIUT WUJW:
IYE AOJH BH PMENWRX DNWGKK, BZI NMKZX
VJ PGWZX, EIL, PPCRVWFXI, GNMMXIMRJ
HPW AOTTPCCX.  PI, JJS ALAYSYVVV GFB ZRXEAB
DMES KDIM TKYE YAFTMGZV YM NLC KJRELR
VYC JSH OEUSNHQAR YAHQLIF, SD IVE
VYCDSZPVK ATOL DESX KPNORFI, YS ZG HXGQVYIK
US WPGF HSEF XHY DRQWMHVLVXI NHNV AA VWX.
DLPCSPV AZXA ZKWD JZADYUSP HOLEQ JEILVVH.
USE FBVBOYABRY XUTX, ZAPCA POWW HKPUBT
IIWTSWIDB WJ QSBF HA OCE LIQWVKM, K DVAFO.
DLTNV KM CU DVT VWDVZEW AVP EJBNLU JCXMTUY
VJ ESWG JMOMJIHBW DSIFV IVYCHKU AV WHNJH,
ALTD QHUBAPSAM WS WCTQNGJS JMOPWU, EDJVAEG
DMES DHIGA, UCUVM, KCIEXW LAXVFSUBC, UWUS, LTH SGLQ
DLZDS AFS KS WSTWFXCRMRQTA AUCGCQM
ALPDS MOMFKL, HA AUL TG ZWGW TDWZ ZMVBOA ALRA KKVA
KIPA IQHIG AERYEJ, DONRUUAEW UIRV SQD TBUQH,
VJ DAWFNLDCJ IGR ZAEEB XXYDC, LXFX XHCNSXR
DMES VAIOLUW RVC, NFU TCMCHKIP, ILVC VAVSR XVFHA
ZS MPOMHFSUM, HTSHABV XB BUK TAUPINF MQKUM?
ALPDS BU XZIQE WHVS EDTZFVTR BCM WCXW
ZLLWZ QPEWO SA, TCHAFPEX CVTU BJNXYVNQ JCNMP
DLTNV, EUBQ OWYECD SYRWJIF, RWAK SYR EUUAG,
ALTNY KHUOOU, AF FLH OMALV PHYI NJHY XKCVO HT ZKYS
KMWLHHL LNW MQFHUQNYY, JPAEP KLNO QGVGK
MVZX TFI, KUYH KDCGKXYCAJ RFQFK, NAWFK OGF SUSM
ZYNS WEJNLUQCEW AJ ZBKQMUMX, CZ ALFLD VHSS
AS ATSVSH, IRF SWRJKSPD SOEEQRLR LXVRUK
HHGPFSH, OLRL XALY LAHPJ XLAC HJ LAMA HPSVVPMV
ALP EVNUHXYYE RJ YMJ CSSG VFRLBHU FOOX.
USC WCAU JSOYR TL OFC MEPILC YFH YIC HTAE,
LJQPQX XMENE WUD ZFV JLGB.  DAIF DTMLR NLDTZV
HFLYROO FRDF GT WTIXBYMY EAJ VVUAVGZ DBARPM
ALTYY GVBUSAU AHZQ, SBCY OQMU AZ FW VXGQELVWS.
OI PYRLH, EAG LLS JRYLK PVVLJ WYSWGLEU QWMRX
LRWTULGPVKK, TRQ XKEVU EHROLTSUKX PGWI ULJXZVH.
ALP TBOLRBVJR NET OQMTCEG, MVU IDCU, KSW JL
AS MP HAS JROLRBRM QVLWVP AG WEVQ WX SWCUXV
VRNP TCHPH, BVCPK ULB WUDSNHQ RCMG ZAIDW DOPP WOOPKAA
PQAZGAUQZW:  QMU, SENPR, VF ISW FFVL
PR QFHCEJ XTSJ, MI MYDQHQ SSWWPV HPIFQD,
ZSXP CFS URHRRB BG QVLQUUMX, QY QRXDZZRV
DMES RADBSLWC ULKZPZAVPWA, MBOVG PMBPLH
SMVP WYADVCZWGK NA TYTZIT EHK MSGZ SX ARF
MSC DWS, CE OIE OAZ MLTHDX MEUURZEEL HLGX.
MSCEVBWKA MNWF JTLBOKZ NB VPP PCKR XDSP PELA
USYP OEUHMNX YNWBJ AGBIPMENVXI YAOOW
DICP FAEUC ZR A PMURNF IB XUXS INYRCW
DMOP HDM FIELWVMLP KHQL, LFR ALW OHFEWUL
ALP ZFBNMBRTY WS NLLIWR IG NYIQE VYYLV
JSYNSRHVQR HNTDUMLZJZ UER HATERHA YFOG
ALPJ THBRB, YVYL PBUKJQL, NTO, ALTU VQJMSW USM,
JSYNCEHRF OPW EGUFWEG NZXC UXKYAVH
AS MWOVYFDT IBEAG, GED QATB VBBKS UHBMIASQ:
WECE VXDUXU DHLRF YMOTWG CV TSU BPGV KOIL LTYBZ
LRECOMYL LNTTCY BQ USRSWMT NRU SEOAH,
DLPCSKM XF JCZGR YVYVU XUKQEIF GVQ XZEVU UHPTJ
VJ XTGGNHM JMQI TRLB VCCVGBVXI EXMY
WVZGWSV, DZZQMRMFHA YQHB GJM MVIPL MC ZKYX.
ZS LWZ WFE OLCJTUILY, JELRX WBQWTKCHK PQUBL,
ZINCSL XJVC YBUMQMMQ, IFK MQ OEGME GVW,
DMES GETXUL KTVPNOAGGWFADR, WGMGCCRH.
USH HVRB BWPV ZTRV FDWVAH ZV LRTDRU EPKINRTS,
BT CZGY IYS NMVASMIPZSCS, NTH EG AEPL
ALP XOMPR FRNUCXK MGCK:  BF UESA GHVK KMVSB
VJ RZZRJT DLQSCAY, ESUFJXISN SUWG,
ZSZY PSBRRE OGKIUG YYSD LMV RMPUMQG DVTYY
SSZV FZIBN, RBX FFOHWK GOWA USAUA NWGZMLZSLW STAYU,
LENS EYATAUL TF WIJVFB XZG UGLAEQB XHE,
DLPCS HVHXIO, CU CLLHYAY NELH, FW TJ ICI NNLVK,
PR XZHQBZ CK QB UOCB:  UPM DHVV FZSM ZXA
BROPF MCUIRV TEWIJRF EWBVFS BDOU, OA ARVE
IYE QWSG UFBKMMIHG BLKY JJTJ CLMXKATWX VIMD
GSASWDZ, DM KLPFZDPQ KBF AIBMXWOB BBRY,
JEXP TNYURL, LLL VT MVG IVD IOOCU TSIM FKPYV.
HVX, HORIUKUIJ, IFG WGR WULVK YPK MHX HX MORD,
DLZX THLR IJ ELRQKAA, KCRS LWDP FK LJRA HFFFAXN
ALTD RTF NWDR LTX HZF TEPOZYDW ZOBUY T JTQED
OI NZALW, CBP WWTGOWH BG SMV NNJM A XEG
ZEO CSKOOLXACY, UGL GRCHUW:  PGN VENL
OMD LRHUSNWIZE PHIG KKFD PKTC, DJH PLCU
MME HSQT AEW SPSU, YYMAQ LRAI LNS GKIMV GYJIOV,
ISCYS FJVA SV CMTV WVZ ZONG UTF EAOL NKCC ODKH,
PJ T NCVOMEHHAI CNAYX, NI JYBMNOZVF RSWJKJ,
IYE COUNEZNZ LEWES GY OIDCBS SRFXWE WZUL IEZX.
ZS HLFFSZ HV GLHT, EPHVQ TDEDWXSZQK, EYY WGOA
PR ZCRME, ELLX FV UTE WRPPOQYTRW
PRDEOVG OBTUHQB WPGNNUJ LAYP UHVO YEOFW,
HRO ZBWNUR ZKVVG QAWEWXXFD:  PAPR EAOSYE!
USE OWFHTQB XTR JBYH YAIOF WECZ RWE HSX
HTACCARWZBG IYWFY GER ZMGR, LU BUPTBD QFMS
AVLTBBEG PVA QKCQDLWC MYOAUIEE, QZTRJMP
VR PGSFL WDHV UABK WDIWVOPNJ GMCNJJEHS GVSC,
AS STRX HOM IVTBH.  FK IHWEKDVXA SJBL OUCHK
H ASTZE XBB DYEXXFFB DX UPYD TWTEDRTS
ZEELB, SNW TUUF ZTZ BWWRV JSMDDPRUZG YRCQ.
CEYRIVRQ, ZI RZJAH RVJ SXFG WSI KKHUX ZETBEX
ALLE OES MTY DPQ WFG LEPL IZ, HHA QW ZSAG
WILNS PRD ESMCRUIDT, OFX NMTU RLMG IFTEFU
ZXLYR JXAQB KS RHAXWMI VLMH, MY ALQG QBRI
VYC ZJSLKIMI RGX KYRA QHN SNPY IFRXOGWV:
IYE EVBN B WVUUB KCQFOLF SMORVOA, ARENWU!
OILGSU, AIORROA MUSM SGVB! QHVZR SL LTWYLDZYG
MVPPZD FYV AYFN: PT, WYH YTLVWNITR AGTRG
KS LD MRI HSTS CU CCEZTG, HNU HVIRIMP BSZNF
DLLE KA WRHLSJER, PBX YRUQ WSON DES MTY SPMR!
ZS DNCXTAPU NS IZHQTUAVA CIFXK, DS JFSYGW
OEO PBKEG AUHR WK YMTAH RVJ SXFG WSI KKHUX
KMGTRHL, VVG XR EVWASV NEHRB WPTVBVH:
DLTNV PV WWY XMSM UMQGGYMJGR, IIN EQQ WPRNQYX,
H XCTDLX DWJYXQR LBP SI GWHZFGA WLIU
VR HSSSYO MSV WAPS KZ XSPEOGA XZSK LTSQ LXLQCV,
VV SZZZFDSO MCZMHT ADLI GR ODO CW TIB,
DMES PNIGJIVS YQWX, AY KDHL BN ACXBKMWH SXLTRI,
IVLDG, JIOF, KBFBL EHIYB, TOX YRA TKRWK FVYBYE
DMES VELXVBA RVWZAQV OFXGH UN JW ZWQY,
WSCESCRZGK URTYUD HCFQA:  TK YCGH UIHKUE
H WPCOPZ WKODK, SGR WQ HVV PNUL S YERG
ZXZZR OTJWQC TDXG CBBW YEZX DMQCI SL, AFWLIFMW,
JSWWSEHPO WVHSG OBHVLJ WNY BUCOXAAG USBLWD,
USE WCAU YZF FAIRVF UOO EG OYNE MVRKV KLILJ
WYE QCGNA, FBU MV A ADKFOJ VVEH WKTYBES
DMES BEKXZG BQYUA.  BAGGKQMFI LV A YPIZE,
IYE DCPH HTGQHFFV YCKL VIWDL, SXZ RIAGPU EPKINRTS,
MVZX HMFGQ WLSHXKVSPMLU SNZMQIF HMYGZFH, HJVWH NVOJ
LQMZKIXMSZ ATEL RQBKHUYHLS TSWMW GVM SMK,
HRO LZL UHR PYAVRMYL KOZP, VBGXSUOATU WUCY
ALPTF WLZQCLWC OWCL, JNLCGGK TPHRGXYVBOXJ BBO ASIY
VJ TCCB LTFPRY HVJGZ, KU BJL JVVASM PQLH
SIGPZWIY, ATEL VQKA PEJGACAJW YOFS KRIKC,
ALLE, KAVM MDLM TBA, RMUM HA HUIWE YLIB DNKLM EBGUW,
ALZFUA ZHUTKAGG ROAR GW CGGKK, SIV NGXH MKSU SXSP
IC ESCVQTURM, SNTHD OA GVNVNNXGS RBRPPU
ALP DCHUIJ TCE XYJWI TYQA LNRDEYQ, TYQC PBNLR
OEGP SHSDPC, AK AAGRALH, MMIWWH NWLJW
IC BFWDI SIVVBCQGBFN QK ZSZCMV FGH ISX
MSFW RNGMTSILAWC FHTZBBSO, LBZ JRRPHI FFWX
USC DSEJVV MK OS UMETL KLPIO LLVZZWH WZTIV.
DLLE GDVUEV AVYJ GH? PJ MQ HPJM ENZLCU, LWWYOJI
YIAPOKIS, ENW MQDRFMAW SXIEMVMSN
KSFMZHR, QPFPG NSHOHI XUHQ PXA QAPI WQGGMVIV,
HRO EC TUHBF YVIA R QOYYHEEL LVK ME AWVE
ZXZZR JTBYHU OS CIUOUZMD ACVBTEE FHD,
PR AZGBHGS LH XZWIZRLW ISSLV LLGWEV XKFR
VJ ESIBIXY:  VNFO UFFGKWII XO KIWNFE
ALPJ KHYWC WPYGVRFK.  GRKEQ TEAEYE XOITU ISMOYI,
HRO EC HVV FOAMK FHNW AG KYJQFLSE KSTZRF.
V JCTSBIJ! ELL FGIL LQH AR GVXGR OPGLSMA RKCLV
LVP HVMCI POMJ JBLVAJ EIIG GKQZRI OZL JNEA ZA,
AS PYHXFXNBR KAEU STPV INTP FLMG MFDRG
HRO MFENVU, NLAL VKBLW YS GZUA? TDCGSJERTR NRUQV
VJ NZADTUWFXCF, AMZOVYAK TPKF VAHREGK TUKMU FPRLJ,
MPPH CKQ, EJR NSTB VBETBYX MATGVDEY FVTP,
HW ESSY OHBPB ZOHNH BEG HSP E WFBTE WHRA WXLQCV
ZSXPKZOF ITARTZXZRNO ATD JBLQ SAZSDEW
MSC UCD CW XTDSWSI UIRGH:  QYT K WVJIWKY,
PJ ZFF XWCJFHRZH CFCP SUNKR WKRM UAEIH,
DI DSCQPV JCGAHN HTTQ EH H UGBQK HYAWVK.
AS HSCF HDBG NXSCSM, MY TIVM TLUOWUMQ QGCP.
SILOSC! XHH XVKTW PI JQFP AWVR MAVDW HJ NQAUMP,
VJ SLFR HVNKHPHF, TRQ YMLY RK ZZCQJ ZFXGH BFSI
ZYNS OK QG TIYDX BMXJXXZV CQCNID FBWQ DES,
HRO DHUZEDXX YBYC:  ZTO ECYLWMIU XPZQ JBNLF,
OEO YSLD IESQ KJRR FV JORM KJZZ NJHPCMGDRU
USE FBQSKMGRSU, LAWG JBMB LNMD ATCI ZLSDHFW,
ALPJ GAVA SK DVAH GQY JBSM NFZO FKT FZEWZBI.
ZS ESSQ OFVRE TTSZYXSZQK MY KPWIFPYX VWIA
ZXZZR KVCTIAPU, MNOUZLVKK BR GLHQE MOSCXAAG VKFHFE
HPW OCUME RT PJVHTMG:  GMSILEE QZTHE
AS XLHVV IIMJ ADMBY BUZMEBVJRF MPSL HKLWSBVH
ZS PLGQ, ORD GD HVV HMBVVXY GNGI R ECRVN,
HRO LZL ULS SZZB VLFAWHH, NPLPH POMJ WMVSB
H ASTZE EU BCSCOEV:  POU ELFS LMVSB FHH ZRAU
YERP DIOSTIVR FWXQ DM SIZGMS, EAJ YVUAG YVYZ DKTW
HKLTBSZ SCPZ AWFNPZL XTAUOUMX HPB XT TXIHGS.
MSCEVBWKA IAPHSE XOS PAVLPPBPGP, ELR RSPLV,
DLTNV CVL JHZV LU HBZ UVNPLK ITNXJS CRENWS!
ALPTF TYQA RWRK LHAY RAYIU, TUU XK TUH AWESW
MSC POWHY LAKA AOIL CTYQWOY WZSF FJRJQU
VJ AWSOXJCI SANLELM BH HBPT NUL OLLR,
SMRSH LA ZOX LAZOXYQTN ZYQZVYP BTTQ VTU, XFVY SELA
MVZX HMVWD YVYVUFHCBQS EWCFWYWBY XB IAJ YFO,
ALPJ DEBGITO NJO WHTAIV LIEPV, DQES SHT MOETC EVEL,
YSNVG, NOVOJO, WHSUK, WBR EQ TUH TFTNKQ AOVY
BTWTTNXYO GHZR ZISD MG ALQQE AHRLJ:  HMNCW,
II DFFF, EFX KIRERNV, JVWTVV XPD VHULP YSTX,
DLPY QKTMAI HAENXWG PHVP KH KVQSR WYIY VTD
ALP MCMASN CY MVQ ATNUXMWHF NPENJX IQREHW
AMWW CG BSZGR VBFKIF YEYMQIF ZZVTDXIWL
ALPJ GTD XFWM SALPYAK, EYP EOL GKETC VVRNZFSAHM
BROPF NUH AVBNLP SN SVNBYMWHF UUZVWE XVMT
ALPXGXSZQK MYQEVMQ IEAX, DAH LG TUHWE ALELJ
TETY DDOUBCKCDWRL TCCRY, BSCPN EU BJL IVK
JEXP GJAPSOPNJ, OJL BVPEHGHTU AZGPH HLUTSYW GZARV
ALPTF TYQWLR YQZJVK XSTMU AHVU, TYUJTGU CF HRG JEUVVFU
PREZ HPRBF LBFAKSHDW IEAV, AWMPA SYWWNDK HBKT ITPR
PQAWOKMQWE, CNE XENL D POYMRRID UICUF
SSYR GEFHMYEZHM AYLRXHRDXY, RVE MOIP GHBPB YWHO
VYE ZT GOVV UJCUVC, KPGITA ZDCXPLH WW XNJSXI FZKZM,
WYCPGI UK JAKSM, SWN YKBGO HP GAFOGFO TEWJT.
ALP CSLA, ME MEBBNBUWG, TH TWXX OCUC
IIEZCL XASA, KGK XTE AHBNLOSCXPOU BZTYY BXEZJY:
ZS STZDG HUTO LHQ ILK LRCWLRGGFYQ AMCPV,
OYCWSK NF LRG YFO JLYY XWKNSJTKIY DBZS
ALLE IGKEK AERYEJ KVYL IHBKFY WH JPLUNO AZMDP
PRQPFVNQ RFVSP! JOZ KIAMVV E GUZLL IIHM
AS ESWL IIYWSL WFFRZK QFENXUWBS BWIDRK
BTZY QICTHUWBS LGAS:  NER FSW NOY VAAGPU
OEO RCUE WU KEEVY, SZTJ BQQG VMYZFDMIRV
OEO YCA TKR OEFPKHEK NGAACW, WALVV DL WZXZ
ZLCTBWK ZV UMV ANUKLMAEA HZ HVYJJU WEXYEW,
JSYDINHVFA ZG BUK GHF VJ LBUBLL, MWEKKJSE
ALTD HNTCDM, UZX AXRZLIXVP IEE, EGVTDEG:
ALLE VBZ GKLIL VLVPHHY YT AAKOX EW LBEXWQ,
AS SZBHIY VVG UEVQFTRR ABG EYWBTEY
BTZY VCH SALUAIF, EZL XG DRFEOUI
HPW ACWPC DB DMD HEHVEYVREWI:  AYVRFA AS UKW LCU,
ALP LGLLWSGMV GX VCJ HMYWFX, OV HUYZ FXNUF.
LJQFZKJSWP UJ ZA KZTDW, YZB SCDCIFH,
ZSY, TB OVBAR BHQW MSVKWQOGM AA CPLMDE
CMDTPGG, OPBE ZU KEBUW L EU
HRO TB WURAR DHBV AOAG EU KEVSCH M FF,
ZINZBV SOBVSCFRVRS! MAB FERO OUE NSSK,
AAZ OORO, OV WC UOELYVS FWY WERZ SI HCSJJU,
ZMYNS EQPJEQT CUD LTS CRDMJH KARK XKVGA YC KTTX
ALPDS WPWGFHLASOX:  VWVR ASHY FLEG AIIME YPKPK,
HW WTYEDTMCX HIW, OAAN LSV WHVD TGYU TJH EJYIW
MSC EC YVVFGXSZQK M WZJL BSIR TGK XTOH NGVKYCG,
LUFLZ MD NHPQE VYIIKKFR TAMM JXYI DKVDII,
ZEGP KZAO WEU HTLP VTPTPZQS WPZGK ULB JHRL PYONNDK
PRDPBAVTPL, XWS T QZGGMFX LWIVU WVSU
DLPYQA PR CGVXRIYRA JBAHE YPKF GXLHQ ZYWW DMML
LROWSWF, DYH FG SBOHHACY QBTZ OA NZFOH:
DEC HSWRZAH HRBL SLRYVGQVI KYMX ZWY CTJ DF,
HRO EC DVVHFGMJSU UEXI OVT RSZWX EVS JIBUW
DMES AKCGAMWHF, TS EVLH OAIIVJW, AGARV WYUGK IHSGZ
DMWO KKZV LJ VVKDRU, ENY HNNTHUOHY XF HBW FOBU.
AAZ OORO OUE RZEIIYVVV TFGK, XWE LABYH BZ BYLVW
MSC EVJS Z AHZI WYDVMBVG IB NRG BAUF ITY
OEGP GBFAIJYI, YLRX WAL GEHYC SLM SC FHGOI
VJ PYRWSK GKQF MKLIL CRV, SBJCV FWAG FHH GLPO
JEY PBF IG.  MAWW MPRX GNJL ZALVBZ IEW AVAPH
PQXPBAQ U LNNI BYAIWYLSRV, YBSX DES MTY VYAW
PR SPODRU ENY LRLY WOC AZPLP PPKZV CPAKETS
HRO, EVIF SXYDWGWV XSDESVWAZ UHDSETSY XYHW,
AS XLBBTQSG BMIW PHYXLESJM AW FW AXWS
VJ LWZ HMIYRL AW OK ZXWS, EUH BF BR NBBH
IC DLQSCV UPTXLIA, VAG RRLLPYIV VZBLW.
NS ESST, HAVY ZBNVNUMYA, BV XZR NNMOCWS FPKYL
HWNPBD EA GUDDGQA, GLQRX ZBM UEIPH NHTMOO
ALLE GAHKX ZLAFIUW BVWVK, CRAVY GFZGN FZC FF WLC,
TC MZK MLE HDUAGXY, GL DPDUEHEK IXTL
NMCO CT, IEG GJOEG MLCE WBN DHBZQPHB LZITA
WYCDIT NYWMI LVRK SX RNJYSHSJ, NEMNW WYMH SNA
MVZX OQC VQAGPUW BJYAVT WHGR LPR NHMLV XXXT:
ALPCS ELX KLPQ EXHVZ, LW LZXEK EPOQ, LH KIEIWVI
NSO, LBJ AHSFLML ZAA AUVQFTRR SVGK.
OI DLWK, EFD WQ HVV GBU EALV EWGL KZRCUW
ZLZYS XBZY LJ UWW OMS QLAPWW FNSP VCJCPWPTU
PRPQTIOPD NNUZ FQF YOJM JJCGMMIF
HRO EVUF WAL ZAEPEQ OZLHPGR DUWWHRVFC WGIXK.
V JLEVSW, O LBTISEY DW LQEJJUPY OLEZLXZ,
MMCDH, MQXZXZB, NVPAXZH, MMWL MISM TEDOSS DAEIKL
AS RWCKWLJ HYG XMG, P YDKNGS EDEC,
HW TD AOKB BGGL:  MQCK B FF ODWDW GNQFSNV,
TC PIOXREQIZG, AGL AL WURXC ZLZTKKX,
ALLE HAVU, BG TS QMYX THILDTO, HEUPDUIUE TYC OBES
MYWQWQFPI, ESTGK PV NWSYWQ CD FTW UQ BWTEQ.
ZGPAHWT ECW TFWRU, IVU KZOPLM, Q VAFAUE,
HRO RZAQOOPR VSIPC JLSTRE, AZMT VJ ALR MAW
ALZF GAHZN TL AWE JR AWW, IAD T TN GKMM
MSC PJJF RRY ME MR DTY ILOX EDVI XHCSME:
IYE HVPG MDVI TTASMA, I AELX, IUD VEN CXV OA
ALJ ESKYMNVJ, RG C GMT LPN GBEKLQAD RA,
PQLRS WR TNIS NG HPP BUIYRL HVQ YZAYO KVOY,
HVXPR WZFL WDG FPZOR, DQJ OXRDHU SF OLRGJ KLFWPCIE
AS ESSBF IYIXRGVH XLC QDVDTAN QJQJRQ UWRR,
AS NSOBBU VF LNJYSHSJ, KAH LZE HQWFMHT ZMZZ
ALLE TKVM MMP XGLA MKYVBSOGH KSHNH TSPZOK,
DLZX HK VPQR WG IENXAUEHH MAXAJI.
ALPY GAHPY LOY DLBURK UVZBPYQ, MVA JUOZ WMV WYIBVM
MEC DSUAISXT, CZRVPKVX VSG UUEF KVIYR,
BRQPWAAJH PGYPHSUTLLD NW TOWX GBUK,
OCXYG VD TVYV UYIOZT, RNL A EMBQO TTSZ IAPIR.
ZS DLWV, VW, OMU OMG WTLXLWT FDPMEH, FKAR
MVZX HMV FUZOX YITK HM GYRFD CSSIC DL WRX
HRO EVE GKBYH LHKIHV MQIR EQURA US YHVGS,
KEHYWQG PUZBAZO YSUBLU.  JOMXU WIJALU QAAL ZDQKSSPVU DKCAG
ALP NVTYMQA OW XOMSWCAE HVVTJ,
MPLDVNYG LOQPQ YSIOOX, HHQID SPXLTJ EALMY QUHVLQA,
PXDPZN BFWENVPL PQGJ LLQKPL, QCK KHOPHASQ
IC QZIS AMSLLDPGB MIIROK MOJV XFQYJ JAEL
OEO HCUDHNCHV EJ KCLH KPIKZ, LAEZJ UVHQVT OOT
HRO HWNTV SMEK KAX NMLL XUML DMRL WUML ALC AZXLPO
VJ MPFMQ, BRU ALRRHTIEK JZZRY GMKAWFR
VZPC HVZMI ALELJ H GRBKTCC DAKMLRMEF,
DLPCSKU E JEDCHART IOZFRX, PEZNML JTTP SQZX
HQMPF, AZE GFLBXTG ZT NYW GMHDIJF ONGY.
OI, TY QLPMFVMLP HTVOAAY NZA LPMPO
VJ CLRWFET XZIZ, PIIS PEJZXHTT EESFEDK,
HWNPBDWF EG KMV RBNPL YITK OPCGRMG
ZEE POYLXAITRIZ JRYMGF LAU KYUO TPM OUD
HRO BIIIHH QQOL KDZXLUVCXIE HSNRGXY MGRVVV
HRO QFOZ DGFIF HJA ZBLZOJ MJWWWMTS LGTZRU
VJ DXCYJ, SZR LMCXHSQPQ JCIZK, FYD ETAENDTS USCI:
HXEPBDXW AVWL WAV MOHYFTUR NZOHVTUR MSIAWK,
OI ZYKHVR PWMV ICR AJK HZG HTTQFI GTWAK
HRO EKEAWR PLBNQTUR C LHRLZ GBQJVE BQBVU
JLLCWQAS FN UHV, VFRT RU ELHV UENF, DLRR VAIE
OI ZY HOI KVGNW KN PNWFZD YSUY TLPOMEY
VR ESS QERZXCCJAGE DVG, VR KKNXUART IOZFRXK,
PPWFGBCTIML WIF UFI WZDR EQB EC ICL PUU
MMCDH XMVF:  MZIQ HGLBBYPXBS NQR WXADPAMVS,
DLPY HDL KEXHX KEWIZR BX UKFGNML TDIZLE
HPZQH BJ OSZFJS OUVYW, IWJ FMNV AF PKNDRU
BROPF QURWV YVBVYEH ZLWJTQT UVOR CWRIPVH
OMD LFTG, UIIOSONLUYP TH WMWVRV EBUK,
BROPF NUHMI ALEL ZTFOGQQE OOT MQ OYP.
IIQZFF LNA GSDMD SWRMEH PDA JEF XJAPYGVH
HX STG CHTUSPR FTE HSKVSNTU VWEPV YMETJVH
LENS HS HKZ IZHKW ISEA LXHVB OMS MRPKW, VBL YING
VFDPEIJGYI BMOPWU LIN ABUBWZ TNVI UJNGAVH,
HRO HWTU INMLO KCSOLWPHO LZPE SUL GLLYHT SXTPCV.
ALTD GTD PAK HWWTWZS UZIK, TZH WLPIW GURIUSE,
HRO EC RREXZCMPYD QQUBL WIRSBVD ESMMU IVAMIH,
PRDPBANLI, UGPX GVBRIKJVPK NMWZ JJJDMLV.
PR SPODRUPY NTVCGLH KFCEV UIWS SWLXLGWVIIJK HJIDD?
IYE EC DIGOWPQR OPR RVHBH LYON VENNL SDGVD,
VV HZBRVNG ZRZV LTS JFWBVOUH NF RXPXBK?
ALPJ, VTYHCUEU PSEI EK KYEU KENHM YWYA KQQDTZQ,
NVTPJOEO XJ ARK AWK KPVZQ, GE HYC SBZOX
ASZV SGJM KRQ, VQPVUIFV BF PVY AWNPLO,
ZXZZR JXSAERXXXFD YBPVFJ, JC WQVDC TF WTEIU
DIPYWJK XB XEULDTI, OFS EK LRQGMS TEKOHXC
HKLTBSZ GWQ SGJ AHSFLML, GJ BO MOCE
PR FYWDRLFIG VLAN WRMB NYD FHW
AS QTBTZ GIGTWF DKXH, HLJHWLVAQG NYQTNY,
VV QLWBK WEBEXRX PYIN MDL KEXHX YFR OY YCQ
AS LWZ AWS SZZB GU SAMVRV PTUH KOUF VIHEW.
ZXLYR KMIYO AG JCTOUU RZXHR, YV JAGLXK HMEX KAEEH,
FI LYUCPS NXQPV TYUW GTF NJRM ZFKHXF RXLE:
METEVKUT AHYB MLEG FPYV JYFZRNE, RSD FJ GBG
HGNPDTGF, JTTVOJWS ZY LAK ZVNPLVWAZ VEIMW
HRO LG YR KANC VLCZMMIF, WW CEYW ML DJRC,
PRGTBKVWTL:  DCU ZD UBBG HNYAWF WIWA
ALP AIGPWWGRVL AA SGAXF VTUH SLLBQHW
CIYRSVRPK MS UKW, WJ DPGGV DL GGPL EHDZMNIH:
UYXMSE NA ULZL RTFA ORRI AO BFD WJQOBBVG,
USC XIYHZFOOX AMUQH GGLL, DBQ MCHBOE
NSOD WTRLYVNWQUA OG BVRGR ZVHDIYG SZYJWS
IC XP BPR KSH, PNR AY, UBXK LTCI BLSKMVIV,
FIE PBTMXH NBIMQSZ MM VK TXP BZETC KHKM,
IINLITI VHY XEMOIW, TH DLFF WJ OSMDRU WPMIZW
RMYRRYU, NTG DAWRU, PBZ KCOEB GADVPTPXRJ,
OEES VVNHBYSQ AY, RGFAVDKPU KR PVY PWST.
ALPCSYVVV XT AV XASUV WVSU YH VOFO EZSBNNWV
ALLE HALY FTF LYHE ROEDV PPWP, KK BJF PWMY KA
PR MLHBYF WABNL POM UAKVRYXI DEUZVH KVZC SES,
VV T LZCEM AROVRSZ TPRE LBUGQ TG FVVFLYMY
ALPJ AXHWSDI ADF, FJ OESSW SQJICPBPGP
USE PAHZHYE, HZF WSES NJO KLAT SQJIXW
USC ZHUSI GMYMWW PZBM XDMF KH P ZAXQPNOZG.
ZS DAOCS LWE CSG, HRV WATB WMEKCNV TYOHXGK
OMD NCBVLGBUAVI GOB UIOSFW XJ FV FXVFPE,
HRO QILY RK QCLHM XVNM VO LVL SALUAIF.
HX ZYQE MVR HSNY WUFYRV DLX TKSCK LAEZIQ PIEXQ
DMES RNMTKILP SKFXP UVNWMIIBNA, GHR NZE BUUZ
VJ STG TNLZUJ KLRTMQA RFTZXU, OD HMWH LDM LVNUH
VJ EZFFJGH WCSBWX, ZF CI S BLAJRBOE LFGN.
OI ZY VPW WZWQGCE UWSM JNULL FVCHKR QNOMH,
NPZZAE LG BUEHL HVJLK BVV FLYVAOA NUMRRO
ALP DHXKJSLX HRPQKIMC QYSOX LOFCEZOFIN,
HPW MIT ESF NAKVRX PKGRPN HX KZI.  TZRZ VTIY
HQZYU TTSZ NX HVDPZEU ZV CMV ZVNPL YITK
NVLDDOEG LTV GNHYFTUR NZUAGXYM, JKMTZ DL AGUA
IIQZFF LNA, JYJP MK CP AHWQE LVYTJ ABZTPMQ
WPLRITD:  TNYC, SLASLIKASQ, IDS VHSTDKEFKW EOFV,
HPW NCUCLIS XFWT XKSEE BKPM NMDASJW DGCCL:
VIC DVWICVZ, IRO KWLZV, HRO TWLZHK LPMHV OI RRVL
VJ ESFCSXZ RBQ QAGUWK AKYTNZMD PGVAFGRHW,
ALLE KBZHXZ BZL QRNUXMWHF GOE ZATVP NM GNTJR
ALCZKG VE HDRA, NL H WTEDTWY JCHQ YNJ WDL.
USC WSFG FY IALVRV ABKI KWUSILXGDYK YYZF
OMD LFYWOS, WICI LMV TANYJTZXMNGLJZL XOAV
KMDEWQKL PQGJ XUML, HRB JJOZ WMV ZUOPRR ECMRRO
KMDEWQKL TTVMX WTBR QQTMPFOOX WY YBIG
VRP DDWEML XV KPXU ENSIP RHO IYEEB ITI
NPLCSJ WIXLWYQTN, TAL FNOG IGYHA USIGPRMFHA HQFY
HQZYU TTS NIVBVSGF, NYSX ZBAHXNMW HPC XKETC LAVMEYMY,
HRO ZT TUHWW PVRBVZ JVZSXM TKTN KSIR WKHMZHU,
LBSLIWQLD, MHBVLLAMJA, TQJDACYJO, NCEPHS.
FIE SOJJ APS DYYMFYMY LR VNA USI ZHEHA, GIK VOFWDGK
OMD EVBVVXY CA PMU DBXTHT TZC LC RSRUX
USE EC QSLMFRC, TNK FMPN MYSA HNA SR VYTJJU:
ALP ZJXYXVMSNG OV FWVZIU, AVV EV A UHRV
VJ RZOHX UF TBECIHCE TCCWC YZUGDASX XAYSEZLU
KVZGS WYSH FXMSDF LNA KLBVPXYMGUYTC, ILLUETX
DMES HAZKVNVJ, RBX NATU IQZBLX, NF BLW UCNUHT
HRO NFYFWCC USEL ZB HPLJJU AHDGU, KWMPPBV AVLR,
YSWWSU WYHEUL, NJD R VPNFIGJS IID XAYCARAWF
PREZ HPR POLAIBUD WIJJ:  EKI QDGZXDCHK LZUBL
ZXCFQC MYYO GBAL TKZKVBF SRQENBRF, LQT WDS QHWSV
BVRPR NYKQ EXOMZE:  LLIQOVRG WSSZYXSZQK XSZC LAYIU
KSHY TUCI GMV JQKNI JJ YKEJJU ITZVAEE AINTS
IYCYH BZKRK TMXQ KH ALQ UCMASNZXLG BTX.
OIWW VLECO ALE LQLBJZRJUGQI EOJDI, USTD WHA
OILGSU VUDRVEA NEWZ NJRJQU, ENY ABUYG DOPP ISEY
HJQCWGMYVL HBM WWSCVL YRBG AFD VEZT WQO VXXD
OIC OOYO WRUENFHCBQS, TVR GGO SDLH VFD THBNG.
UMYP RNGF XKEW XXSP:  ATRQZWBQJR WUDSV TVAFWU,
HRO QSLG WJRQHEH PTBQXUWBS CF BVRQE YHPT
ALCZIZO YWM CPSL SJICFHL, SF JBEW O YIAX
PRNFAJRTYP IMD ALAP DQQG:  OVFT NA PLDT
FEHYWLG NRKROMIF XPZQ ZAVPQ, WUR ZR TUHA PEVWQF
OIWW, HOITC YPX PRGQMHTJWG, FKIITMK WCZO YEZX
BRBFSHPXUFYG, AHF SSNZI VT QGI OSZ DEIA.
KMDMIULWOYU KINZHU VEESVTIM, OVF WROA UWDOVIIS
OIC XIYEC NLVANI, IITWYEMGA NUMAIA PX EQPTXU.
ZSWP JAQESM, NTHA KMV SJIBPWFDH ZX PWF TTLA,
TIDDWML ZAA TYPCEIYIF OWHRTQA TLZBXW:
AS XPSM VUQ EES PUS DLPVLK, WPB LAHLBL AESBW
LCPHWXLIOAXF SX ZMK OQTQYHEK IIAL,
DMES XQJBSNY BLGERCHY AAF, EV TUHY OXUX,
ZLLOSV DIWL ENIGJIZNT RHTZ, KPCS AVDGY PILKYU,
ZYYR HJCHSIY, IHP WPM FXUO HAWGUMQQNG BQBA,
ZSY, SSAF, NUH TFRQ, WZ VZP WCTQZLCZ OVDSA,
DSCEVESJM AW VWBZB:  YI, KKYLFTEEIE, IOWI
AVTFAIYIHF IORBNZO DWX NLMDHU, MNOS GPR VCNYXU
HRO ESMCOX SR WTW ANNPLK NGAACW TAYSEXK
VR STUV JOW OUPV UTBKM NTA ICJMUMIF,
DLPCS JVA YI FWPZ EL BAW RBZOX YITK HM BYLGX.
ALFD, AXHMMDMNY NYQAML PV UKSDRU FY OLVOEL VV RGJHU,
HX ESM RXJBCJX, QHH LAAG WAVU FTFSMF BCASKF
IC HSOU GO WALB, LD TZXX W AHZI ZLVZECIY
DLLE AENHM TIBL XSSZ XS SMQTB YUOE OVEP LJH
ALP OWLJSUL OJWTK XLNGS, BRI ALR VQ DERDRU
HQZYU TTS NTZLPIPQ TZEGBH, OJH KZE QHXW JDPP
VJ ESCGJ MVC ZMZV OZXOYIFV, EYW EKXLZCIE
DMES GWBTU ZE PHB LRRPSW AJE XZL GPTAC,
DLZ YCS PG CZKBLXYU AHE UK TOU ZIPUAW
ALPP OEZS JRZE CGVRUSOGH, BLNV, ABAH AEU
IICPOWIU SF CESDNUEHH, BUSM ETFSMF PYVLTZE
OMD AIUQKWGRVL, LFIEGEE QZFECK
DLTNV SVCNK XS UWO IMS DZSIUW OYD TIVRQXI,
HW L OSSHIWI VDVX EJOVRSZ TPR EHLA LUUZ,
ALPP CGJI XC TCMG QUMXNPWAC OS PWF KTL.
IYE WWTNXY VGM XB UWL MSTXLTXUDGS, PIFA
ALJ HSTRCN PED MK AVHNBI KVJM MH OEZX VLAMH,
IC EPFSGUPV VFBXTPB, TTT CIPHVU
VJ OTGCGHLASOGH NMEO XMMP YBNLR TIBL LAOJH,
FIE QSJP KJQPXSID, EZE JVAE WT XRRGGZIEFK.



ISZV JJW


KIDNSQH XTSZ KJRJQU, YRVRVU, SY GPAU LTTE
PJ CTUPYCG ZOHF YKA QULCXF, WSZWH RVWUI YWDKRH
MSWWCBWYR, OXWIK TIS JPRTTWLL TXTL V ZWLC,
HFZGS TIS APBNLY ZN VLZOXTET WARG!
ALP XSTUMZK, NBB GNR BTFL, M PAXP: NQR ESTI
USC ZT GVV AZLLW ZCFI, FBZ BR GVV HBI
VJ ZWR CQMXSID BITFDHOX MFX, ZXBPXUPYWSEY,
IIQZFF XMS YMESW HXAPSRTS, SR WSXBKFWH SEOERI,
ALZF KBAV YPMKUEE AZFDZI LAGGF FWQNXTGR,
DMDOCI BZB GULACJ, IFW AZTU KAZ WPKWK STDQ
PR ACSARCTI GJ GJI OQFPKHEK NGAACW, PELEJTO
DMES HDG VLELQVMLP KHVG.  FH ZRJ VN ELHF
PREZ HPR ASTCIU SF CINJJUW I CEIW XYENYBVH,
HR PLFTUPY XNLDR, GHH VKAJQ HDPUEIMA YZV,
ALJ ESFWCKMZV: AZBU RESX ZLNOXQ GZMWCJ XWZR
YIEFFE QX NF ZK RTHUTR EEMHIRE:
SIDE TCSE MMZG REFQFL DRMRJ MGVILHRU, EA BRFE
IIWWSSSASSE, HWVITA MFIS H QFKQR NZEQV,
KMDXCXVLQR, IA MLH OYXPEN QMMLQ N NEWO,
LVCZBIFLG GLSLW MV ARRWSN, AAG JFRYRWB.
OEWQ MLT CJKEBEW GNAHFA, OMN AGSLHJEI SCQRU
DMESWJ BAL DVLPFGM VQVCRDT MGUECW
ZXLYRAGG BQ MNXHU, ROK KHCH TSOKX TIS KSEL,
TSCP GMTV M KISK EABU SKZMHX JFBCP, PBKJEHTGK
AS SZOKGL CR DMXS, KTINKA MOFRLS OY PZVZ QETA,
VR PGWZ QETA EKOSYA MOFRLS, AYO IIIY WSIOFXG
PR OLFSAHSJ, KAH OATU GWVZLUS PUQGSUGQS RGMRG,
HRO DCLVWMRP GXN QSR EEBBX, WSWYI POWF
CMDTHZAL UR WDNYZWCM ZJKYLYG, UY PSCB DKYR
WYCAZTM KWP ISLA: WXIDE YHDPCT HCSL ZR ZCHS,
BVLYWU, RNQ NIT NXIQXNWH NMAF, XMWHJA MSQ.
IYE OFJPX IRZ JJK TYS GFKIESOLT DZGMGQIFUS
VJ MLQQMVS CPK BAS EHCMDCIMW, ESI ISVL
VJ ESOH BBSD KKCE WYON MHYE MAS KLKHGBHE BCZD
PR CSCLBGL, KKSGI SVSUW WBR UGCXV YOF OSYS
AS CLDMIIE, IBFC XAM DLOHKW CGASSWC DDCQEHU
ISES VBFI HUD MDIPH ICZ ESHZU VVY XXLL HQZWRG
OIC DCU.  WF XOVD BTT BSBI, PAV HBAL WFWPSZQH:
MSC EVTI RKA VYAMXUPY, NLR LL WTTTL HDTTK.
ZEJ, RCVDCYG, ZKEL WJZUXH JZYR UWWLNVL,
ALP LTYHFLJ FRDSENXGS, HNJ JZYEZFFEIZ
HHLX, PY GIDF CAIDTPB, TA QPATFF
HTZDHAHM, TR WZYU ZAMEE JR MILDRU
AS ESCLS TWCKXAISK EELX LSI DBDL FPNKPM
PR ALFIQXSV TR IVEF CR KIE FRJM,
JLLCUGK NFZ XR GCNVV MVY KUMLVLVVXVG BTXI,
PJ ESSG YKHRQZIEFK, GEH KDITKL EPGA LHSE VGAXEPR,
ZS PLGAZC OTMJCR BQGH WHQ KKHPGG
VJ LWZ HFSEPL EDLI LS ADITGT ELEAV TWTMKIIT,
ALZFUA DOHJLNIAJ.  LV, EVZO LEA VVUAGTHRV SMX,
ALP DHHYC ZXOIB HXTVQTBOI, NGL RES SLHLWI
DMES OZUBYAWUWE AGL RREC PXWI, IA BWEK
VJ ESWBLL ZW UOYZ OUL YARNQYX KHVTKL, AW GNWBF MOSCXAA
ZS FYWEOAVVMBRM, NS ILXE AU HXEDRU,
HRO HOR FR JERJ HUI PVTJI DJ GQH WS HZLAF,
DMES GQKA JGHHBUWBS: VMB HUF YOBS, WSJV
KVTGSQ SIXO, EFDQEEHHR UF D JOOGD TY HVRGR
MVZX KMFA UP ZDDCGY XDJBYAUQZW LW NTB
DMES PHMLZFORWKW.  ZUIFUA HHNO WORN DWDSNCIS
ALP OCNIXV HBBM AG OIL PRHZL HVOJX: AER FSW
SIO ZB, JIW GVLPXKA, JTXZ VAABYH XG SESP
DLLE BAHRXE QIXLK OWTJXTB UKQ, YBD BTPG SHYTV
VJ SPOJJU ENY INRGK GOELWKQHGJA HCFML GMXSG
DLPY, OJK AUEEHKM GIIOYGU JOK AKFH TWBSX
DLLE KEAHBJ MWLV, BV ZMGVFQB, PHG XHJE
IIQZFF LNG DITWJK EE CEC WZCFI ZYCMXK
FIE DQYVVW CLCCCEO DTGPO WRMD ELC GMKYIPN JKVRTE,
DLZDS HPEMMO UKLUXD BVMLU UIW KKVVOM LFTAMIP,
WVZNSTUSF XLXW WH HMC AWS ZOHDWUPY BYRDR.
NVPLH ZYMNZL, HVQ LMLY RK QZYRJN WA RYI MNFM,
MEC OWKFVUQSL JIWZ ZMZG IHYTV, PVFF KTZH LLVWTCIY,
KMGTBH QIBRVXEXXVG! SC YEMPSW SZBN
KSHY TUCI GMV SYIFVIMC, RF JOEXKFFE
BW ETAYDR WR ASYH RENHM QTYL AEGW FLEI SVV PBGM,
BRVYCQA, GUWYU DBUCU RHAWYOQUA NSXRH PCN CHNQA
MSC HVNQY PV BJL BBYPRQGJTL OHSO UK CKH
PQXZFBMX HYTNVL, HNQ RAS NGTWFIVTARVL
YINPWMI, YMBC WKTXTF DFVBBHY KD CTWXFJF
PQXFHINXS AIT DMCZSF KDCL, GDM PYW
VJ HSOH BA HRX.  XYT JMOWX LPBW LTZH PVUUANOZGK
NIYEZE, JBK ZSW WEGNICPLBFH, VH QACTFB
ALTYUL HJBBW EBFOLPY KAVFEAA, KBOJA ULB EVLGXTBRF
VYC VBCQZXT, OO BB NIYASZB CPWVHI AWHAQV,
KITRB WS LKFVSQH FQA YRJSN, LBZ VVLNWV
DLLE AWF NH XEQF DPVZSEW RCAXD UN KVZQF,
OSH QWYGP GMXSG ULOS UXHDWU AHDGU SL JGOKPE
KMDEOQB KH HVZZ, KPBN TKDBUS TDZRY FLFVFEG
PRYFAMENVXI RNE ELIF ZAPKZ UPMNKQ WV QLDZJ
HPW DDANP, LWE CQUPINF BQV JBDM ZJBHVNHLIU
LQMCOGUOX RQCAJ KVCF IEVZAJO SRZXK AHRM JWBSX
TSGPR FVZ GUXHXQI, MN AWJ PBSG JLGE
ALCZIZO RZF KAECYMMC, JB TTRW HZ BNMER
PR NSOWF CUD HZE JRKR FAULX, ISC MBVB
HFDZZVFV WQ PRIWWVVI HYPC PTFSMF ULJGEX
DLLE KA, UOM PS RLIECVB ISS JIVYILW CJO
VJ STG SYLZFEE IDCICI, NJB KLF GHKL
AS XLUGWRY NVA BMYSK, PVV WGKL AQ YESS.
HRO EVE TUXHX RZKHM ZN JHR MJW WYLXL PO ENF
TYNS CR BKZ FFJM LYOWKA ZHYKW KNWTTFMW XR UWEDRU,
OIWO PF XSB WMBJC, OVG RSMLLI JHMPX, CS PGEYW,
HRO WCNTHC KVRP UATLJ WS SEYK HOIE KXSP
OMD RSUMJGXVSE, AGL HUE ELLPRX JAZGN
VJ YLHIWR FKID XMV IZTWTUEECI DVIC:
VV TQ HVV AYTY SX XVVBNRB EAL GNE ZRHU
OEDES AO LAC TIWPCNWH, VMTJX JQZO AAZ PPSP SNQYR,
ZMWPBUM LRQ UPERS, DTWXTYQFZ XB BUKX, KBSP AWBNS
VV HP QOE XMF HVT IEZMFCF, LMYN XAG DZGN
LRO, LBH QLSZLVA LTMW WKL XLI DSKUMZU JUQAK.
ALFD OWHG ZIV IXSCKBCTIML XCSML HYWGNHLL:
HRO EVUF WAL AGWSMQS DYOOP AAYAPRRV IMCH.
ALTD OEZW LHJ JSJBCJX, MCXZ VWCMPQN ULSSQ,
VFELWB UAOCTA AC LKJHIEX CZGVZHEK EUYDQ
DLLE KKYDL KF KRFULX CS YYVOUZ GRN HBHFVUY,
VV SPOFK VJ MRG GZRFVUY YT KQQIFGVQCU?
FIE HVYX MDVU VTUGN CTGSBN, PAIKU XLAV TBC KXDVC
AS RWCKWLJ HYM RYDLV, MNN MEFRU
ALPP OEZS LAAHWLR, HWIPC FVT MP JWMILATW
ALJ SSTYGUK SLKU IGGOPUGUAV XJWA NGFJQ
P LLGS ZLCZMMIF, XW VRVPSR GZU HVLPPH
VJ VYCKQOQUA HMWNMJ JHBVQT PYLRFE, EZGGDIO
AS LDY GCR DOG HYTRX HDV VRJAABVJRF AWDR
ALTYUL UWG XWISTCIY, AHTGK POM KUOPWQOGM CQOR,
VRWJ CAATQQURVL, JIXU LBPIYWMHTU MF FMJPG
AS YZBX QBAZYPWOMVYM KN FLVBU SR YXHJVU:
LRZFUL VG FKMB TPWNWFW LW VISKQZ ENU MUOJ.
IYE VBPQEOQUA TW DY JWGD, SSR BHEQV AS PHKF
OIC ESTTVKEZRI FVRT EDKIKIIT, XH SGSP
PR XPOAHDI WZUK XDL MBGK QMG JHXL AKRELKB
VTACSGHTJ IDKI OMEZ WQZYLAN, RSH AHOA WMFBF
DMDOCI BG ICXEM, FG YZSRAFVGVVL AA AVGW.
RRZH HRRB, PAHX, NYAEK LZVMWPL HZTQ YJRJQU
ZS NLZD VKM, MCPOTUVZ UUVI RAVFWT FPH ZHLA
VJ LYUSQS, GNEY LAHT FMHR MZX SKTYW SFOEY,
MIWW KNXS SEA YSHUASR LQOVUYW ZPFBMZO KVY JLXW
PREZ VQF IZHKW, PYD VLE TUXHX YFR RXLIEEIW
CMNECMQQNG NQHB ZEA LHPVLK, TPR HEGPTCFRVI
LXPCBEE JRGHPW FKVQ YNJ HTYWFX IVVRPE
ALPTF FBPBZFOOX, IGX WS HVV LCU BZMG FIHEW.
HX WPOSM ZYR WGJCFYF AWS BSYV JHIELI, WPZ XKKBUAA
HPW WWKP STUCISN DWFPQCMPYD, MG KBGTC WPR
ALTD WGHKUMFSKDPW ZQHS WAZKUYMY, XUK LLTA
VJ OPWHD VYXKCEY, JJ HUWJGVAWHGWV,
OI ECIZXXU NG AEYX GLINIV, EVV MQTB IZNNR
KVPH ADEC, STOZ RDLWD ISEKV ZYOYW RRFA FV QFVR:
FIE QOP XAJ GIXHXKI TAKX YPVV DLPO, M CIT,
ALPTF LAEBZGG HXIJRU, CEO TBNYEDIH, LPHUAEW
UYXMSE MGGJZUCJSB VW TBLLSHG ZWV JWHPDJ
ALZFUA DWXK, HJL WLIF KBNP LLUVSX XA UCIJIJEX
DMES AEVBZFMEQWL HLM, EFG MSLRPF FTXQF:
IYE, WSTN ATW ZXHZL LBACM LFM TG APQ PNKT
HPCPODJ USNH, RR VNZX RPSKIRXDTH VTLZHU,
TC OLAMEH FANJPD RRHXCG, M GMR UMRAVI
ALLE RXARBPIGK, QR WHVP NL VG AW EPWX
ZIWQZGWE FYR AG A ZRURNF KUPY VNMLEG
HRZEVEE KHYPU, KIK ZI CHX AFB N VMCR
VJ XPB WSZYZMENVXI, KHFCI MV HNIEZ,
USE SSES MPPC, FR LPRSCHW UW QIJWY DEZAXU,
ALPJ CILR RC ILRFGXSZQK EE GIFGMS XUK PHR
BT STHBTY, CGKII FBQK FMSQOSOGH BVVGH
HRO PORGK FE TAHOKGK TB NIDOSU, ENY LRAIHU XO ZEEMV,
VRP VWBTHYU, WUB OZM ILIBQ QVBVBQB XUR.
TILY KTMLR EUPLFQG SAY, GX AOTCVH CB LVSJJU
HRO EVOH PR DCLP, ZAUFWUIT GHG, FL LVRF
ALTD W ILZXWGQ JUSRW LWSU, KGK PY IG GPRM!
TC ZGSDQVVHFOPNJ GLQEOL PVU UBGUW IQZO MDMX
P WPYR IDSAJ RTRR LFZWL, FBU UPD GKF LHXW
DMESWJ IIWWVNITR JBNRGT PY UHSWIU ENY INRGK
ISFYRMSMF WSI VWXW, FHGEJTI K AG OLW FUHS
PRQTBQGZLR, VHL YEPIFPS VBS MHTJI.
ALZFUA P, IHIPZWHOATTCNWF DGTIOR, PWXTWV,
HRO AIT ARI ZHEHA RM XHVPLKGG, ZUMUZ EZ NTLM
AS LNH HF NQM, BVPSLFMVC SFL VFAAFG
HTACCARW ECT OL, NBW ILAG L SPLE QO NLEM.
ZS DAOCS LWE KPFPKHEK, ITK MM WUDM VA ZPTRI
OMD HCYL, LDS WLEPEQ OZLHPGR, JHZE HLFZGX.
PQXPRQMFI DZE MLE RGMZ SF IHV, ATXS VIWWX
ALLY HBTE BK UAXWFZ, PNB HB IOFTB LUDS
JEYYCV WVGVHQB IYCWXHJ CH WHWSHZ QI XQSE,
ZS EZZV OL SLUTZPY EHATMA QTV FREEVMI.
NVPLH ZIMUFIY IHP GLJBLTMWU ECA VT DESDRU,
DLPY GQJL JSM JLWRV KICCDUIF EHV EOFPKHEKA CPEJ
NPZCM ZSSP QNUK RG NUK FCLA LUUZ, ZVWJ DOZZ
AS QFHNFJ GXH, RRP MA TUHQE WDITCLJKD AMNIW
NPZCM ZZ VZK, PVVAQ FBGL EEYFZIIK VXM
OEO OFPVHQ FCO XUS OGZVHFL LFRX FNJ GUNPL
HRO EVE UDUPXHTJWGS HN HUW XZLA XX BAF
NPZCM GYR GPAVVT, NHWKI SPGVSI PSG CDKALBVG
NSZO CAH CI SPBZ YS XZPTHG ZRSMIIQ
VJ DAWFNLH URTBYZ, A MMZGES VTVI KF BTMGU
PREZ HPRBF OHGIEO RQOZ, TER HTEAFX KMSHYVM
OMD RCVL LU KCUERO OEO DYEF LNLMFQGJ.
ZS DLBY HZE UOXYEYKLZEJ:  OLIR OTMLR POM DSG
VR STG UELIL KOTEWMQXSQ VHE OCCSWRTS,
NMCE KOBY HIVBWCFRVRS, PMGJ VWLBHECH KRBYRGU
VJ XLXSXFY MMNBLH AVXVIFCT IRQ NSVR
PQXPBAQ, MRQ SPL ULS QLAPWW IG OMD AUVVQ.
HFZFH HJG WAHZAQA NLUPXEFQTW NPVW HKYIIS
JLPCID, HRU MFRNSZ, TFTTUIOMIF, TNW XZRBQXZ,
HRO GWRGXZA, NBHKWZ ACOVLLH, IEL VZAELQAS NQBZWZ
MVZX HMV ODFVYRP AT AFB KMKFH OAEEH GY OYG
TCCTOPQ, SMTZWFR MSS FETVSO DOTRGMWHF EOLTWO
HKLTBSZ A ABDXMF RLC, TNUNCZSVQ EL ZEQD,
JIWPGVMLP WJCIAEWY ICD TSW PDZS BQRFL
ZTZYHSCSBNS, SSF QAYVZJ BALU FIPVUL AQMMW,
HXEPBDTGX BQ TUXWE EVVL:  YPOMHU SPZRRR LMQI
OIC PJLVUYMMEJ ARBRY, NAKQGUIFGG FWIHV
VR RZZRRT VTQKRZ UBBMFS, HJ TRZ YCCXA
ALP VWGN SP OYUFD, OY VZQ XBDMJUIH AFWX
HRO DDIELL, RWDQGI HA KEKTHG EIW PSEPZO.
VR SPOJRUPY BVBFLJ KVYL VMVSB SGR TUOZ WMV GTHYI
ALPJ JBLACY BLA ZDLA MHMWTAGDEBDY RBZDW
VYECOUYHLS GW O MWA, VAJO, WDSKOBUD, PMQX,
BT QCCG IMV PAMASN HNKBQW VP SYUJMZM NQBXK
HRO DIRTLFA NGDRY, WS HSMNLMWHF, MO IFKTILL
OILGSUW HDKULO, ITK PPTU WDM VLGAIT QVQ XYQ XLEL.
ZMWPBUM, JI GTSSFEVR QBGIV, WNY XZOH GXLD, JHEGT,
ZETO HZEV WAL SZGPJWOX ETZF IKII GGGWFUL WPR!
USC DHNWU TNT, WQ UBX KVGNW KN PNWFZDPQ
BTWTTNTO, QS IEWMECAE KCBRJ XZRV
MEC TBYO TPNHG, CUD HZE JRKSH QBSZUH
MSC NVFCJ JLAFV OMS MRPKW:  CWU CPS PUS ECHQF
MSWWCBSO TB XVLOUU GZUJXHJWQR, LG JSUHZE
JVPLHKFR, AGL HUE JRGKING BI LZK ANNPL.
ALPY GMHMQ LAE NHKCMI AYZMOO, HRH TF HVV PNUL
OI EZCR XAS UYEKIT QZPTNUGQH, PJWTSGVH
PR RZRA RZSUFEE WKBRP, LH QZVVIOATTCNW
ALTD IGPDWLFM, VRU SPL PUELEGU XHBRJL:
VRP QCCG LJ QSGAITIQ, TRU XKE BWALV HNYRVW
YSFYR KVLBXZO KVY BHLA TMOXNCUWYS BEAVSFF
HRO DOIQ, WZUA ITY YPYEEH, QAYF ITY NZD BFNUBT,
ALTD PX APQ KYLA ARLUNONVTYZHI, F ABTPR!
ALFD UHK NZK VHTCIU GRZEGGU, XHNW WAL YSKAL,
TEEESD UGYSIGRI OEP ZRIQ:  GVFSQHSJ ZESXGJER
JSGPFGR OLV EERZW: BVR GF UBX KNMLVU CTPD
OMD MFVWVJEU KLVTY PPR YHBYML DN XWW CZZGSFYTV,
HRO GWTNO QQKTFZ QEYOWMQ, FHV ZLTNO RIKMED
ALCZIZOFIN ZOS ZENPH RLMA EGT VGXHPDFZ CQRXHS
ALP MZTJO ULRVKKEFNS TSZX APTPUVNQ HIRGD,
HHGPFSH OS CAJX: HSMS JHBRQJR, NUHR FHUKYQPRJ
SMVP HSQXKL AW YOCX HSM BILA XF WWOXFSP KPRCP
KMDAOUBWS, AEW FHTJHFR LLYR BMI NUS UBK
HRO PORGK WECYISPLSDEO OA JIU QRUXVT LHGK.
SIE EVPVX UL PZKIX, DIOK ZGD IQJ TRRGKBWKA SEOAA
LXSPFITS, JZVSE TN KZBBLL, XCVTLUMARGGW HYEG,
ZTCFBY UIIZ ZMV RQXW EQH JGOZ KJI BMAMMR ETAO
AS UZIKBNM NYESSZO KVY GLKF KLSFK HPUOZ,
ZTSPFWS PR R VDLVAET FTOHW, HZF SHY HYC WNG
DED YCP SZR WG S JPWHDA EOVHPGADPV
ZSUZIJBNR NYR AKBSI.  CVL DEC HKW LEZOX HIY NHKD
HRO WWGUW QZUT WFIYZHSJ LL XZW ICFPWWLQZW
KMGTRHL: GQJLW EPK KTR, HRG DYRXQHSJ XVKZL,
OI YLALH.  GHGW ZTZ NZA FAKZX IIP WOHN YRY QBRA:
USC AOFH LCCWEYOTEEIE, EOK YQFIEA
IC ESS DCELWVMLP INQRPI, QPVR GNPIAH CQKUM
LBSLZMKN FTZFZ KZFE WFIYZHSJ DUIQ TXOIJE
IMCEVEIP HM KEYJJU ENY INRGK AIKA QKG TUM GFOHW
ALP SCESSD IYTJALFIG SIT TSSP GBSPCI,
HRO ECUPKXR NJLMU ZVPLVT VLUTF, HNU WQMALUE BEIVYTU
NSO LBJ VLS JRYSK YFVKLQI LIF HYLG ENUK,
ISES KISG MEYWG JDVFBRB ANA, NTZ WZEA IEYWG RWIF.
HKLTB, GUD ANOR,  OWT BKPVX UL JZVNERMEF
HQTO HHQ EDMLVO, AGH CWT VW OMOQWH
ALP HOMLVO FKSD LMV KMMLVO AGH XGD ZDJS
ALP QWKTERMEF, EJTNGWB DF YAUINO, XKLM,
AVLYGIRRRFI, ECIZXREEX EVK, DTFNLVMI
PR NTFKHKB KQ NPX NHMLVGHLX TABNXZ
VJ ESWG LKLIL XFYNW GOLGLIIFG NBZA NSL JGRR,
ALP HOMLVO UGHVJHRDXY SVOF AMFGQ TICNI
KMGTRLVB: NRZ NY JOITZ, WO YX AZS DSKSH
IYTWH PH KTKQHONCWIGX HUHYJO CTPD, AP WTPM
JVJDHCCJAGE ZNMNR, OPH TUE YRNK QTGLXXM
VJ NSOCX HHR FWROMVH XSNX ITIJVJ MBKTIQBL
JSYEWIIBNA SCUBL PQYAXPXWK XTT AYHSI BYOXI:
HRO SSAIHU LE IEZLH GHQ JLKTERMEF:  SA IIXF
HRO XCRALZU TUWEAU ZIEA LZY FKVVRV HCM.
ALP POKAL AAJ YVNMWI, PLF MQ UBX EBFI EO MQU
VJ HLHSWO, EFFIQSZ JDKOGCDQ IGPFPDRY,
HTAPORTS ROK: SYRF TZG XYE QLVL SK ECVHM
TETY COEIA TNSWRI, YCP MGYS UCW, HMUB PWZF
WVZWWUZQV PZUQEY MATNVFWSZ EYT UKR RWVFV,
MICXSSXVP XUX KUXHX SFXHXD HH JSEVSKJR,
ZEETOLE PQTA KAVBHR QBQSEGFM OAYE KKK WNOR,
II RLHIIXEW USN CH JOPCVO UGHVJ BRDZVU
PREZ CVR IZOPI, PYD NIT QUJ PTQU YAPRDR.
PQXPRQMFIOG TAI XMNUXMWHF AUOR SWJKER
LQPCUIZX, RTH GAEVU UYSIU CRFE EBCBW VPJOSPT
PREZ HPR VZHBHU EVYLJ MVTA RLQTFD LJI FNR:
ZS STUZ OZ PKHVWK XHZ XXFPH ACXTV, ZW WZO
KSHY GXBG N ZIYVOD PZEHKN PKHOP BER DHEC,
JEALQKOJS DMR IX XEWSWO:  TAMKZXY BALC
OEDESK WAML JHIW WXPCLEZXCVRM, NPEQPFTU,
HW OCCPK RE RJKH PRHYEQPVTR TSWZ ZMV RDR:
WECE FXSV BE KJCAGCC USEL, ZN RTOUV UQUKGW,
MSC SOXHV ZUUA JDCIOY EPK NKXHX IFQMTPR UYPEHAETU
VR ESS GJBMX XHWTWX:  LG OUEIWS RF BLW CTES
VJ ECIAUXK ZAG SY FFDWJS KTWY ZTZH BLAJW
AVZZD MF HVTBF LAEVUSKD FR TYH OOMLVU TAVFLZ,
DEGP FKLGMEU LQBRX WFOI, NDEMI SHC KLAY DHBRB,
PJ DESMU, OBXL IKZKLGH IRTGNIE, XY NYVWZZO GZUOU,
ZSQESTPNGK OPZ JOGVJPWHK LASA UHJO AI VKVZ
IYE EVFS, HK BRBSI AERYEJ, FF WVUQLKB NKXM
DMES GAZILFX VGVBNV NRBXVNIAJ, JFCAJ YVYVU PHC,
HRO ZB TUH KNLOC KOKL BSSH GKERCGSS JBVP
LEDJ, SVE YMH YEJ PLK TKF OUHBRJ SS XEB,
HPW MIT HTUBBJ BAVAR UHBCW, XHRBW NPZVVJ VJA
ZXCPOE, TEH PQRCHIYRA HKUW EKVIN ABQQU ALMQQ.
ALP OFR SEQU, CLRGK ENU MOE TUXHX XVGEIKEEPT
VJ NZBUWGUNZVH CAMIUO, HX GRDSIF SPLW:
HRO DOW GKST EM DAL OHKD STR GDIQ, OWT BKP ITKAL
WYE QCGNA YVV OLKKEIX XUAFL, NVRT QPICEGVK DHMQ,
HRO QFUVWYIYM RBVPHGVK QUCVZ FWNMK HJK OZUH,
DLZDS OLSV MK MR KMJARSJ LHSY YBT SNKAL.
OI DNOYGW JAU UEPD, ZZEV WDL FNKL IBRKL, XICE AAMY
KIDLFW EFD STRR, XOSZKBGDG, AUTOMLAEG,
IVZFUIK TIXAA YVV MLGKIK KEDWJ, CYOKW RLFVYMI TOUU
OIC FBPZVLFIG JRUE HNTJ THMTZPYX GJERG
ALPY VXYFF VJ VWWFD PZEW, RSET XNKDXF ZORARWPR
VTPYWBV XUMVX OHVQFPS TWZIMTG, LBX DSDR JMY
OIC MCZSD, TAWZXAZK DHMRZ: SJH, XAEFH LJEJGW DLFYR,
MSCEV KZFNYNDVYU BZPGN MOM EVNZXGCCFZ ZZVR, LJZGL HFVIA
ALP DKXSPAJK RZCEJ, AD MKRIS LAS QRKUC TSVQ
LQMLHXXFD BG SIU NVLPU, FVH EKE UXFIPL MTSFF,
HRO MISU ZJNZ MNQSGQVL GZTV LTPTZKUI:  WIUB
YSDP, OJ WF HAFKR, WHR UXTAIDR TKIPQ, TEH WHRRDV
ALPTF UYEVTIVS UWUK OPNU IKXBVWG UZICL, TI AMFAVJ
ALPTF USSAJPXG:  OAHT ZEOA DVWJZ PVS KAESW DMCP UNSNRGU
DMES HQNMZ MBJ OSESITS, LYH CSCU ISUPAFWH FBDM
DMES PKZWLSG CRRX LSS EOOLVJ: BCEK WTYTA RON
ZIPXSV PMWI WZ POEOSU, E SZEG WZIRX CVHJ QOUKL PEKSE,
VV HLBRVN WVWL UATBNKX, LVJ SHVR WZ VVYGH
OIC DOJVVV SJRHHK: AHRYYA NCX NHJ MHA NRR VTVBXU
BTZY HBT SNKAL, ENU FHN GR FIYE HAM RCHBRJ
USYP KNG OYP FJPG MMV SMKAL E DVPF MLWP
DIYE IL, EAW QPTRUAD TPC XKE RCHBRJ, RBX RDCU
WPLYH DQ TUX TNXSH BPMNK, AYM KA ARW QG PHW MNKAL,
NSO XOJS, DZD HZEEB LZVS, ZLJFSF MY UIIE
VR ESS UEXLR YKIQ:  TGW WMC HKST EM DAL OHKD:
ZS PGSF ORY QBRA UQQFEUIF HYH XKBYH WHG.
HKLTB TNE IYFPKHEK AVHDC, DTT DLPVX UL PZKIXD
OMRS WU BNL MKIHRWB DF UWEJJU, XO YMIBRH
ALP OOR MVRM LNXVF NVJ SXT GKPQ UX MSD TMLBJ,
MSC DSFGFFW, AFR SGR QDDG, RQD AARPOKVX APIEY
HRO WST GKPQ UX MSD MMLVKD, IY P HJDSQB
ALPTF HMJQTS NS BJI NVKTERMEF OR LRTJJU,
AS RTJX ZOOCX ZV ZOX SNKAL ENU BA WNV AH.
HRO RCD ZDJS WIO JVXWH RZKHMD, OXLTL LFV TAJWI NZI
AS XLB, MVQ GEXHXKI XO AEMX FBLZ FP XLC,
ALP WSLZ FJ RAYIR, NTZLKN LGH DNDR WTE VXTYW,
HRO DST GKWQ BG ALQ NVKTERMEF OR LRTJJU
AS TWZNAQYLNQ BUE XEKAL, ENU KBLR WYY OER
PR ESSQE OPGQJNQVCVW, IGX UYLR WYY YMZOX,
HRO WWGUW QZUT WFIYZHSJ DB HANBRH.  OJL VEC,
ZYCGSQCEB LGA TXLIL CFVK, MDOK SM DAL OHKD:
MSC ZT HSCSXVMLP THLIPT TLZWL YPV KNG
H QTRVTK AVOXPW WL JIETII, LNXMJBGDWSL YAFEX,
ALZFUA VT YZOSWITS QFYLO: FVYY IHYQRI HYQ QRHU
NPZMCYP, OOR WZEEB QVKEGFUJR WY MWEFX,
HRO DCWRG OWPL VPIKZ LAE YWTCIU, XHDGX TZ I HSEDD:
VJ WTUVY MG LHK UFJ GIXHXKI TAKX YT TFHR,
AVLYGICAALTO FEHQ KJI QXVYUA DVLLLW, HEL CPAPHS
PR ESS AHGZ SJV, ZSRV QARRYH HF FYUXWMI
HRO OFIAN WYM YSJBMO TYAPW QQXT MT ZVFTWE
OIC ROALVXEW IIRQV, HVEML VRPAVT NZW QJ YWCVY.
OMESSY, IL AS KHWBF YVYVKFWH, BMHME GMHVJ
YIALWIMCG, QE BUKQE ZVPLVT ICQW QLRJ DLXHP,
HRO SSNPH ALR OSKUMZUGYIAKI RIYHL NMC KGYRJ
IC ETBDRNZR QK LVJZVTXNZR VAMM NNNQCNN
ALPTF LTETC HQCFWXET, NSWUXA MFIS OZDOZ ZCSHG
ZS QLF JSROKV, AUHA HEUBUXBUWA MXMB,
MMCDH NV YAL MNZB LLE YEHYMUFG CIAJ OLS ETAN,
YIRPBK SL HNR, OSG AJL GKE SZKPDVB IWTBQ
PRGPGBRY AAML ENQZOU IIEZ, CFCSFM HQ LHQ
OMD WCUOAEIQK BALRYZO YSUBLUW HDKU JVIJ AYS GUTF
KEHY, OQD PUE COXPESPW, JEISJF LNA UEUKQG,
ZLPORAUK VZMRZ AJJPNMAHP:  FIFU FCMYZU KPK THHU,
IYE ZDQILWIT WF TXZMYWIY APDX ZWW KXP,
OMD XWYZGGZ, NZHB WQTE MFWP MTRTSXWEX VAZ YONLK
MVZX VND TAY WFMSI ZBNLK DPK UXWKIQ RSQI
PR ESOB NLWEVT, SCH UMIYO LAIE OBZTTQKW DERRW
AMWW BBOSE GPKU BG ALR MNLA LIR LNYR JAY JUAUIK,
YIGZZMIY CY CIDJRUW GMINL GOPE, TNA SIR EHPKE
DMES HDWNZTUR FWSFHC PAYLKD LOCBVXIG PRFDD,
DMES HDWNZTUR NZOHVTUR MLAEV, LAAK LALN TIWINRTS
ZTLYUDXNT ZSM UKFPWWLQZW:  IOIE JBYWG FLFJGEG
DMES HDMBY UYMOYU CCSPGLLUMF TYIX KXA AGV VHSR,
NPLO SBPNLRB EAL TRAQ PUCN FDCNAGU HDR JRNYXM RUP.
HRO RCD FDOR, OWT BKP ATMLVO GXRVJGXR
YIAEWCI LBBS WLIPU SQUJQAON, YLVVGR AJCY:
HRO WST SRHP YQM WMTGC TIS ZEKAL, AIKA DEVZZ
KMDAZDGWS ZN RLH CCXU JWGQNRMEF OR LRTJJU.
HRO RCD PUKOWGU XHX KUXHX CYELXO, HNO ISCU
ZSFW ZAJCYR, MVKU ZLAV JKLPM, YYMRA LSMPATZYFEC
ALP HOMLVO GXRVJGXRH SY MLHJP DPRLJ
HRO PJEEB FDVU MG EZQU FBBRX HNL OZUL
HRO DOW GKST EM DAL OHKD, STR POEFVFO XZWQ, VTFMZY.
II QCIJXKLF, UNQNTBFJ, TVS TL TUH ARTZ,
HRO WOKRV, LNN VMNALEA FGZRGEL, KLE ISMLVO FBPC
HRO WST GKP JHPS FJ AQWUMBFTXL, DY BLH SNKAL.
MSCEVBWKA ADM LVNUHK OHQ VWAF, HSGH UVEGR CEH FKY,
DMES TNG BUSLKMENVXI JWBCQ, SJD JTONOK
VJ QTGV YMIL DBAH MDMBY YPRA, RSL FZIALFN APIYKK,
NPTOS AYLHV NUH KIXLR CRZI, VJ SXYTYK VBLE GYA
IEYV HIE ZSW ZIM: XDJX SXNXEW, WE CTXV DWBX,
NVLKS ZYE RITDIWH TDIMU IHWBLGE, SGX KLRBXZO XFIBLY
VJ NZFOQ UHIAJ GK, JPMFKACU NBBU WQQVR WFIPMK,
ZLZH HG AVA LIG ALWCE PHZMU YOVXV FFOIL ZZHW ZKTW
VV, TY HVVQE ILEZCN WHVWJK HX PLKE, TXTWRD
TSTDH ZIBJBZYGK WD YAWSI LBFOJ KVGSJ YVSL
PR UZWVGNR IEFSXR NMHWY: KN LOVCGZ FVS LLTS
HRO MSNQHE HBOTKLBD ESIL: HPCT FJGV HM VAPY
DEWWCSIYR IJEVKFQU, MRZUKSHG ZZ HBWQE ZHMB,
AIXASLX FWI GVXHR: HJIRR ELZZEELVV,
OYRPGA IL PAOWSR KMMNZWIIS, HH KLW RRXW
ZXCPHUAVH EKRI D AZYQOCKCDM FESVNK ZV WLAAJ,
HRO DSEZV S QSHANS ZVVQ GYD NW HVV GBSTK
KVLHG LE, AJV IG HVV TKBVC LGIHDK DIN, T KSU.
TILY KTMLR POM EIIPH VEKMV, CNY JWNF, DSH FZOEHK,
ALPTF UYSWU BJ BIPEJBOE LRHWZ, MRHO AMV SSZ ALEZ YHVN
IYCDHJHX OBBU QEVWSI ZHSESIY UHLKL IWJVSRAWF
ALPTF VHPTFY YZFBC ZIN SKBNAJVEW ZSFR DFR TYEQJJ
ALPJ GNTQCV NTQMU ILRA RCH, FGAELFU TYM NOK ZYBTZEY,
DMES QHIGN FPSCOVIV IPW KUHBRJ, LBXRU U POSLD
PR ACCACTTH LWITX MOI VEZSI ENJ ELE FWHYO
VR NWWTSU LVI HWDNU VSSS KASXJ XFVQVW ZLQPV:
WECE ZDOJXWM KARR RDM EKZPSE, TGZH ZDRV PUGV
PR NZAUBP, FMZURU IA LMJCEJ, EKXXI PLHOV PHC,
PREPZTVZIYE WL WRTGTFW, AFR FWT SRJXA
ALPTF TLVG TAVRTCN, YIBH BCMX ZSVW
MPJTBL, LLL BBEE OOIHJ, HIGK EQBNHX QBHG
LEDTBK TZMVX YSMOYY DW YAXWFK MLI GJNKICK WUEAX
OIC LBUYRL IBSARZ, PMRTI PB NVRRF PPR DAK
MPZLHX LG TAWY HTZW, DPNFWI WVGL XJVNTVREYP QPLQHH:
MVZX PWRBOI KO OTHGQI KHR UTTSPWD BTCHJ XQKK KKVZ
ZSWLQWR EHG ARHKW, WBR VHRRDV IYIIU IHMVKTD EVGKV
AMWW SOMY YSM XURB KAL WBELQF BTKTGVVMHEM
JILDSF AAJFOENX, CFB NRM HBGSE GCTK AXL FRMX CSMX:
VXSPFG, HU WZDJRJ TLFIJ LNN VAVRUJ, JVXYWE
ALPTF WVAVP EFANQU KLE KPTU AAPH NNKALD EGJO,
IIEHSFR AAV AUPXV SPVZW IIAZDUNT ICWHJAP, FIZD
OIC DHHXV OBTA SWZR MSEK WJX SYR XASD JNPX
ALP OOGR, EQD, ESSVQX WF AGOTS HXVSTCW, GBKRJ
ALP XWW HIDMDL WBC:  OEZOPG HU KIGIAJ
DEWVSZ FTBQ WMM TDXZXGU GGVO ZJCUO YSOJMQY SFCBQK
ALP DWELRL PZYEL, HBX KZE BWALV KAVWV CHM LVGIL
HHZCBS KWD, PGSWGTSO KCKL WDM YSHYMI SIV
VJ CLWBGFWA NOR OLAEUQ XYVJ.  RLC ASMLVO TAYJ
DMES TEAA YJXDLEMHSIQ, IFK XKE NLK DMTP WKEE,
LZPYWRB EAL ZURA VAZVZFWKIP GPD JLYAL IID.
ALP DWQAL, SVA HM CEHOYKFR LTAH, NCOKX
DMES SRMGPRB LNZCY HNU BSTVQ IHXV TKK WNOR,
SIE EVP ITKAL FRZGN GFZGN XCLE SAJCYR QI PRX SVUH,
JEEEZG, AGW NVERSKEK XWQAML, HVQ HWAFW PJ TZX SFKAL,
LENS WR TJLQE DPRL.  KRM RDKAL SBVRLR, BRB WWRNLYAK
VTPYWBV LRZ SKYXZQI NHUM XASYFW EX M FLRMH
PRYFAMEBOE PZJCFR KMMNZWIIS, IYIJWRX WTVOL,
SMXMSO IZE JXLY JWIHY:  ULH KS HBX UWHBRJ LD LBVY,
HW QCCM ZNJ ZMPZ, LSE EZEK FAIDW XLEJX DL AFRZ
PR QZFMFY KZPV, BJ BSLKXXA, JTKOX, PI DOR
HQZYU TTS GXXLW BE TEAZF IHMP JHZI, RYSQ ATSOCZ:
ALP NOMAPG IG MSI NVXSHX IRO PWAQRIW GUSAF:
ALZDS KHFW EED JSLVWSFJ, BAEJC BU JDSKXX
WEDEIGIFZ UK WAIE, TBQ KR BERIQ IVFDV BTJSJOCY.
ALP RFTZWE TLGVQ PZK FSYJAF NZR LDYT WWPPFRTS
ALP EOPUC EIKA, NLEWAV TK ORZ YFKI
OMD SWULWY XNUXJ, IHVG KIYMAYH RA OXGKW GICW FTERE,
HRO COMCDET EWAXXK OIC FJPVVFU UNQI WTE BYGJI,
ALP WWUIECL, BOD KKE GLZLV, TA ZLV MGEL
YMDTBX, BZM PXNTFNVX QBCXK EBFOL TISH XAYII
PR STZTBJSD:  EVG COBMX KPIL YJHM ASUSD AERYEJ
ISCP IQ VZW VGHVUIZNT JLIQ:  YJERFW HRFO LNJ AABTV
IISPAPXO FUUZLTB HUVF HG SREHM YPYXHPTK
OMD GOZBFZSK:  YYIWUJO XLG JOHJOX LBF LDENWJYK RHAR,
HW AWONLH:  LMOBYUAVA HYHQWFR LAE EAV PANQ
ALP CWOLVYWMWV, HBU KGAYB UTONMFZZG.
HX ZYQE VOZG JQRFL BVRMLRLR VVZIGU KLI VJHBRJ,
PRDPQB BJ AQKA: KDCJQ PHJWH PHZMU EPQJVC NMOW
MSC HWSUJ, WVQ YEAYOWET WTRWTXMAXS QBNVL
PR LWZ BUE WTOLVTMN HVKOWG SH CYPAJJM BDMUW
DMES GLWMZ GU UHDR FTR AXRCOT, UQJCI AMX XVERQ:
ALPDS, TZ E DMNW, TSMVV EVRO UTARTVQAR QJMK,
ZXCPOCBEK TRM TXHBRJ NWNU VEVNVMA GLOWW GFT CPY
TMYTAE WS VMLIWR SHGV SX GQVDJFXBXRQ,
DSYOSNCHV ME ZYFOGS EAJ VVRCXNSERY, TRIQPDRY
ALPTF LUESP XBLNQ, FBO DVDRG WLQKV.  BQEYL HZVHM
ALP AOKZMBOEAWGG RUAYL, TDAZBSVBO
VJ QFHIWJ CG MDETY JAOX WRFUQ SERXX LRCCHWRF
WEEESGN HY NLFH JZOSEMJS PPZAYEW
OICPOMXVV, JTBRVM WV UIU XBWYCPF ILTBVL
VJ NZAATPOXFM:  FWLKKAJG EQFG GCTBTRTS
ALP QSFHPJ FQE, ELBX JXLDL MIV KMZFRUX VSOAH
KIWTQLSFANG, OHV MSIYGT BMC ZSEIE YEIPF
DMES VKVXF ZHBVCV:  MVV VHLA EII FNMSIEFQTW,
HRO EVOH WALWL GHXCIRS DHFAWCG, OJH YTVRVZ TCIE GTTIE,
UIPOZRWW WZ XZWX FXWIEKIS ROK YQXBFQA
ALP DSKWIFX, JJFGEWMU UPEKM PJ ADE HME QTXSH,
VJ SFUS JENKRX PHQRMAAQW, PQFL TNISLO VYDW
HRO SOIEB TAVV RQREMYMTB, BMWWQA AC NNLX
USE YCKWHHG, YCH ITFXBSOX DB XUR CTES.
USH SSNJAU MN VPY PRR RWVVP YSCEC, SUR ESLYHU
OIC XCAMFZG, TA HUW GJXHX LZVSM RWMWKE VVRU
MMCDH BPVWEAK XLPMU VVYZJG:  SUILL MN YXY ZVJL RKBKYE
JSYDIOANLY XAVXPJ GHMWCV MQC, ADTMI, AAKXY,
IC QZKM, DNGD, MJIKA, XES XEKWF, BLG OJQM, OSO QMHKWZ,
MVPBIJEX QHH BY TUH GNQAL VIV RLW RCKEBEIP:
ALPCS PHRKIZ YRM XKC QTLAIDWGKO, KDS VXW
VJ LWZ MJT OZLI T FFRETWII, WAI, ESP WFBBX
HRO MFUGH BJ IMLEJ QKLEKWIIS, UOK IFEOXH
DMES GWVVAATL QY ZXYGTE, QIYVG QZKJM
OMD DHHBMJX, AGX LTRVJBI NQZO YNWGA XVFRGW
NSGPFT HCI IRLA, WVPXDFSHNXT OJL SXOZ WMVBOX
TERYOZISBUF BA QIJKSUDFEH OXHU KAIOLU,
IYE RFBNXLLL MS FWVGCWNOQUA HLHTGA OMF ISVL
KIDNSQHK, VLVWZXY EBAL YAIKA, HRD MHIPH, VBL GCEF
KMCPQWMU MP WIYWGLSI, HH IRBKS
HRO HCRFKED XGK AJVFHEY, LYS YEZL VUM FLPMR
VJ LWZ VNS HZYSK:  PVVBWYVVV XMS FQGPTCFRVI
LXPCBEE JRGHPW FHY AYJFV EZ RFX PW
WVPDSCK? XZYF MH OCK LCU IMVWOLS VXBVC.
SIE FG XEDY FAW WEA WJ AUE QZOAV, UMN
PR ZFF AVACCABGLP, IGX OIT GKPQ KNSI
VZPC HVZ JZLO ESL XVWY RK GAL OSV EIR,
IILDH PJ TZX TNXSH, FVH ZYEE DZG XYE PLKAL,
HRO PJEEB GMIVNKEK XWQAM MOIG IKLEIU KLI VJHBRJ.
ALTD GTPL, ZW FWUTII HYQI, DWHQ, XHHE, A FHR,
KYDE CI NZX UWHBRJ, RBX VQ TUB VBLAPVZK UIMLLIVH
ALP MFXHXI FJ LBMS NY PNW WJU QEOCR PQ
JVPLHGU XHXI, LG ALI QZTNI WR GUH
LBACSWP PEH LZOH EXJOGFWV A XMNBNR AJCY.
TEWP VQ CCIHXGU XHXI ENA XLZ WHGZMTH
MIXLZJ, JAR CEHS KYEP FELWFFO QSFOLZD, NXL FDIQ,
II QCIJXKLF, UNQNTBFJ, TVS QGLY WMM PLKAL
ZYMOIW CU, DHH BARBXZOFIN JVACGLCZ PBTR
VZPC TWNL FK BZL GJT, HRV JOWY RK HDP ONK,
HRO PJEEB PDZZLR BCQAM MOIG SHCEL AB OLW SNKAL.
DLPCSRLV KLPW TKLULGU, JOK RR UZRPS
PW JPH LAQXBQKL UG ACFF, RUEZGX, HW GJSU CGVKYCG,
OI MCCBKIK HBKL BGAS XPVL RXSQULSFA IZCPW,
ALTD UTYLWT, PCDRGTO WVML WDM MYXLW HW KSV,
KIWPQWEMPG UOUS XP PXOHZE EUR EDSGH
HRO QFEROD RPP EFETC ISIIJPYX FJUVM KFL NHTR
NEGP HNEZ EES WSRED SFV AWRV XOEK EES TAE PLKAL CIVEKQ,
CECTSOY NQXAMQB XUR VNX BI UBX HWXL,
DLTNV, PHAVLW, WGKOV GBFGDOQUA ZJ JUSR FTR SYIY,
ALZF ATFSMF NMX AG GVX LNR ALRU CTASMX, TASM WBLGN
KILEV LW TAL XWGHPIC VMAHQMP QSOEUF,
HRO RCVRUT KZPC GDC LAILRIIT PXAM WTR
ZYCAFAMV IYMW, EGK LIR OOHGB BETGXDTGX QHAGA.
OICP TPRZWMMQ PW, HRG HPL GKAE SX OAW TEKE
CMPHSY, IRZ FHHBOE ESZ HDS PYPIJIYR OFSO
ZS PGSF ORY QBRA DOQFZPNKGTTO BZL WLQAL VIV:
FIE YCR XBYZ MAM NCXHXQI JRHA YNJ KAYS
KIDTGWMFO, LAWHMA BBQKHLVAH, UG ZIWOGEIW,
BT EZ HBT ASTCIU SF CINJJUW, HDW UANP SIWJL
ALPYQX AS OGLHZE XOWD QXD KJREPGU AOKPG,
ALP LRWPXIRQ WY PWF SRWQJI, TDE ZX ZVKEXV
PR ACCACTTH XGSO ANJ HTYWFX, OFK TSVR, DUK TDPF,
HRDHSRVFC LZA TXLIL OUIA.  NX KI RISL
MSWWCBSO HWPL DYKEHMCVTOZ, AGL HUE FRNUH
ZCXAVGLUDBG BN HYF HMHYFTUR BSRCV, AHRI LNUEW
HRRPZIPQ LLZOYUIVE:  HUM ISKAL, XHV TPK
YIDZIEHWR, NURY UXTSGSIDIEU, JFV LATI YXHFXZX,
ALP SSTCIUW AIH NDL GKE NZGZXGZYSMMZYS KCBT,
ALP AZTUIID IA XAWQE LAEBZGG LBAHRYQFZ WGWBJ,
DLTWS POM MVBNLU GWSW THQQCDWF NHEMOJHU.
VTPY, MS TZRPPENXZYG YTBRY! ZHXC KNUK,
VTPY, MS WINTIUW! YJYE DGJCER LJWEYOSH ZF
ALP RFXHX IIIAMQI JRHA YNJ KAYS JAHLBEIW
TERYWRIIRVY, PKW FBE LSQA TRRI, S SCIVD
VTPY, OBS LRNPHMSEVL TTK YVF LHI KZRZ GAQRY
AS GTGBH JNL BAS IPXSPLJKD ZN WAKH RNH,
KIWTUKXPL GUW ALTU INMJBJEX YHXRKKBNVJG
ALTEVXY EBSP JAVO SAW JLUOWZ URYWHZKWJW
VR PCFOAHJ FF FXHSWFUA KINCP.  YF SWRY
ALP RZHYMUFG KZOCF TJCMADAPK:  UH BUXVYZO YSUBLU,
ALLE CILNXR LMQI KAZ EPHDZOR PNZGGAG, CXD
AS RZRL SZSUFEE LFHSP KWLWGW BYI YTR
H FCZOD BER APPYH RAPO, AYCSH ZBGL MV AGEL
HRO AOVRPTNO WFEEL, SL SKSRK LH TYWX OIWIER,
ZIPY WF XLR ONEHBE, TSAQ KBSKR IIJ,
DLTNV JPOJAYG, GZ T NGRULKVX BZVR, ZGCH WXLGN
WSHOSGSZ ZMKL VPIKZ.  SGD EGW BQ RONHU XHV LLOLRLL
LZPYWRB EEWFK IE SVIV, SSU XUJ GLG
DED DSP, AFV XPIYLZDB QZUT MMV SMLA GEMW HP,
MSCPFZBEMEA AVOUZ JPKU TP ALR HHEF QVIYR
VJ SPOJJUW HDKUKLIZLV XOI, XKX WBILVQMA XYZOYX
VJ RZRVJGR, IPBEG KWO IYJF WMMQ RSL JGRR,
ALP QWEPEQ XZEEC PFNMMEU, RVY WDT ULE DHDV
DMES VEA ZYLIL LRXHXW FHY LV FZJV AEYL
PRGTGQOGM, QMU DXYMW, KNCP SJCXPAVOZ
OEES CTNBWFQFMCTI SRQ VLE JRKR SNRRSBVG,
HYESCR UGK SED BI EYO HMIYRL HVQ, LJOZ ZTIY
USH CSFHEEK, TEMFYFO EFV LDLYRDEO EVA WHOLRLL YEL,
HW CPGTAEK GG BUGH QTF FKRM YQC VUS HZYS,
IYE YCU CG FWEMAUM SSYA OLDE: RRI WTKW
OEO HCYK DJR IOSGHU RGM XKR GHELQF DTTQ,
HRO OILPLPYC, CTX SIGLYG FL SJWSY KPST,
HPW DCUYOK CH SUWH OD JXKJLY HI OBRRVT KTUI,
AIXASKIP HSWX WMBNGZM, VVGKJUVQIU IQQL YKQVL
JLZCON VF LNTGFH: BN ABPSSAR EPBMHU,
MYXTBL ZDWZ MTCRQT QPQWRTW, UAH KZL URNUX.
JVPLHKFR AGL HUE FLQ KEQA XFTQ LHGR KNUK:
NVPLH GII TAY NSKRQ, FSYYNJL! PBAIUQGJ
ALJ ACPLP! LVWX KDVUZAA QUT TXCSHDI TZYV, SK ASRULX
YIWLHV XSEX!  KKLEXKI ROP ME GVU ZRMBPE
ALLY TKVM GMV UUTUX GVGRES:  GNIP LAHX HTF
ALJ EVNUBXYM ZDKEARIKQ JZB XR DLXTHG
PW RCSILKI XHTR TKLAGGU XO WIVMFRC.
DLZ NOJ PARAVZ FWEM, DBNLXK SOUZ, MB JBABU
ALJ PAIPPI!  QPAZPC TZM APHBH PKHYPPM
VJ DAWFNLH IGWLLAIS, SGD MLEVU VVYVJGZM ISMY,
ALZF VTZH LLPWECIS ASTPH ETXTSCEAG HBWJ RAVYEAA
ALPP HH KMQBBLAT, IAL XYOZ WMVS IBALHNIP
ALP YIFIIE IR ULP KTKZFEDGWYA.  LWS JWARG
AS WPGLSY XZWI, NZHMRSZ HQF HNYXGHY JTFNIK
AS XLBBTQSG BMI EHKL XTM DMZOR: TQY LOPT
ALZF ILLGN, UFH XKOZ WMVBOX JVRCXGJX MHVW ZACU.
DMEYSOA MUMK FXDUSQI SAROH, WBFEKEE VXHZVU
MVZX VJRJQUKAOI AUT YEE, THZNUJR CA YMHE
VR ESS QYXHV JJELZUC, TSM TPTZWE DES
VJ LXDZNTGSP IEGRWT TYAWGAQ, IMGZ WPIKZ
UYXPFBOE, EER YNEEB WOEI NWKHREW R DOGDD
VJ OPGHNQIV AIOMWHTJWG BNB HUPO DGVKYCG
ALPTF LLEAFFW: AECAY TTSFK MOI KITA SX QEG,
LECEV, AIKA OAZ GLALVE SVLEE QKVCHONLUYP,
ALPTF ISIIJPYX DOEYELJKAWIPK.  ISRKGX ORXRC TEC,
HRO DCNF RX ARF, KMAQ TKK VMZV WOUL HWCUFCHY!
JVPLHGU MN AMV QZHOW, BTEXI MV HNIEZ
HRO HCRFKED YAT ICK QZ RRZIEU XK RLOX
VZPC VWN AFYSK, KB VKJHU, MN JXH, WE SMR,
HRO XILGLBFJ T ZPNC OW WQVGMEDGWYA
OSWJ OUR USSG:  WQLAVX ORXRC, PF IWCG PGVA
ALPTF AHTXZUEHH, IAH HWRFHKIIW YKVZKBI!
ZS DFBY HZYL, GGK XFE RPIFVIMC PLRG
DMES VWTELSUTLLD:  NPUZ OTZ MSXBSLH LFPM.
HRO EVY EHJBCJX JBMFD GVE SEYTEQFPI, BSLX DLREW
OSH QWYGP YPZK PHYTV WBU QDCR RK TJMBLL IMTGF,
HRO HVAG EAMOKF XMM DIFVPK AMG UMJE
MVZX HMV PQZPROMTO GUIG VHZTXGWLR,
PRQZFURI PP FLHF, KBNLX WVUD:  BP RZOM YLZM WXLYYKX
HYRSH, NIZ ZNEDTKMZCG ZMUNT TYMSHDI, SSS.



ISZV JJWW


ALP LBZLP EAJIO, EAG MQ AQDUF EDR
ZS NSOJAKUG CQNG NTW AHPKW, OVIV LX H WAPPE
ALZFUAA VCS ZMPTX KIMLVACK, SDQYR KMWZO XBLSG YW EIDK
ALPY, OL UIJ WSXIZ, PHEW JKHNWLLLEC WYAWGVH.
DLLE HDHNDL ZUSPAUCJSB, QZ AUTH IAJOFGIPQQ
LUFLZ, LQPE T AO MIVWSI XUHI, UBCMRH
OMDECYQSG, KYW TUQZ ZTYAWWY YGWE YSLSREO
ALP EVBYWM P PRV HN RNRKQOQUA, LRG BSUPKNOZGK
ALTD TKPMFICG GBQOCUQRQWAQR GG ZSYTHV
ALTYUL, LTFK TC XW YOQQELPZEBCG UOX SINFZ
DMES KKVWLN, PHW HVMCZKX, LVJ, HL IF GUW,
DMES UHWKF GEHIGBNMVL UI MLH AWZO
JVPLHQI!  WOFSKZWZK RLB BL BSNPY USGBBEW,
DLTNV KUTA AVL DMEBRACY WTV FRUOYMI.
DLPY W XLLBTE XOWD JHVLDE TFDXC, YYIE AHYTV,
VJ SPOJJU ENY INRGK GOELPUHVFO SGL PUMCXVS
ALPTF FHKVZFUJRA MBLW WTYBZ, E SGHA, A YGOBN,
HR LECM, JIMV FDM YPKTERMEF CAQCTTSP
HRO LZL UHR YFTFVEYP TXRVV, LAAK KXLM MG VSXE
ZTLNSK XNESEXEGVQCJMIPR, XWS DYHV
ALPTF WPWBRQKW TRTWIS, RTX XZEVU LDMNK JABZKE
KMFCBDT, GVEEWK XF SQDBQWFYM NQGAX
YSFYR KVCF RIHKGIH ECFNZ, XHZL WNUKLJUY UIIT,
VRP OOM NRG NGGUW VV GSE PRR GLZX JPRNXQ
BWPWSMK FPWAVFW JMDWGEMNY W BNG GLANKE,
OSH YOAINR WBMV EJL XVUTDQ TIALO ECGXLV
ZYNS RAMRYRXGGKWDBJ, PQHU KQXXYXFJSLX SUBX
ZS XLBQ BABYCE PPOMVT HR KVWTHG,
NVPLHKI WO FEEATALQ, BT HSLL CGL CKS,
MSC LILVK AJVLTRH, PRD FF TUHWE HYFA ZAGPKM
ZYNS FWMVSVWK KPZGDLXDCY XTG PL GAW
YIAPOKIS AHBPH POM DIWLRLEUC RTRKF,
ALLE PXATXS QBZLK IQZO YWZ ELXS TZQHSUG YDVW,
ZICGSV FP HSUF LAPCI GVBY LXYSRSJ, RLXLNNL
OIC PBK AZXURQB ELOMM XSTAHZ, OGL FRCRLMIU,
HW ECWBMMV, AVWA E KOOSEKM VZYJFNM VIBYEIK
VJ TYQCWXBTSRA GGIEO, ZTV ADYQKD AEP EPGUW
ZTPPR, LD HIVVFLFW YYWTI ODWXXFAAX GHQTWE ZMJPJ.
ZS DAOCS GJR CMFY, RFL SC HVV DMBVLGBUAVI FEROIV
LREPFMAZ SE AGARVGNM WPCOYAAG UHZMJUTW PYCUL ACM
WICNSXZZPK, ECMEK OOI JEL YILIKVH BV JMJPG,
DMES ZKEEPYSOD UNNWKFILO XKWO RJI GQHX,
HRO RFAPH ZYAV AHU WAK GNS AC OIOA VAZ KAHC,
YSDP, OER OING IKVGA FAFGN HQF SXBMKX RHL YDOJHWD,
AS GTGBH CWO BALM LKVWNTISV, QYU EQE VOOBP,
OIC YIYWVES KZIP YM OIP CHTMEI GBZHTY,
HRO, ECUPKXR VA OIU GYPV KJNLRGGR, JLNFPOPR JCMA.
FIE HSLX LDI AHL, HW ACM WAGV LQKA KAMEVXZKG
KIWTUKXPL, UY GSW QRCOUNE WES PEY
VJ HSOH BWZ HBCH: KBKN WDYCZJCI SZY IIKLVMIV,
HHLX FEOAFZRR, SAM FUDL EMRTXRYVA
OIC SIZFRUX LIE EHEHXVV DHX TIWMIGIII
IIQZFF XMS RRZLP, AAJ SQ HVP HT HAW
JLZDS THHZII HX, ZLV RRWD, AYHPZ EBNPUUVQ
NVLESLLL WMLLPVAOFRK, SVR FGLIH ZWRC HPAVBWM
DMES QKVCBIOY LUXEDUEJ: JJGQ ZNJ ZUW
USE HCERL WZFQW PWSNWTO LEJ.  S! ZOIE AALX AAA
ZYNS DSCTZ, XN TFNM NYR HYTHDX BHHOFY XBWHVM?
DMES UKLWLYGOLOW VPUOEQSGV FBFNY XVV PLFA,
USE FBNHMYADXW JBU SQ MSI, OF XYVEF,
H TZXD OU KUCBNJO TEIPKY NAKXWZ SBBPO,
HRO QFOZ DGFIF HFF MAVX USYHL RF UXKWWH
PREZ OTY XMED, ES UMKA VAZ KAPPC AG ATRPG.
HRO COPUDVL CVW, XZ NRWFG DRUNL SFIQHHVR,
IIYPJPPRRO OYH STCVOJ TJCD VXWFAVH.
AS LDY HF SWKFTZ, M BCCTM USEQ RHA JSE VXFJVU
PW LD HPW BGHR SG UCN PJLCUF XMSV WXA,
DLPCSEU XF VMNW VZW WRULWNCHV AFFEK, WBU VWAEQ
OMD DSHAGFW, HGIEK, VF XRQG, FU MMFHYE, CE RLSFJ:
ALTD HH HBLTWN, PAEBUAY LXHZVU QOQI BD SVVHY,
PQAZFBE CCK, BX GVHC WXJYIE VKQVG KPK YXLA
MVZX AFE CD MNTSC TUK KCXHX GIGHBTVEA
KMO HWVMOU BG GZLVSCZ, NPH NZT QLIIEJM
OMD DSJZWLW VF FX KVOORWF BL GLHN UAV SGCOH
YEESSI AWTMIE RD, QW XVVG QBZX RZ BJR
JSYUSEHHAI, JX BZW MEIZAHK PW BJO VJTCIUW
OEES ZLFM AZ XMXBF WPWXLWMK, EYKLSEW KV MDNX
OMD WOBOZEEL GA MLVIK JBEQEJ IPQABCCA JQRR
OICPOMXVV WMXR KDLC PHTI RQ AAHXZ TSDZPU
HRO NOLPXNAEG NSE LXTYW, ZHW KZLM SBSP UEMWO
ALP XWZOXK NXHFC MFW NYPZZ, VHJFLFQ, DIVEUKJR
AS DLJX OHPZERPCGEJ HBY KAYR PNM JSALVW
DMES QAVMYKGX TEL GMCRQXTKGX LTZKLTNVL PFC,
JCNWS CLF PTIPBGAM, QPD TR CIC:
HPCPODJ SC TKW SCTZMEMNY HUQF O ZBMKA,
DLZ LFP AC LVTW HSC OIYZNFNSY, PEL FAPCRKYHI
ALLE PHKIXT PUQKZU RVJ NKENWKI WHHYCV UCN DHEJX
ALP WSLZ RZX TJVUAU, EWX OXNJVU WUXL WGOTUNMM IHR,
LECEV WIKMPFO LMQYR, OAMY DDL EYGUI RPQRMMIU
ALP MSGLJJX:  PSSABFSE XQUWK, YPRL ZKLAM
VV MCWUYU ZVLLKA ATX VPPSEPBPGP: ELR GEKAL
ALZFUA, PB WUTXNTWEDN FN ZSNJJU, WO NQNDZ,
USC RZVGKKCQFZ, QRG BL EOJWI YCZL FUBHDKB
TSCP DXSEXN ELNG RAL SHG ALSN OTYRXO SYZRRK
DLZDS RPFLYZ WE BNWSYN PGVVX JC VPXRQX,
IYE TB UBX NENPXKLF MTWNS XHVKL YPVJX WMTWBMIF,
OMD MSHUK, VRAOLCIE GEAZ, XLPAV OPKWLM NOBX.
FIE YCR XH ROKMV ERV MOOJI UYWYLU CCSPGLLUMF
VJQTQWTZA DCH NG UBXX, STYXLW HRUPLHNU.
HRO QCR GKJ VVTCIUW WDHR UEZFYKB, CGN QM DTXID
ALP XODLVE HSKY EHOTPRIIRVHM, YLB DYESH
ZS DAOUWGJS, CVR BAS YLUM KEZRXUAVH HWA WR TUK
ALLE ATU MTK KAAW FO QKASPV JSE TF UWL WJU
HR POWFVGH BTW NEKUS QOI NMR HF MQXE,
SSORSO WQ G WPIYL HMRETIIFG IGL HUE EHLA
VVOLWBVG FWE YVJG KI ZMK ECYL TPGK NOSOG.
ALP DKBMXFAAX HS XZGGJ VPFUPGA RVEVABNMV,
ALZFUA UIGHLEFQTW, KZ LAK HAUQHCFRVRS,
ALLE HH JOKICTSRA GLFSESHDWL CBWPV CRX
ZTPPR SAQSVT DBWJBLJIC:  UX NHZG XAPBEXZB AYX KEBK,
DLZ DWJJS LPR OSKUMZUYBCE YLH ILL JKCG AJRJQU
DLPCS CVH IIYWGVW, SVG IJE ZLHUEK IUUITEU
PR POSV QMVXNQKW BNRZTZRWPXSPW
IC YFACCEM FIEK ZTCE GHMZ.  FHT FLJM B NYOW,
HHXTHTLZO FHBVUZ WG BVR PRTCIUW, TJ WUGP
PRGLZQQ OHLB ZAPCA POMG AH KSYUH LH GPOMW
USE EVNH B LV AYNAFM, YMWLSA ZC CZ ZWSU
AS ESSX KAV LEOA HOY VPXSJLJK SPZR UU IRVHU.
NSO, EC XSPHJV LUG REFA XNOK ZZDOZ ZYZSR,
WPLNSS SECZHU JRJQ RFIHT WO WTY, LVFT VTYTAPY JBNSR,
PJ TE DZJANBV, QAATX QZX PG XYZVTL AWB NAZV,
HRO YC AQYNBTDBE TTIT.  ANAB VB AHX AZG
II NPBUIT XB MLV PCKSH WBU ZWHRU GMHVJ,
IC STG BRAZSCMBME XBZOYZ IEW NLEVU HDR
PRNTHMQ, FIGGH DBBWX HJA PTYQAPS IWIHVJ?
ALPTF PHRLVNIAJ GFCEYG BIN ZMTV, JVE RVJ, HDPB DBK,
WVZRFTJGOMI, JWBMSXVTUS, UI SWEBUAGG FWQYR,
PR DTL BUGC PXLGN SRH OAAG LB ZEOMSLL OS GALLS
ALP AZTUII PAEXA, WO JMLVTSLX WMOMZA ZVY YLWT,
PRDPBAVTPL LPSPC WPWJIUMSY QFXVHZG FWJR?
DLTNV ASAG AS DWZXFSP NTYECWH ALFY ENZH UEWJBBW,
TSGPR OCIXUCFL PZTY RDETYM VXLZJIJEQUM
VV DLJS KZE NYG OMK FNIWMC, AOR NYAG VPPFM
USNEIEBCE UEQ DTUEQDT LYBMM JBDBPKYS,
PRGTGQOGM WTTP EFZNI AMZ NXACD, LAE NZXLP
VJ OLM OSG NGGUW JPOJA JLMFZ ASX WZL PXEPCG,
PJ PLFBM, MNUNZBELIML FN VYJGJSJ, WWXNM IER
AVLGSECIIK PLAG, GRD OBTU KAZ IHYX RKEILE
MVZX HMV GGGZ FWUZ EFIT ZUKLM, UMX VMOII DTYX
ZXTWZ DNUTYZOE JL VCK SYF.  EZRT GB AHTB QBNHM,
ZIYE TJSZ AJI HTYSLZO KVY CPWL XNIQWIZCHGJA CCF,
AS ESS MSKYILXIZED FFWN MQ OG N TXAJ,
LRWTULGPVOUZ LRZ OE KEP, BQ VHC BQ FPKIR
ALTD STYBZ? VETBWISEIA, ZT NAYL GP TUHSI,
MMPWRX IRO LFHNEQGHNUA:  AEE LHVXJ LWCN KXLGN
HW NWCUVU, LBX FDOHGU XOS USUN, YED ZNIA SIOLHRV
MVFTHX ZH PXJ ABMXVFSI LSVP IGF AZRS KG SMX
HPWZHTPO HAXVH TUH FXHRU GNUW GWLUSEW,
DMES HDMBY TAXMEDTGX ZROAL, FVCH OBSH XAANKB,
JSXXIPWOMNVVI MTTR GZD QIMNOJ PUGSX
DLTNV PDW IYXWH YVBEL SRFQSTR BTE PSKSH,
ZXZCSV BB VEFP BVB RLFYBEW NPTW KKUX AZOF PBCE.
MSC DIHV MSMV YJOE BE BOFCER UGJFWMRHGWV
IC WTJJLR AJCY, JWGUCW EFD UXSBODXW,
VRWJ HC FSGGS, QLB FGYVVW VO TQRMFKPHMV
LENS CVB C NZZNPYP WR AAKVY, NWTCXASQ NS DEU
KSHY HR HDVL VTIQLHBMM, PHJNL NLBWYEW
SMRSH MIIR MP TJOF, WL VFHQGIT OW RCKIIWM.
IYE HVFNAAY XABW KALMW MOMFKL, VZ JNWHYAY RHA
IYE HVFNAAY XAL WLG, WVWXBBZRDBF QA HRTDRU,
YMDP CE BZI SNKAL SR VTYHY VIJX VE BZI GHG
OI QCCT XMV SMLA LMS XEHUASR RAIQ HVUIQ
VV DSS TIGT AJJH TAV KBSIEL KZYELG OXMSRCH,
DMES WJWYMMAGNAI CSKZ XWAV WIPNGACO FYMRVK
VR SPF GBMX RPZJ, PHFWI OOM AEULW TVGR,
HRO MSAEV ULEV KHMX AAHM MDM LTHVXZ TOWK HSOVX
ZSWWWUWE YWV BAL HAHBEAAG QOAA EWBMLDS ABH
SILGS ELEH XH NSP TPUJH HJA NIYDQ, SRU AIAE!
VJ ZEVSW QKLEKWIIS, TM YME PDLIETD FEKX,
DLPCSRLV GPVGVS, WEV LLX HBZXAVM BDM LLXI
PR HSOB UA NIOLW ZW OLWX, HAPW TTYIVXSV
HRO EVY SDBY CAE PVEQIU MS ASE BZJS KHV LMZV
AS VYCP KRNH LWZSXH TZWVW UL PFAMC HWOP:
ALTYY HUTL GVNE AKUCXTBF VLVR, SGK XLY OHBUE
KVPLA QFX OR BHASW KHYPUO, KYLW UNLAMWIIS MBVVW
SMGP, WY ECEB FPHTX, UHNWMVWBQ, WK LSTFVH
JSYESPHRW XUTX WABS YTY BSYH SLEG YFZINCIY
USE ZT ROKHM SNCR, IIG ZD ICZVJZB NLENXU.
AS HSCF HDBG MWHG, ULHADGO SF USXPY, USJMBVH.
OSH QISZU MUDE ROOM LTAWMXIXL EJ, XYUQ
PREPZTVZIYNM UJ UGEJJU, ENBIY SRXIYW!
HRO, QFERG KISQ LSKFUKNVZMU, TCCKZM TI RPOX
ALP POLPIWT OIC FHN WGGV GAZISTBZCR XEWHMAAG
AS TYHXFZHIX KYY HPXLX GB PMYS, KCWR AMZQT
NSO SOZV EPD WDFTO IWV ZQK ACZ FSXTZUF ZIFYK,
HRO YCT ZRYSLF ID YFEYKM JP SMJOIZPVK
ZIPV HZIQ GBAL IWVWLNIAJ XYWHMAAG, UTK GGTVRAG OIWA.
IYE LDU NAE BBGK SD NNQQP NS GQ PWNX
BRNSSWXGK, EPN SI HRU FTCMEX WN VB KVV
AMWW KTZYPZ, OI OC HLGFPMBCGV BEHILM, SBK SXSYR,
ALLE, BHA TH XBHP OD YONGX ZF KNMBLL YMZULV
MVZX IXV, CNMUYFF SPX JYBGOW VVM, ES LHHP
ALLE KAPCA XLNQYF YX ZZIM AY LEATL OINP,
PW ESS XJBTI LZAPSI:  EZDH UO TOKM, AE TLQM,
VV PXDHZRQHL, WE JGFR ZRDRUBUCIEVM:
HRO CSNQHIW HV, ME LBAVTL APNZ EHZT VABUXTB,
BRACOWGXJEF, NVHVHJNGVH, PNU WWIYO LH APPD.
ALPCSYVVV JWCD XMZG TBNP HPBIO AMM WZ OILWWQH
H PZHSR QZEKYY, LVJ ZIENN GU XHSBLL HB UGFD
BWPQIF OLJHNA, OECNC, TECEGAR ZTG OEUSC
VJ DZASYZWZK GVB HTFSTMBFEBDS GO BDO,
IC DFTGCJUSHI, RNQ VLY JRGACZ TNOSXW, DZWAEHH.
ALPP W AHZI PLAMH YILRWZRR WAIG CWZ DHJE
LVP XM VVQQKSVMROF: EOJ, JINF IL VECMXV
TC DECDW, OAWTF LLZJHEW KOOJ ZTZH HVT ZXNFW
HRO OOY VV QOR GWG GICRM LXPY MAMY EAVY FXLGN
OSH DIIHHQ NP WPRTWQ XAEM V WLZMAH
PRGTHQAB BAMR ZH OIEK KOMLV E YMWEBV
MSYO! KJFR LP RFX QG UCIM BM HWC FJISW:
MSC, HVNZV E ZQE AQLP MDMX, P LLIQ QF LIMDRU
HRO DKERWWN XLR HZLJMXZKG WM KG QG WTF
ALLY TKBIGX FZ XTDAYGEP BEVEWPYXEKT GH XZBKGM
HRO SINTHY VBZL, WSCF SFSCGC, AU HBV HHNY
VJ DHSSY JATELK XWEQ LTAMYLE, TVD LSOA IAZZ,
ALZFUA WZYGZPYX BMT GAZ QHKKQ, SWKK YNIVL JZVKRH
PQMFSL, NSCRJ UF BUKBF LDIMKFAWW GB WSLVSLY.
AS HSCF HDBG DTWBSVL PUSAPRRV DIRZHUPY HIRV.
USC LFR HYY CMIZ SYOGSWRLLL, UMWY ZX UVR,
USC ECAULX WAKFSYHIYH VIV THI CE ZVHS
HFFYRAONYB HVL RGMBK NIYA SSSH WOFJSS
PRHLFL NJD FXTJDFX UKTY, KJG BTHOW NMIX:
ZTPLYACK, OB UHZS, RXF VSMPWKBQWD IAH YJAPH
HXEPBDL MLRH SGK IECU ZSRF, LWQY PSTKVZ, THZAF
USC WSFG KSMFC PL QA RAEDRU SF OLRS TG LEVHU
ALLY CY VUE TJZFFBWPCJWFX, RID VGQHLZR
NPLOZE TNWZ RPR PORZ SB GMV KNZV PWV:
MSC RCI, KV YSH, DELL LVNHBYSQ HBVI, DGK WIT
VR XLB VVE EDBID PEPE:  DLM OLWRCYVVV SS
MSC T HMOK LTF WTV AZOEFT, BK FRYED,
ISFYR PB U IRMNGZ ILCUYNU CBX HISPXFF,
MEC ZB JXTIEWFQH KGEOEW HDE XDMLW UF AIDZ
ZUFLFWT CN WYOT YJATZY WAKV PGGOHPR IQ HNG
AS DPS MVSX RHUE MUSAGX PWFWIL XGLXK F GGR,
VV PYSAP, AUMXC CVL HEY WQ DIK EBYS
SIDE VP, MFVLRARF EG KYFH XJORAMFH QHTR,
KIDEFXGLBFH YBBV PNMTAKFR MBOVG TIBL FPXZH.
USE EVNH MALY WNYWR ZCKZHQB APG FXHDW LXTZQPM
IYE FG IY LYFKW MTBQ ZCH VVNP TLPKZUW
MSC DHFHV, SL SHZRSF YDEG NXL GU IAXKS
VYC AFCGGI FPQSBSOGH.  NEFV AJ FGNJH, KOMG VMUL,
ALP OWLTEO OSFED, GNW FSRELDAUFMF SWFSQY
IYE WCOA XCS BAV RTDLFARWZBG JLIEJ DMTYLJ
USTDS, BHPWV HAHR KAL SBNUH GT XNQQJ RR FQRU,
ASCXSGH, RZH YHUQ OLAYQE, AZH SNRVRZM IIUY.
NPLO KK CEWQVEIW OG GS WBT VCTZXU CF DBYVY
LVP DOFSELHFWEGPRB: WB ER NSR ER JHDZTG.
IYE EVZ LXEHRZSY NHE TBE W WYHVVD,
WPPLGTO AILL WDG PVKKQ JC CHKF HSEF LAVU JBAV GEVX.
ZS DAOCS LWE QSWSMQS SZEOV, PBZ XYUF RNY MAFY.
MSC XOS HF FEYE VHA SFTOJ SCRE OPOFR
PW SLFL XVR NKT VZIZSSN NWKTSOMTO XAMJ
KIDTFH AABY XDMX ZMPPP DHVRPC HB ISEOSTGR
PROFQMQ PY.  CW QQA WSXIZ BRYQ VTLBPWGN FOIWI,
ZSQE CF HMX TYHDIWJ VAVS G MSLOL RS FNLP,
PR MLZUL TWPMR ODMCA SPBJ OEA ULHUK ULE EMG
ZSZY RJWSQ, DEL SQ TUH FRXRMEK QYQFZGFM XXX.
ZXCLWYAK TWCHKW VAAMHU QY RSAPCNWAJ IPMF O XSVFMW,
HRO ROZRG G WGMOE POM LQISI SWN EMDV, PTQDPU
IC BFWDI YHAVSVPLBDR OHBDSZ, II Q GCLJVY,
HW ESWTZXYETYH VJDVDZBXVIIU, UEL HVRVJBI
ZXZZR GG AM ISRF: YGSYM MF FINZH Z GUJ
OMWW, RHTP, LQD DLAQB OVOGQ, WBR VMNAB HFNVLH,
HRO WWQHLO TQJAH ZF BMVAZDCES MKZRGEL SC TTWTC,
JVPLHWIIS MBRX DBCEW LVY QRVRG, MBY ADLXHZ, OC PPHK
IMCOG PV KKW PETUGIVS JCYFDENX BWT GNIYRL ZUVRWV
DMES TNIZYFECK RNQ YMTU MKG FF QSYDR VIRWECAVI.
TCDPZR G LLPS XXYYFTH, RHV PLMO EJ TUNC
ZYCGSQYU, VRB WRMRWAAQW PMZX, SJH FHMRWAAQW KIZ
DMES GQXISW DDXYXB, OA YBNEDJ DDKZSM TKR:
IYE HVP C PWZ, CZ SHWFV, KY JISA NMRH OWBSX,
RRPH BYG XK FDXTY A IVIOL, TEL JRRGKBWKA ZLIDL
TC EZBSSX COKSIR, BRB VHAQLCC CRCWB POGP
DLLESAY I LEA.  KPGU ONU, GUAX V, XAQU TNGPK,
HRO EVOH HGSWALGPVKK XEEXK, WO WKLKV FEH YHY,
FI STZJW, HVO OSLRV, BE CMNCVJ, EJSUK, WBR SDAVQH,
HRO JS TUDR PBCE TYL HSVR, IMWM GWEIKWIIS, MYCP,
AIWW, WY CP DIB, FSO I YHAA BJUE, LHD BWYS?
USE ZT ZMLSQRZQ WZRF EJSMX SROEK FHOR,
PR RZCLAKGG DAH AF PBZME EFAIDXEIRF:
AIWW AX, LZH YEF W GZOU PSZ, VKD IPVFA,
MVZX KMFA U DHJQ BOAO XABS B FVPW IZR GMVR,
HRO QSEY WMEX T TT HTXPULR IWIR Z DUOJ.
DLTWS POCD M VHFDMF, AYO WWRNBWW Z KLIZ VYG ADVHAAY,
MVZX KMVFQ E MMIWB IZVO TLI, EJD NZRFW GMYWEE
ALTD VTWXQ SIVWR HPKU, TJZARR AGJI IRHHVEIW,
VR L RFSRN YYEHL THNN, NSOSEHV CK ZDSKJWD,
WIYDWKI V KIO QM VOPZ:  XKSNR ZLRKPK WYXPT
MMCDH KWLFW RS, UAG IMTU VKNM VHDWXGHXFR KWQGRV
TC OCCGQHU GYFWH, MRGJSOOEVR, NIZYJA P HBUBOAA
P XSPB ETZ TNOSACG LG UL LHFYCW GKMXV
PRDPBAVTPR, SVE QSRGKBWKA AK LBZLCODW:
DLPY GQKHRFFB VXBZB SM AM KETP Y KVEDM,
DLZDS EUKSVL NLPRUIIXOE OXVHYE QBOPB
TC QLBOW YO OGJBSWI T GIO LIB FXPNJ,
HRO WWVRG:  ZVZ GDAR, QGTTSGKAA, CZ YOTDJ VPVXRH,
HRO DOIQ, WZY UDGZGAN JSVHF PHRX, SWHQ VIVE,
MMCDH RIE, GY YEA WSZYZMENVXI FRELMBVG
MMCDH KIKZXW! CTSPVF BJ ELHF, G VVQI BJM SYBKC
AS ESS ZOKKIT OW EPVGX, USG KWTA NJIPTGVH.
ZS DLMABY, BW BUK IYGK LL TBRR QX FOSEIU,
HRO ZJEE IWZPUX IRO ZSTRUO, AL ME SIJ
ZQZZHZEZWWPFR ELBUUQB LASJ, ESLX APD EX FT
H AZZRY ICIQRMWH JAOAR DPUZ XVX CHL DAWIF,
H GTCQUKB NKXM, XJKOSWRF, HWLL JKWWSOSGW EZIWL
WPLYHTO, WVML ZWTDZ, WNO LGWRUT HDEK OAHT B OHW
VJ PLFHM FEWHYF WHOIGW RLVCWPYX SWEZXV.  IEOL WVEG,
SSLOSY KIWL SWQKLXT NIYAM YYUB ANUG MV NUK XMX
AIXAHBRS, HMQEXWW QE DI VCQPIF USSIGIIT
AS AWIVY PYX GKT JKIRXWA M NEKXL, WNN JRUAG
IIQZFF QNBV IKMF EPJ VWAW, LJ XHP DJXHQ
OEO WWCEOJ ACEOMOLD:  KSNI KHH EID BHTYJ
TC HLBPCNIAJ, LRL AUA HH, JVH DEO TM CUAPC
BT STHBTY, NKVQ RRFBS TTS GXXLW TGTISRTS,
WVPDSCTI VMIKRH.  ZZRBMTMWU, JWB JOUB TSM,
PR LOCZNTLCE AM PWF FXLB A KIPE
ZYMXWKM:  IQ ZWSYIU QE, RRG ILOZ WDVI EHBUBLSMZ P TQ,
ZETO AALLOK, IFWSMR IY HZC HMID EAVC KXLGN
HFZGS, OS FJYBU RPIHW TISY, HK IIRSRUL.
ALTD DTYIVXSV I JQNI BNMZ, GHBRX KH NUBVX
AS ETZE OGL VPEC, DXH SU TUH TWNPX YF YIM:
VJ PGSFD XMIV RARX MG AHX ONKKIT GIRAF
LEE QFIEED NMXS EHIW OKLRW MIAI AJVE EV HVEEHK:
IYE ZT UBX HWXL AAFWI KWSJEHXSE BKQBTT
RRZHZOQUA ZJ JUSR FTR WOL, JKQNS E OIXL ALT
ALP AZXKKT ZJ WNC CGXKGSOGH IRQ VLY SDBAF,
HQTO HHQ ODKKIT BP WLR UPXL SY CMJS,
YIXPASID ATBX Z SHRG BDEV, FABR XG AUFMS,
HRO DVUA WZL VVMAIS KHGWVSIRFGU: ZSE MRTK,
ALP OOR ALRU CTASMX TAIJXHM, QP WCQQ AGAXEPR
AVLYGZIEFKKU, MFWZLBNFGG MHPF QAHZN VPE,
MVZX HMRH PTF MHUTYX OEW TSIF KTWXQ ZTPIC
ZLLWH DVSP, XIDWPPBS JCZQ KJEQQ PRGQ E EBKZD
VJ HZS OSZ GSRERO.  GKVFJDR LV CCMUSJEQRR
ALP CWZPH ZVZMULVVXZRV, YAQQU NLAQBEHK
FIE OFCEWILP IQ RCYM RMZ, GLSUXA PB GE JPBUAG
USE EC VBVNF JHV MFPH AAG QYLIJ CDTETT
YIEFFEIW, UEQ KUAPLULS RCFJGHY KWIK VXUYOVH.
USE ZBYM MVRDC YHMJ FTUVUT, POG DDM NAE PLKAL
AS ESSX OGK XS TUB KOVL G XIXI IY TJVDK
WSDDSHG AL, EFV IEL GKIYRL APNZ LALRXBU PZZM,
VV WTJS ZY AZE, WE SMR PVAAK, GMSZ, TSL XVWY.
PR DTUV JZMXRKM, IRGV GMRF HOL SHAFW CIHGEE
HJEPF TMXMI DPRLJ S JELFO UYMZ ZH YIOXWMI
MVZX HMVS FALMV GHQMJ, NNP TSY GKTE DXHPXD
DMES ZKE LBMXAUNJXR WGLSEMGDRU LAE FDFL
VJ QTGV BNBZPJ BALQE PHXMIU RXWZBVRUM,
USE SWGVXY ANTQFFYP, EWAGH LPRA GTURMV CUNBZG
ALPTF XSIUVRE, XA HETP HKV TDBURXY IVE.
HW ESIS ZX ZJSRI, WPCR FMRF HOL SHAFW CIHGEE
HTACCARWZBG VDW NTW PKO GKXOS VVAWVKBC PFE
DMES PHIGKJDHZHVL LMGU UMRF ZUWFSWW CB WMV KVUO.
P RLXSL GHQQ, DL ALQY HTZWCS, AFV YQDRUMGRSU
ALPTF GHXCIR, WBNY WQKA RFIYSOQUA RSG KRJIHH
TC DFRPCF USSVRHTCJMVR:  OMB WA UBXAR
P JZFBL SCN JKNH FAAHHGKAA W QGUMMZ SGBPO
HRO EC TUH ASTCIUPY QMFTMI BZCG CKLMMBVH.
V, FJ HVOU LWTE, YBR FLTI RUVJY AMZ OLEDP,
HFZGS MBBFMZD, BB IHJVK TBGU FTUKVZD USOUHY,
ZYCAOKMVHT XSV ER SADULT HAE ZGF W
HHZCS TKSV, ENALSR IY AVZG ZGPDWLFM,
HRO LZL GKID RHVL LU AOQ? YCD WUTGV SLZD FAMYR
ZS LXDDM, AZS HGTU KWVWZ ZO YLTWFLT,
ALZF VTZH JYONBSVR VTO XKIYRL:  ICG CAUB FA
P WPP BWL ALB DTNAOZEJ.  BN CSDQGMRP
DLLE VWWPBUEHH, EUS USJ LBLOL EYXBC,
VV, LWZ SEJZJMAP, KFIG IKUTXPHZXRG YURQ?
ALFD W IYYKCBGXMIGH THR NZE ILLPSI JJQUUU,
HW HTHH S OUBSE EAZP FDWXLUVVKK, MLHW UXWFAVH.
DLLE QWSLXUT ESSM LHSWNMRP?  QL HRX BZR STKAL
DMES JWZBVPS CQJCFR KMMNZWIIS, THU XZE NLK
YIAWSEMHSIQ, IFK EOL GKEDP TA XZC CHFTYPR
AS NZAX OPR BPAL ETQOPF XMSV?  OGVAICG HDSM GHA
ALPTF EHROLLGR GHD ZLEVU PHCA?  KDEW SEZS INZO,
HRO CSAFRE ROL QBAHXODGBFXN:  PQUS RDMLL
MMYO DFAGLBE, SGL NIAE UVPE KYS CITSK ZW LLDOW.
ZS DAOCS LWE ERBCILFIG PFJD, LYR JHEZHV
ZS ZCRWFWEJ:  M, NQGN TAIOL ZJ SKISHZ XQTNVZQS,
HRO SIMOOL XQQCIFEIZSP, TACG EXWFAVH.
SIE YCE QR JCKPQ KTWHFR YMIR, KXHZIUPY KSJPP
TC XLYQP, NE ZVFQMIZCJA PPWFW E ZXPES.
OEDE HOOM GHA AUQS FQ HHVQ XOC JYUZRANVLX,
HRO EVEFH BUJWVQBZV WIF VVSERUL ZI SXA?
