	If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear
	And know what tis to pity and be pitied,
	Let gentleness my strong enforcement be:
	In the which hope I blush, and hide my sword.

DUKE SENIOR	True is it that we have seen better days,
	And have with holy bell been knolld to church
	And sat at good mens feasts and wiped our eyes
	Of drops that sacred pity hath engenderd:
	And therefore sit you down in gentleness
	And take upon command what help we have
	That to your wanting may be ministerd.

ORLANDO	Then but forbear your food a little while,
	Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn
	And give it food. There is an old poor man,
	Who after me hath many a weary step
	Limpd in pure love: till he be first sufficed,
	Oppressd with two weak evils, age and hunger,
	I will not touch a bit.

DUKE SENIOR	Go find him out,
	And we will nothing waste till you return.

ORLANDO	I thank ye and be blest for your good comfort!

	Exit

DUKE SENIOR	Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy:
	This wide and universal theatre
	Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
	Wherein we play in.

JAQUES	All the worlds a stage,
	And all the men and women merely players:
	They have their exits and their entrances
	And one man in his time plays many parts,
	His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
	Mewling and puking in the nurses arms.
	And then the whining schoolboy, with his satchel
	And shining morning face, creeping like snail
	Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
	Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
	Made to his mistress eyebrow. Then a soldier,
	Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,
	Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
	Seeking the bubble reputation
	Even in the cannons mouth. And then the justice,
	In fair round belly with good capon lined,
	With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
	Full of wise saws and modern instances
	And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
	Into the lean and slipperd pantaloon,
	With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
	His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide
	For his shrunk shank and his big manly voice,
	Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
	And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
	That ends this strange eventful history,
	Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
	Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.

	Reenter ORLANDO, with ADAM

DUKE SENIOR	Welcome. Set down your venerable burthen,
	And let him feed.

ORLANDO	I thank you most for him.

ADAM	So had you need:
	I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.

DUKE SENIOR	Welcome fall to: I will not trouble you
	As yet, to question you about your fortunes.
	Give us some music and, good cousin, sing.

	SONG.
AMIENS	Blow, blow, thou winter wind.
	Thou art not so unkind
	As mans ingratitude
	Thy tooth is not so keen,
	Because thou art not seen,
	Although thy breath be rude.
	Heighho! sing, heighho! unto the green holly:
	Most friendship is feigning, most RAJAGR AZZR LAPCC:
	ALPY, VXPKUOS, BNL OCESC!
	ALTD ZBMM AD UTWB BAZDR.
	MVPPNJ, WVIDDJ, KLST FBAHYS ADR,
	ALLE RHZT GRH TBGS LP VBKZ
	HW MPBEXJXF JTZZGY:
