As that more willingly thou couldst not seem
At Heavens high feasts to have fed: yet what compare
To whom the winged Hierarch replied.
O Adam, One Almighty is, from whom
All things proceed, and up to him return,
If not depraved from good, created all
Such to perfection, one first matter all,
Endued with various forms, various degrees
Of substance, and, in things that live, of life
But more refined, more spiritous, and pure,
As nearer to him placed, or nearer tending
Each in their several active spheres assigned,
Till body up to spirit work, in bounds
Proportioned to each kind.  So from the root
Springs lighter the green stalk, from thence the leaves
More aery, last the bright consummate flower
Spirits odorous breathes: flowers and their fruit,
Mans nourishment, by gradual scale sublimed,
To vital spirits aspire, to animal,
To intellectual give both life and sense,
Fancy and understanding whence the soul
Reason receives, and reason is her being,
Discursive, or intuitive discourse
Is oftest yours, the latter most is ours,
Differing but in degree, of kind the same.
Wonder not then, what God for you saw good
If I refuse not, but convert, as you
To proper substance.  Time may come, when Men
With Angels may participate, and find
No inconvenient diet, nor too light fare
And from these corporal nutriments perhaps
Your bodies may at last turn all to spirit,
Improved by tract of time, and, winged, ascend
Ethereal, as we or may, at choice,
Here or in heavenly Paradises dwell
If ye be found obedient, and retain
Unalterably firm his love entire,
Whose progeny you are.  Mean while enjoy
Your fill what happiness this happy state
Can comprehend, incapable of more.
To whom the patriarch of mankind replied.
O favourable Spirit, propitious guest,
Well hast thou taught the way that might direct
Our knowledge, and the scale of nature set
From center to circumference whereon,
In contemplation of created things,
By steps we may ascend to God.  But say,
What meant that caution joined, If ye be found
Obedient?  Can we want obedience then
To him, or possibly his love desert,
Who formed us from the dust and placed us here
Full to the utmost measure of what bliss
Human desires can seek or apprehend?
To whom the Angel.  Son of Heaven and Earth,
Attend!  That thou art happy, owe to God
That thou continuest such, owe to thyself,
That is, to thy obedience therein stand.
This was that caution given thee be advised.
God made thee perfect, not immutable
And good he made thee, but to persevere
He left it in thy power ordained thy will
By nature free, not overruled by fate
Inextricable, or strict necessity:
Our voluntary service he requires,
Not our necessitated such with him
Finds no acceptance, nor can find for how
Can hearts, not free, be tried whether they serve
Willing or no, who will but what they must
By destiny, and can no other choose?
Myself, and all the angelick host, that stand
In sight of God, enthroned, our happy state
Hold, as you yours, while our obedience holds
On other surety none:  Freely we serve,
Because we freely love, as in our will
To love or not in this we stand or fall:
And some are fallen, to disobedience fallen,
And so from Heaven to deepest Hell O fall
From what high state of bliss, into what woe!
To whom our great progenitor.  Thy words
Attentive, and with more delighted ear,
Divine instructer, I have heard, than when
Cherubick songs by night from neighbouring hills
Aereal musick send:  Nor knew I not
To be both will and deed created free
Yet that we never shall forget to love
Our Maker, and obey him whose command
Single is yet so just, my constant thoughts
Assured me, and still assure:  Though what thou tellest
Hath passed in Heaven, some doubt within me move,
But more desire to hear, if thou consent,
The full relation, which must needs be strange,
Worthy of sacred silence to be heard
And we have yet large day, for scarce the sun
Hath finished half his journey, and scarce begins
His other half in the great zone of Heaven.
Thus Adam made request and Raphael,
After short pause assenting, thus began.
High matter thou enjoinest me, O prime of men,
Sad task and hard:  For how shall I relate
To human sense the invisible exploits
Of warring Spirits? how, without remorse,
The ruin of so many glorious once
And perfect while they stood? how last unfold
The secrets of another world, perhaps
Not lawful to reveal? yet for thy good
This is dispensed and what surmounts the reach
Of human sense, I shall delineate so,
By likening spiritual to corporal forms,
As may express them best though what if Earth
Be but a shadow of Heaven, and things therein
Each to other like, more than on earth is thought?
As yet this world was not, and Chaos wild
Reigned where these Heavens now roll, where Earth now rests
Upon her center poised when on a day
For time, though in eternity, applied
To motion, measures all things durable
By present, past, and future, on such day
As Heavens great year brings forth, the empyreal host
Of Angels by imperial summons called,
Innumerable before the Almightys throne
Forthwith, from all the ends of Heaven, appeared
Under their Hierarchs in orders bright:
Ten thousand thousand ensigns high advanced,
Standards and gonfalons twixt van and rear
Stream in the air, and for distinction serve
Of hierarchies, of orders, and degrees
Or in their glittering tissues bear imblazed
Holy memorials, acts of zeal and love
Recorded eminent.  Thus when in orbs
Of circuit inexpressible they stood,
Orb within orb, the Father Infinite,
By whom in bliss imbosomed sat the Son,
Amidst as from a flaming mount, whose top
Brightness had made invisible, thus spake.
Hear, all ye Angels, progeny of light,
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers
Hear my decree, which unrevoked shall stand.
This day I have begot whom I declare
My only Son, and on this holy hill
Him have anointed, whom ye now behold
At my right hand your head I him appoint
And by myself have sworn, to him shall bow
All knees in Heaven, and shall confess him Lord:
Under his great vicegerent reign abide
United, as one individual soul,
For ever happy:  Him who disobeys,
Me disobeys, breaks union, and that day,
Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls
Into utter darkness, deep ingulfed, his place
Ordained without redemption, without end.
So spake the Omnipotent, and with his words
All seemed well pleased all seemed, but were not all.
That day, as other solemn days, they spent
In song and dance about the sacred hill
Mystical dance, which yonder starry sphere
Of planets, and of fixed, in all her wheels
Resembles nearest, mazes intricate,
Eccentrick, intervolved, yet regular
Then most, when most irregular they seem
And in their motions harmony divine
So smooths her charming tones, that Gods own ear
Listens delighted.  Evening now approached,
For we have also our evening and our morn,
We ours for change delectable, not need
Forthwith from dance to sweet repast they turn
Desirous all in circles as they stood,
Tables are set, and on a sudden piled
With Angels food, and rubied nectar flows
In pearl, in diamond, and massy gold,
Fruit of delicious vines, the growth of Heaven.
On flowers reposed, and with fresh flowerets crowned,
They eTA, XFIY WKPRI, DEL VX CBPUHPWAZ MJMSG
XYLQT YGMTWBMXWKR AYL CMY, FHLIPW
VJ DFFTJAN, NMIZX BBPC QJUDFDI OFFP FCHYBT
LBNPGW, YGJGJF XMS RPEISUYEFCOF DMBA, ORW FNKDSJLR
DMES QKXBVWG WIBX, JLJBLTMWU QP BUKQE CVC.
USH HVRB WIIVBSUBC BAOHE JQZO VHWNKU PLBDDIA
MVZX HMRH TBNH FVCTA AT ABW, KMKBFA SMTJX LVJ ZAAQH
ZTCTBY QFBU, ZIS YHVL SK BTMUMUVAZ OXENXU LAY GUHNJGK
AS RCOMSLLL MANFTZDB, QWX UBLVK PWSLL PCF XZRFX
PR OLFSRU VVSP, RIH ZZSRDK RWAS WLWLGVMV
HPW MIT ESF OGLSIYCAYK INMF UJ ESV HT XSVM
DMOP CRMU EZG XYE AWTPR, PYD EVDRU BIU
ALLY OES TUID REVJGAD SBFNZ MN GEHQA DFTACFYTV,
ZYNS OJY VOE TSNYXU CZ XHV HMK OQZLPIPQ XSZQXZ,
KMDASUAWS ME TEQLF BNQ IALRV, YPPMJ VHQX VZTQCH
IC WTJJLR AOZRGEL RQOZY TTS GXXLW HW PMXS,
WEGTZXOIA YCAOWEFQTW, RYH KMDQHF LHDVRU,
JIWPGVMLP LTJECGADPVF, WJPVW POIP WELTR
