systems on the market.  The costs of equipment are being amortized over
five years but are still quite high, nearly $2,000 per month.

HOCKEY raised a general question concerning OCR and the amount of editing
required (substantial in her experience) to generate the kind of
structured markup necessary for manipulating the text on the computer or
loading it into any retrieval system.  She wondered if the speakers could
extend the previous question about the cost-benefit of adding or exerting
structured markup.  ERWAY noted that several OCR systems retain italics,
bolding, and other spatial formatting.  While the material may not be in
the format desired, these systems possess the ability to remove the
original materials quickly from the hands of the people performing the
conversion, as well as to retain that information so that users can work
with it.  HOCKEY rejoined that the current thinking on markup is that one
should not say that something is italic or bold so much as why it is that
way.  To be sure, one needs to know that something was italicized, but
how can one get from one to the other?  One can map from the structure to
the typographic representation.

FLEISCHHAUER suggested that, given the 100 million items the Library
holds, it may not be possible for LC to do more than report that a thing
was in italics as opposed to why it was italics, although that may be
desirable in some contexts.  Promising to talk a bit during the afternoon
session about several experiments OCLC performed on automatic recognition
of document elements, and which they hoped to extend, WEIBEL said that in
fact one can recognize the major elements of a document with a fairly
high degree of reliability, at least as good as OCR.  STEVENS drew a
useful distinction between standard, generalized markup (i.e., defining
for a document-type definition the structure of the document), and what
he termed a style sheet, which had to do with italics, bolding, and other
forms of emphasis.  Thus, two different components are at work, one being
the structure of the dTKWMNVX LYWLUN (NBU LXOMF), FRK CPJ WVHNZ FHNRN RBX
WIWAMXMPTJBMRS AONV NB KS YCX RS XON AHZGEW WV SWMUCMI.

