so proud as all that.

  With extras? asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.

  Yes, said Alice, we learned French and music.

  And washing? said the Mock Turtle.

  Certainly not! said Alice indignantly.

  Ah! then yours wasnt a really good school, said the Mock
Turtle in a tone of great relief.  Now at OURS they had at the
end of the bill, "French, music, AND WASHINGextra."

  You couldnt have wanted it much, said Alice living at the
bottom of the sea.

  I couldnt afford to learn it. said the Mock Turtle with a
sigh.  I only took the regular course.

  What was that? inquired Alice.

  Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with, the Mock
Turtle replied and then the different branches of Arithmetic
Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.

  I never heard of "Uglification," Alice ventured to say.  What
is it?

  The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise.  What!  Never
heard of uglifying! it exclaimed.  You know what to beautify
is, I suppose?

  Yes, said Alice doubtfully:  it meanstomakeanything
prettier.

  Well, then, the Gryphon went on, if you dont know what to
uglify is, you ARE a simpleton.

  Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about
it, so she turned to the Mock Turtle, and said What else had you
to learn?

  Well, there was Mystery, the Mock Turtle replied, counting
off the subjects on his flappers, Mystery, ancient and modern,
with Seaography:  then Drawlingthe Drawlingmaster was an old
congereel, that used to come once a week:  HE taught us
Drawling, Stretching, and Fainting in Coils.

  What was THAT like? said Alice.

  Well, I cant show it you myself, the Mock Turtle said:  Im
too stiff.  And the Gryphon never learnt it.

  Hadnt time, said the Gryphon:  I went to the Classics
master, though.  He was an old crab, HE was.

  I never went to him, the Mock Turtle said with a sigh:  he
taught Laughing and Grief, they used to say.

  So he did, so he did, said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn
and both creatures hid their faces in their paws.

  And how many hours a day did you do lessons? said Alice, in a
hurry to change the subject.

  Ten hours the first day, said the Mock Turtle: nine the
next, and so on.

  What a curious plan! exclaimed Alice.

  Thats the reason theyre called lessons, the Gryphon
remarked:  because they lessen from day to day.

  This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a
little before she made her next remark.  Then the eleventh day
must have been a holiday?

  Of course it was, said the Mock Turtle.

  And how did you manage on the twelfth? Alice went on eagerly.

  Thats enough about lessons, the Gryphon interrupted in a
very decided tone:  tell her something about the games now.



                            CHAPTER X

                      The Lobster Quadrille


  The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper
across his eyes.  He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for
a minute or two sobs choked his voice.  Same as if he had a bone
in his throat, said the Gryphon:  and it set to work shaking him
and punching him in the back.  At last the Mock Turtle recovered
his voice, and, with tears running down his cheeks, he went on
again:

  You may not have lived much under the sea I havent,
said Aliceand perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster
Alice began to say I once tasted but checked herself hastily,
and said No, never so you can have no idea what a delightful
thing a Lobster Quadrille is!

  No, indeed, said Alice.  What sort of a dance is it?

  Why, said the Gryphon, you first form into a line along the
seashore

  Two lines! cried the Mock Turtle.  Seals, turtles, salmon,
and so on then, when youve cleared all the jellyfish out of
the way

  THAT generally takes some time, interrupted the Gryphon.

  you advance twice

  Each with a lobster as a partner! cried the Gryphon.

  Of course, the Mock Turtle said:  advance twice, set to
partners

  change lobsters, and retire in same order, continued the
Gryphon.

  Then, you know, the Mock Turtle went on, you throw the

  The lobsters! shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.

  as far out to sea as you can

  Swim after them! screamed the Gryphon.

  Turn a somersault in the sea! cried the Mock Turtle,
capering wildly about.

  Back to land again, and thats all the first figure, said the
Mock Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice and the two creatures,
who had been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat
down again very sadly and quietly, and looked at Alice.

  It must be a very pretty dance, said Alice timidly.

  Would you like to see a little of it? said the Mock Turtle.

  Very much indeed, said Alice.

  Come, lets try the first figure! said the Mock Turtle to the
Gryphon.  We can do without lobsters, you know.  Which shall
sing?

  Oh, YOU sing, said the Gryphon.  Ive forgotten the words.

  So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now
and then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and
waving their forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle
sang this, very slowly and sadly:


"Will you walk a little faster?" said a whiting to a snail.
"Theres a porpoise close behind us, and hes treading on my
 tail.
See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
They are waiting on the shinglewill you come and join the
dance?

Will you, wont you, will you, wont you, will you join the
dance?
Will you, wont you, will you, wont you, wont you join the
dance?


"You can really have no notion how delightful it will be
When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to
                                                      sea!"
But the snail replied "Too far, too far!" and gave a look
                                                       askance
Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the
   dance.
    Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join
        the dance.
    Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join
        the dance.

"What matters it how far we go?" his scaly friend replied.
"There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
The further off from England the nearer is to France
Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.

    Will you, wont you, will you, wont you, will you join the
         dance?
    Will you, wont you, will you, wont you, wont you join the
         dance?"



  Thank you, its a very interesting dance to watch, said
Alice, feeling very glad that it was over at last:  and I do so
like that curious song about the whiting!

  Oh, as to the whiting, said the Mock Turtle, theyyouve
seen them, of course?

  Yes, said Alice, Ive often seen them at dinn she
checked herself hastily.

  I dont know where Dinn may be, said the Mock Turtle, but
if youve seen them so often, of course you know what theyre
like.

  I believe so, Alice replied thoughtfully.  They have their
tails in their mouthsand theyre all over crumbs.

  Youre wrong about the crumbs, said the Mock Turtle:
crumbs would all wash off in the sea.  But they HAVE their tails
in their mouths and the reason is here the Mock Turtle
yawned and shut his eyes.Tell her about the reason and all
that, he said to the Gryphon.

  The reason is, said the Gryphon, that they WOULD go with
the lobsters to the dance.  So they got thrown out to sea.  So
they had to fall a long way.  So they got their tails fast in
their mouths.  So they couldnt get them out again.  Thats all.

  Thank you, said Alice, its very interesting.  I never knew
so much about a whiting before.

  I can tell you more than that, if you like, said the
Gryphon.  Do you know why its called a whiting?

  I never thought about it, said Alice.  Why?

  IT DOES THE BOOTS AND SHOES. the Gryphon replied very
solemnly.

  Alice was thoroughly puzzled.  Does the boots and shoes! she
repeated in a wondering tone.

  Why, what are YOUR shoes done with? said the Gryphon.  I
mean, what makes them so shiny?

  Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she
gave her answer.  Theyre done with blacking, I believe.

  Boots and shoes under the sea, the Gryphon went on in a deep
voice, are done with a whiting.  Now you know.

  And what are they made of? Alice asked in a tone of great
curiosity.

  Soles and eels, of course, the Gryphon replied rather
impatiently:  any shrimp could have told you that.

  If Id been the whiting, said Alice, whose thoughts were
still running on the song, Id have said to the porpoise, "Keep
back, please:  we dont want YOU with us!"

  They were obliged to have him with them, the Mock Turtle
said:  no wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.

  Wouldnt it really? said Alice iD Q FUWY HZ PESQF LHEHDHPS.

  UZ WMHNPS WUP, BKUC GRS UIDQ FMCPSA:  ROK, OU L GUPR NQHQ
ZM HQ, LAC GUXC IS RY REL ZIUDF K HIHNRAK, O PRIOVN LEX "YMGO
ROQF ZHEHIHPS?"

  WICF XWO UQYR "FHNZHPS"? LEDK LFMDY.

  H UQYW DUEG M LEQ, ZRS UIDQ FMCPSA ESFSHKK DA LW UZLARRKW
ZMRA.  LAC GRS PDEZMIA LWVKR WMHQ, SAPB RSEN XHHQ UZ XWHN
KNSKCFHNSP.

  M DIOVN PQXV XWO UK YKGARFMESBLKPUDDUDF PNIU PMHV UICWUDZ,
LEDK LFMDQ Y VUZBSA GMUHNVQ:  XMF MGL RI OPS ZIUDT VQNQ GW
