preservation materials in developing imaging market  Factors affecting
quality and cost  Factors affecting the usability of complex documents
in image form 


Donald WATERS, head of the Systems Office, Yale University Library,
reported on the progress of a master plan for a project at Yale to
convert microfilm to digital imagery, Project Open Book POB.  Stating
that POB was in an advanced stage of planning, WATERS detailed, in
particular, the process of selecting a vendor partner and several key
issues under discussion as Yale prepares to move into the project itself.
He commented first on the vision that serves as the context of POB and
then described its purpose and scope.

WATERS sees the library of the future not necessarily as an electronic
library but as a place that generates, preserves, and improves for its
clients ready access to both intellectual and physical recorded
knowledge.  Electronic tools must find a place in the library in the
context of this vision.  Several roles for electronic tools include
serving as:  indirect sources of electronic knowledge or as "finding"
aids the online catalogues, the articlelevel indices, registers for
documents and archives direct sources of recorded knowledge fulltext
images and various kinds of compound sources of recorded knowledge the
socalled compound documents of Hypertext, mixed text and image,
mixedtext image format, and multimedia.

POB is looking particularly at images and an image library, the uses to
which images will be put e.g., storage, printing, browsing, and then use
as input for other processes, OCR as a subsequent process to image
capture, or creating an image library, and also possibly generating
microfilm.

While input will come from a variety of sources, POB is considering
especially input from preservation microfilm.  A possible outcome is that
the film and paper which provide the input for the image library
eventually may go off into remote storage, and that the image library may
be the primary access tool.

The purpose and scope of POB focus on imaging.  Though related to CXP,
POB has two features which distinguish it:  1 scaleconversion of
10,000 volumes into digital image form and 2 sourceconversion from
microfilm.  Given these features, several key working hypotheses guide
POB, including:  1 Since POB is using microfilm, it is not concerned with
the image library as a preservation medium.  2 Digital imagery can improve
access to recorded knowledge through printing and network distribution at
a modest incremental cost of microfilm.  3 Capturing and storing documents
in a digital image form is necessary to further improvements in access.
POB distinguishes between the imaging, digitizing process and OCR,
which at this stage it does not plan to perform.

Currently in its first or organizational phase, POB found that it could
use a vendor selection process to facilitate a good deal of the
organizational work e.g., creating a project team and advisory board,
confirming the validity of the plan, establishing the cost of the project
and a budget, selecting the materials to convert, and then raising the
necessary funds.

POB developed numerous selection criteria, including:  a firm committed
to imagedocument management, the ability to serve as systems integrator
in a largescale project over several years, interest in developing the
requisite software as a standard rather than a custom product, and a
willingness to invest substantial resources in the project itself.

Two vendors, DEC and Xerox, were selected as finalists in October 1991,
and with the support of the Commission on Preservation and Access, each
was commissioned to generate a detailed requirements analysis for the
project and then to submit a formal proposal for the completion of the
project, which included a budget and costs. The terms were that POB would
pay the loser.  The results for Yale of involving a vendor included:
broad involvement of Yale staff across the board at a relatively low
cost, which may have longterm significance in carrying out the project
twentyfive to thirty university people are engaged in POB better
understanding of the factors that affect corporate response to markets
for imaging products a competitive proposal and a more sophisticated
view of the imaging markets.

The most important factor that distinguished the vendors under
consideration was their identification with the customer.  The size and
internal complexity of the company also was an important factor.  POB was
looking at large companies that had substantial resources.  In the end,
the process generated for Yale two competitive proposals, with Xeroxs
the clear winner.  WATERS then described the components of the proposal,
the design principles, and some of the costs estimated for the process.

Components are essentially four:  a conversion subsystem, a
networkaccessible storage subsystem for 10,000 books and POB expects
200 to 600 dpi storage, browsing stations distributed on the campus
network, and network access to the image printers.

Among the design principles, POB wanted conversion at the highest
possible resolution.  Assuming TIFF files, TIFF files with Group 4
compression, TCPIP, and ethernet network on campus, POB wanted a
clientserver approach with image documents distributed to the
workstations and made accessible through native workstation interfaces
such as Windows.  POB also insisted on a phased approach to
implementation:  1 a standalone, singleuser, lowcost entry into the
business with a workstation focused on conversion and allowing POB to
explore user access 2 movement into a highervolume conversion with
networkaccessible storage and multiple access stations and 3 a
highvolume conversion, fullcapacity storage, and multiple browsing
stations distributed throughout the campus.

The costs proposed for startup assumed the existence of the Yale network
and its two DocuTech image printers.  Other startup costs are estimated
at 1 million over the three phases.  At the end of the project, the annual
operating costs estimated primarily for the software and hardware proposed
come to about 60,000, but these exclude costs for labor needed in the
conversion process, network and printer usage, and facilities management.

Finally, the selection process produced for Yale a more sophisticated
view of the imaging markets:  the management of complex documents in
image form is not a preservation problem, not a library problem, but a
general problem in a broad, general industry.  Preservation materials are
useful for developing that market because of the qualities of the
material.  For example, much of it is out of copyright.  The resolution
of key issues such as the quality of scanning and image browsing also
will affect development of that market.

The technology is readily available but changing rapidly.  In this
context of rapid change, several factors affect quality and cost, to
which POB intends to pay particular attention, for example, the various
levels of resolution that can be achieved.  POB believes it can bring
resolution up to 600 dpi, but an interpolation process from 400 to 600 is
more likely.  The variation quality in microfilm will prove to be a
highly important factor.  POB may reexamine the standards used to film in
the first place by looking at this process as a followon to microfilming.

Other important factors include:  the techniques available to the
operator for handling material, the ways of integrating quality control
into the digitizing work flow, and a work flow that includes indexing and
storage.  POBs requirement was to be able to deal with quality control
at the point of scanning.  Thus, thanks to Xerox, POB anticipates having
a mechanism which will allow it not only to scan in batch form, but to
review the material as it goes through the scanner and control quality
from the outset.

The standards for measuring quality and costs depend greatly on the uses
of the material, including subsequent OCR, storage, printing, and
browsing.  But especially at issue for POB is the facility for browsing.
This facility, WATERS said, is perhaps the weakest aspect of imaging
technology and the most in need of development.

A variety of factors affect the usability of complex documents in image
form, among them:  1 the ability of the system to handle the full range
of document types, not just monographs but serials, multipart
monographs, and manuscripts 2 the location of the database of record
for bibliographic information about the image document, which POB wants
to enter once and in the most useful place, the online catalog 3 a
document identifier for referencing the bibliographic information in one
place and the images in another 4 the technique for making the basic
internal structure of the document accessible to the reader and finally,
5 the physical presentation on the CRT of those documents.  POB is ready
to complete this phase now.  One last decision involves deciding which
material to scan.

                                 


DISCUSSION  TIFF files constitute de facto standard  NARAs experience
with image conversion software and text conversion  RFC 1314 
Considerable flux concerning available hardware and software solutions 
NAL throughput rate during scanning  Window management questions 


In the questionandanswer period that followed WATERSs presentation,
the following points emerged:

      ZIDARs statement about using TIFF files as a standard meant de
     facto standard.  This is what most people use and typically exchange
     with other groups, across platforms, or even occasionally across
     display software.

      HOLMES commented on the unsuccessful experience of NARA in
     attempting to run imageconversion software or to exchange between
     applications:  What are supposedly TIFF files go into other software
     that is supposed to be able to accept TIFF but cannot recognize the
     format and cannot deal with it, and thus renders the exchange
     useless.  Re text conversion, he noted the different recognition
     rates obtained by substituting the make and model of scanners in
     NARAs recent test of an "intelligent" characterrecognition product
     for a new company.  In the selection of hardware and software,
     HOLMES argued, software no longer constitutes the overriding factor
     it did until about a year ago rather it is perhaps important to
     look at both now.

      Danny Cohen and Alan Katz of the University of Southern California
     Information Sciences Institute began circulating as an Internet RFC
     RFC 1314 about a month ago a standard for a TIFF interchange
     format for Internet distribution of monochrome bitmapped images,
     which LYNCH said he believed would be used as a de facto standard.

      FLEISCHHAUERs impression from hearing these reports and thinking
     about AMs experience was that there is considerable flux concerning
     available hardware and software solutions.  HOOTON agreed and
     commented at the same time on ZIDARs statement that the equipment
     employed affects the results produced.  One cannot draw a complete
     conclusion by saying it is difficult or impossible to perform OCR
     from scanning microfilm, for example, with that device,  that set of
     parameters, and system requirements, because numerous other people
     are accomplishing just thQF, HLUDZ IPMSE WMHTUWARPB, HSEREFB.
     MIMZUW HZUDKR PMQF XMPM PMS RENRDENQ YWR PMS PUZZCENY RSES RDIUSX
     HUZHCPLAM.  CHXZ MZ FRS HEMXSAHB KDBRHLPSC GIWYK UESK SQAR XHXSKR UD
     ANHQWHHL KDZLSEARZ CYKB LX WPMSE HSHZSA.  PMIOPI MG HV ZIIW ZM SQ
     WMFDOGLAZ MG LENHIHL YSHSDHARRQB, PMHV HL RMZ ZM LEQ ZUEG MZ CUVX
     LFNYEX SQ PMHL.

      QF ALB, FRS PMWHIFRHMF NEPQ UZ PMS PNQWLUDP TWHRQBV ZUE HEFSE,
     FEPK XQ FEPK, HSNPHWUHDF MWW, SLAPKL PWHC 300 MH 600 ZKFSP HSC RYK
     WUF TSEZUCHUDZ INC HV WMRLDKSEQLXA ULBPSE, LFPMIOPI MIC OMNU PELPQW
     HV WUG QWUDW.  PMHV HV ZUE PNQWLUDP ZWHC TIOWR XMIYX, RMHRM HV UORM
     BXWYSE.

      NYPQEP WMOBARPQW IW DUDWIC OLAKFQHARM BHABPHIRL:  RKR TWHZHPSN KW
     ZYUDWIRX XHFNGMUW ROMDO REL HEMXSAUQGMNQF UHW ZCH WQYXHRL.  UWY REL
     ZHLB ESAMHDQHARZ BM XQ YLXQ PI ULAHGNFQFK HUQPKX HC FRS YWDEBPQFHIW
     LAC VDHDF PMQH WIDW ZM PMY RHWEVFQGMUW MGPSFU LAC GRS MZRSC DEL
     RAZCHWA ILEPK.

                                 


PMIUK  UXVHLPCQFHIW UG NAPMDHKWNHKV HR LNQWLUDF KWR BPHWKFS HWHRQBV 
HUKFQ ANLVUZQ UD PMHV HEMWSPV  RUGPAESCF WMBPP SCFKUSAC VQ XQPPQD HUQPK
AMLFMGQ  ZQRURMKHAL PHW IXSEWMUHDF LKDHIOV RAPMDHKWNHKL:  POVKR
PMESPRUXKDDF, WKALUHQ MRESPMIVNUDI, KMGRSDHDF, HUKFQ HSEPK  FEPK KRPK
