impatient tone:  explanations take such a dreadful time.

  So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when
she first saw the White Rabbit.  She was a little nervous about
it just at first, the two creatures got so close to her, one on
each side, and opened their eyes and mouths so VERY wide, but she
gained courage as she went on.  Her listeners were perfectly
quiet till she got to the part about her repeating YOU ARE OLD,
FATHER WILLIAM, to the Caterpillar, and the words all coming
different, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath, and said
Thats very curious.

  Its all about as curious as it can be, said the Gryphon.

  It all came different! the Mock Turtle repeated
thoughtfully.  I should like to hear her try and repeat
something now.  Tell her to begin.  He looked at the Gryphon as
if he thought it had some kind of authority over Alice.

  Stand up and repeat "TIS THE VOICE OF THE SLUGGARD," said
the Gryphon.

  How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat
lessons! thought Alice I might as well be at school at once.
However, she got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so
full of the Lobster Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was
saying, and the words came very queer indeed:

    Tis the voice of the Lobster I heard him declare,
    "You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair."
    As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
    Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.

              later editions continued as follows
    When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
    And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark,
    But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
    His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.

  Thats different from what I used to say when I was a child,
said the Gryphon.

  Well, I never heard it before, said the Mock Turtle but it
sounds uncommon nonsense.

  Alice said nothing she had sat down with her face in her
hands, wondering if anything would EVER happen in a natural way
again.

  I should like to have it explained, said the Mock Turtle.

  She cant explain it, said the Gryphon hastily.  Go on with
the next verse.

  But about his toes? the Mock Turtle persisted.  How COULD
he turn them out with his nose, you know?

  Its the first position in dancing. Alice said but was
dreadfully puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the
subject.

  Go on with the next verse, the Gryphon repeated impatiently:
it begins "I passed by his garden."

  Alice did not dare to disobey, thougI PRA PASP BHNK HZ CIOVN
LFB NIUY RWHDF, LAR VRS RYCF UW UD Q FESCTVUDF XIMDY:

    H GELPSC VE OHV FKCRAR, LAC IENEQR, DMGM IRA QKY,
