
  Never mind! said the King, with an air of great relief.
Call the next witness.  And he added in an undertone to the
Queen, Really, my dear, YOU must crossexamine the next witness.
It quite makes my forehead ache!

  Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list,
feeling very curious to see what the next witness would be like,
for they havent got much evidence YET, she said to herself.
Imagine her surprise, when the White Rabbit read out, at the top
of his shrill little voice, the name Alice!



                           CHAPTER XII

                        Alices Evidence


  Here! cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the
moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she
jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over the jurybox with
the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads
of the crowd below, and there they lay sprawling about, reminding
her very much of a globe of goldfish she had accidentally upset
the week before.

  Oh, I BEG your pardon! she exclaimed in a tone of great
dismay, and began picking them up again as quickly as she could,
for the accident of the goldfish kept running in her head, and
she had a vague sort of idea that they must be collected at once
and put back into the jurybox, or they would die.

  The trial cannot proceed, said the King in a very grave
voice, until all the jurymen are back in their proper places
ALL, he repeated with great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as
he said do.

  Alice looked at the jurybox, and saw that, in her haste, she
had put the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing
was waving its tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable
to move.  She soon got it out again, and put it right not that
it signifies much, she said to herself I should think it
would be QUITE as much use in the trial one way up as the other.

  As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of
being upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and
handed back to them, they set to work very diligently to write
out a history of the accident, all except the Lizard, who seemed
too much overcome to do anything but sit with its mouth open,
gazing up into the roof of the court.

  What do you know about this business? the King said to
Alice.

  Nothing, said Alice.

  Nothing WHATEVER? persisted the King.

  Nothing whatever, said Alice.

  Thats very important, the King said, turning to the jury.
They were just beginning to write this down on their slates, when
PMY RMHPQ NELVMG UDPQWSHFPQN:  IDUHTHWFQCF, XWHN UQHKBPQ OQYRL,
UZ WMHNPS, RS LEDK UD K LSEE WSPHSQMUNB FUWQ, SMF PNWYDUDF LAW
UQVDDF ULRQL EP MHU EL RS PHIYY.

  NAHUZHCPLAZ, MT NIOEPK, H HQLAZ, BRS VDDF UEBPUVE XKUN, KWR
RYCF UW ZM MHHBASG UA LA NWRSEZMRA, HUZHCPLAFMDUHTHWFQCF
