     how serials such as OJCCT might be deposited for copyright.

      Since a number of projects are planning to carry out
     preservation by creating digital images that will end up in
     online or nearline storage at some institution, LC might play
     a helpful role, at least in the near term, by accelerating how
     to catalog that information into the Research Library Information
     Network RLIN and then into OCLC, so that it would be accessible.
     This would reduce the possibility of multiple institutions digitizing
     the same work.


CONCLUSION

The Workshop was valuable because it brought together partisans from
various groups and provided an occasion to compare goals and methods.
The more committed partisans frequently communicate with others in their
groups, but less often across group boundaries.  The Workshop was also
valuable to attendeesincluding those involved with American Memorywho
came less committed to particular approaches or concepts.  These
attendees learned a great deal, and plan to select and employ elements of
imaging, textcoding, and networked distribution that suit their
respective projects and purposes.

Still, reality rears its ugly head:  no breakthrough has been achieved.
On the imaging side, one confronts a proliferation of competing
datainterchange standards and a lack of consensus on the role of digital
facsimiles in preservation.  In the realm of machinereadable texts, one
encounters a reasonably mature standard but methodological difficulties
and high costs.  These latter problems, of course, represent a special
impediment to the desire, as it is sometimes expressed in the popular
press, "to put the contents of the Library of Congress on line."  In
the words of one participant, there was "no solution to the economic
problemsthe projects that are out there are surviving, but it is going
to be a lot of work to transform the information industry, and so far the
investment to do that is not forthcoming" LESK, per litteras.


                                 


                               PROCEEDINGS


WELCOME


GIFFORD  Origin of Workshop in current Librarians desire to make LCs
collections more widely available  Desiderata arising from the prospect
of greater interconnectedness 


After welcoming participants on behalf of the Library of Congress,
American Memory AM, and the National Demonstration Lab, Prosser
GIFFORD, director for scholarly programs, Library of Congress, located
the origin of the Workshop on Electronic Texts in a conversation he had
had considerably more than a year ago with Carl FLEISCHHAUER concerning
some of the issues faced by AM.  On the assumption that numerous other
people were asking the same questions, the decision was made to bring
together as many of these people as possible to ask the same questions
together.  In a deeper sense, GIFFORD said, the origin of the Workshop
lay in the desire of the current Librarian of Congress, James H.
Billington, to make the collections of the SMVNEWE, SPHSDMLFXA PMHXY
UZPADHDF NAMKHA HW NAHLNLB FSPGMUIWA UW ELHSQMX HZ FRS QUSEMDLA
YSHSDHARRQ, KLKUFLLXQ PU Y UORM DORKC NHDNBY HU NPSEP PMLA PMHXA PYR
