believe they lack complete control.  FREEMAN related the example of
teachers shooing away students because it was not their time to use the
system.  This was a case in which the situation had to be extremely
structured so that the teachers would not feel that they had lost their
grasp on what the system contained.

A final question raised by FREEMAN concerned access and availability of
the system.  She noted the occasional existence of a gap in communication
between school librarians and teachers.  Often AM sits in a school
library and the librarian is the person responsible for monitoring the
system.  Teachers do not always take into their world new library
resources about which the librarian is excited.  Indeed, at the sites
where AM had been used most effectively within a library, the librarian
was required to go to specific teachers and instruct them in its use.  As
a result, several AM sites will have inservice sessions over a summer,
in the hope that perhaps, with a more individualized link, teachers will
be more likely to use the resource.

A related issue in the school context concerned the number of
workstations available at any one location.  Centralization of equipment
at the district level, with teachers invited to download things and walk
away with them, proved unsuccessful because the hours these offices were
open were also school hours.

Another issue was hardware.  As VECCIA observed, a range of sites exists,
some technologically advanced and others essentially acquiring their
first computer for the primary purpose of using it in conjunction with
AMs testing.  Users at technologically sophisticated sites want even
more sophisticated hardware, so that they can perform even more
sophisticated tasks with the materials in AM.  But once they acquire a
newer piece of hardware, they must learn how to use that also at an
unsophisticated site it takes an extremely long time simply to become
accustomed to the computer, not to mention the program offered with the
computer.  All of these small issues raise one large question, namely,
are systems like AM truly rewarding in a school environment, or do they
simply act as innovative toys that do little more than spark interest?

FREEMAN contended that the evaluation project has revealed several strengths
that were gained through the use of archival resources in schools, including:

      Psychic rewards from using AM as a vast, rich database, with
     teachers assigning various projects to studentsoral presentations,
     written reports, a documentary, a turnofthecentury newspaper
     projects that start with the materials in AM but are completed using
     other resources AM thus is used as a research tool in conjunction
     with other electronic resources, as well as with books and items in
     the library where the system is set up.

      Students are acquiring computer literacy in a humanities context.

      This sort of system is overcoming the isolation between disciplines
     that often exists in schools.  For example, many English teachers are
     requiring their students to write papers on historical topics
     represented in AM.  Numerous teachers have reported that their
     students are learning critical thinking skills using the system.

      On a broader level, AM is introducing primary materials, not only
     to students but also to teachers, in an environment where often
     simply none existan exciting thing for the students because it
     helps them learn to conduct research, to interpret, and to draw
     their own conclusioWV.  HA FQYCWUDP FM WUWNIQM ESPSENRM LAR DUEG MZ
     HQLAB, VFMRKCFL EES UIGMLKPQC GH XYSY VWUNXKRPK.  PMQF ESFLPQB PW
     LAMZRSE HHXMGDGY HMFWMHQE UDIU SKSAS UZ HSEPUWLF UDXIXSQHARZ MZ
