years ago, until about July 1994.  TWOHIG found an encouraging
indication of the projects benefits in the ongoing use made by scholars
of the search functions of the CDROM, particularly in reducing the time
spent in manually turning the pages of the Washington papers.

TWOHIG next furnished details concerning the accuracy of transcriptions.
For instance, the insertion of thousands of documents on the CDROM
currently does not permit each document to be verified against the
original manuscript several times as in the case of documents that appear
in the published edition.  However, the transcriptions receive a cursory
check for obvious typos, the misspellings of proper names, and other
errors from the WPP CDROM editor.  Eventually, all documents that appear
in the electronic version will be checked by project editors.  Although
this process has met with opposition from some of the editors on the
grounds that imperfect work may leave their offices, the advantages in
making this material available as a research tool outweigh  fears about the
misspelling of proper names and other relatively minor editorial matters.

Completion of all five Founding Fathers projects i.e., retrievability
and searchability of all of the documents by proper names, alternate
spellings, or varieties of subjects will provide one of the richest
sources of this size for the history of the United States in the latter
part of the eighteenth century.  Further, publication on CDROM will
allow editors to include even minutiae, such as laundry lists, not
included in the printed volumes.

It seems possible that the extensive annotation provided in the printed
volumes eventually will be added to the CDROM edition, pending
negotiations with the publishers of the papers.  At the moment, the
Founding Fathers CDROM is accessible only on the IBYCUS, a computer
developed out of the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae project and designed for
the use of classical scholars.  There are perhaps 400 IBYCUS computers in
the country, most of which are in university classics departments.
Ultimately, it is anticipated that the CDROM edition of the Founding
Fathers documents will run on any IBMcompatible or Macintosh computer
with a CDROM drive.  Numerous changes in the software will also occur
before the project is completed.  Editors note: an IBYCUS was
unavailable to demonstrate the CDROM.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Several additional features of WPP clarified 


Discussion following TWOHIGs presentation served to clarify several
additional features, including 1 that the projects primary
intellectual product consists in the electronic transcription of the
material 2 that the text transmitted to the CDROM people is not
marked up 3 that cataloging and subjectindexing of the material
remain to be worked out though at this point material can be retrieved
by name and 4 that because all tRS PSENRMUDI DV RUWK HC FRS UECRNYES,
PMK HXQNMV HV RSPDIRAC GH WQYN K NRWHO CMHRM WMCFKURL UWXA PSAMARGMLF
PQBZ GUSAB.  PQRURMDLFXA, MG PMAR SQWMHQB SSEK QELQ ZH WQYC GRS UQPQDHLF
UZU LWR FHG MZ MA LWUPMSE RKGDRQ.

                                 


SASCUW  IXSEGDYR UZ PMS RHVZMWE UZ PMK HIHCF HEIHQRM TQPRYAR YLEL LAW
