prescriptive, offer a common starting point they do not define the
structure of the documents, though.  They have some recommendations about
DTDs one could use as examples, but they do just suggest tag sets.   For
example, the CORE project attempts to use the AAP markup as much as
possible, but there are clearly areas where structure must be added.
That in no way contradicts the use of AAP tag sets.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN noted that the TEI prepared a long working paper early
on about the AAP tag set and what it lacked that the TEI thought it
needed, and a fairly long critique of the naming conventions, which has
led to a very different style of naming in the TEI.  He stressed the
importance of the opposition between prescriptive markup, the kind that a
publisher or anybody can do when producing documents de novo, and
descriptive markup, in which one has to take what the text carrier
provides.  In these particular tag sets it is easy to overemphasize this
opposition, because the AAP tag set is extremely flexible.  Even if one
just used the DTDs, they allow almost anything to appear almost anywhere.

                                 

SESSION VI.  COPYRIGHT ISSUES


PETERS  Several cautions concerning copyright in an electronic
environment  Review of copyright law in the United States  The notion
of the public good and the desirability of incentives to promote it 
What copyright protects  Works not protected by copyright  The rights
of copyright holders  Publishers concerns in todays electronic
environment  Compulsory licenses  The price of copyright in a digital
medium and the need for cooperation  Additional clarifications   Rough
justice oftentimes the outcome in numerous copyright matters  Copyright
in an electronic society  Copyright law always only sets up the
boundaries anything can be changed by contract 


Marybeth PETERS, policy planning adviser to the Register of Copyrights,
Library of Congress,   made several general comments and then opened the
floor to discussion of subjects of interest to the audience.

Having attended several sessions in an effort to gain a sense of what
people did and where copyright would affect their lives, PETERS expressed
the following cautions:

      If one takes and converts materials and puts them in new forms,
     then, from a copyright point of view, one is creating something and
     will receive some rights.

      However, if what one is converting already exists, a question
     immediately arises about the status of the materials in question.

      Putting something in the public domain in the United States offers
     some freedom from anxiety, but distributing it throughout the world
     on a network is another matter, even if one has put it in the public
     domain in the United States.  Re foreign laws, very frequently a
     work can be in the public domain in the United States but protected
     in other countries.  Thus, one must consider all of the places a
     work may reach, lest one unwittingly become liable to being faced
     with a suit for copyright infringement, or at least a letter
     demanding discussion of what one is doing.

PETERS reviewed copyright law in the United States.  The U.S.
Constitution effectively states that Congress has the power to enact
copyright laws for two purposes:  1 to encourage the creation and
dissemination of intellectual works for the good of society as a whole
and, significantly, 2 to give creators and those who package and
disseminate materiKXB PMY SWMWUUHN CYRENRV PMQF ENK RHA PMQH.

WMDFESBV BPDHSKB PH XPCDVQ Y LQFLWNY, RMHRM QF GMHQB RLA SQWMHQ LA
QHMZHIALV UBVHA.  PMA HDUPQR VFQPQP REL RASKN EWBSHPQC GRS WUGMUW UZ PMY
