  "So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange
Thou interposest, that my sudden hand,
Prevented, spares to tell thee yet by deeds
What it intends, till first I know of thee
What thing thou art, thus doubleformed, and why,
In this infernal vale first met, thou callst
Me father, and that phantasm callst my son.
I know thee not, nor ever saw till now
Sight more detestable than him and thee."
  T whom thus the Portress of Hellgate replied:
"Hast thou forgot me, then and do I seem
Now in thine eye so foul?once deemed so fair
In Heaven, when at th assembly, and in sight
Of all the Seraphim with thee combined
In bold conspiracy against Heavens King,
All on a sudden miserable pain
Surprised thee, dim thine eyes and dizzy swum
In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast
Threw forth, till on the left side opening wide,
Likest to thee in shape and countenance bright,
Then shining heavenly fair, a goddess armed,
Out of thy head I sprung. Amazement seized
All th host of Heaven back they recoiled afraid
At first, and called me Sin, and for a sign
Portentous held me but, familiar grown,
I pleased, and with attractive graces won
The most aversethee chiefly, who, full oft
Thyself in me thy perfect image viewing,
Becamst enamoured and such joy thou tookst
With me in secret that my womb conceived
A growing burden. Meanwhile war arose,
And fields were fought in Heaven: wherein remained
For what could else? to our Almighty Foe
Clear victory to our part loss and rout
Through all the Empyrean. Down they fell,
Driven headlong from the pitch of Heaven, down
Into this Deep and in the general fall
I also: at which time this powerful key
Into my hands was given, with charge to keep
These gates for ever shut, which none can pass
Without my opening. Pensive here I sat
Alone but long I sat not, till my womb,
Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown,
Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes.
At last this odious offspring whom thou seest,
Thine own begotten, breaking violent way,
Tore through my entrails, that, with fear and pain
Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew
Transformed: but he my inbred enemy
Forth issued, brandishing his fatal dart,
Made to destroy. I fled, and cried out Death!
Hell trembled at the hideous name, and sighed
From all her caves, and back resounded Death!
I fled but he pursued though more, it seems,
Inflamed with lust than rage, and, swifter far,
Me overtook, his mother, all dismayed,
And, in embraces forcible and foul
Engendering with me, of that rape begot
These yelling monsters, that with ceaseless cry
Surround me, as thou sawsthourly conceived
And hourly born, with sorrow infUDMGY
ZM HQ ZUC, DRSC FRSA XHVG, MCFM ZRS YWCT
PMQF SCKR PMQH PMQK ESFMCW, LAR IWYF, LWR FDYN
OQ XMRYXB, PMKHW SSHELZ BRSC, LHNBPUDP ZHWPM
