which it changes we are already wondering what is out there that is
better than CDROM to suspicion of the technical language used to
describe electronic developments.

Maria LEBRON

The Online Journal of Current Clinical Trials, a joint venture of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science AAAS and the Online
Computer Library Center, Inc. OCLC, is the first peerreviewed journal
to provide full text, tabular material, and line illustrations on line.
This presentation will discuss the genesis and startup period of the
journal.  Topics of discussion will include historical overview,
daytoday management of the editorial peer review, and manuscript
tagging and publication.  A demonstration of the journal and its features
will accompany the presentation.

Lynne PERSONIUS

Cornell University Library, Cornell Information Technologies, and Xerox
Corporation, with the support of the Commission on Preservation and
Access, and Sun Microsystems, Inc., have been collaborating in a project
to test a prototype system for recording brittle books as digital images
and producing, on demand, highquality archival paper replacements.  The
project goes beyond that, however, to investigate some of the issues
surrounding scanning, storing, retrieving, and providing access to
digital images in a network environment.

The Joint Study in Digital Preservation began in January 1990.  Xerox
provided the College Library Access and Storage System CLASS software,
a prototype 600dotsperinch dpi scanner, and the hardware necessary
to support network printing on the DocuTech printer housed in Cornells
Computing and Communications Center CCC.

The Cornell staff using the hardware and software became an integral part
of the development and testing process for enhancements to the CLASS
software system.  The collaborative nature of this relationship is
resulting in a system that is specifically tailored to the preservation
application.

A digital library of 1,000 volumes or approximately 300,000 images has
been created and is stored on an optical jukebox that resides in CCC.
The library includes a collection of select mathematics monographs that
provides mathematics faculty with an opportunity to use the electronic
library.  The remaining volumes were chosen for the library to test the
various capabilities of the scanning system.

One project objective is to provide users of the Cornell library and the
library staff with the ability to request facsimiles of digitized images
or to retrieve the actual electronic image for browsing.  A prototype
viewing workstation has been created by Xerox, with input into the design
by a committee of Cornell librarians and computer professionals.  This
will allow us to experiment with patron access to the images that make up
the digital library.  The viewing station provides search, retrieval, and
ultimately printing functions with enhancements to facilitate
navigation through multiple documents.

Cornell currently is working to extend access to the digital library to
readers using workstations from their offices.  This year is devoted to
the development of a network resident image conversion and delivery
server, and client software that will support readers who use Apple
Macintosh computers, IBM windows platforms, and Sun workstations.
Equipment for this development was provided by Sun Microsystems with
support from the Commission on Preservation and Access.

During the showandtell session of the Workshop on Electronic Texts, a
prototype view station will be demonstrated.  In addition, a display of
original library books that have been digitized will be available for
review with associated printed copies for comparison.  The fifteenminute
overview of the project will include a slide presentation that
constitutes a "tour" of the preservation digitizing process.

The final networkconnected version of the viewing station will provide
library users with another mechanism for accessing the digital library,
and will also provide the capability of viewing images directly.  This
will not require special software, although a powerful computer with good
graphics will be needed.

The Joint Study in Digital Preservation has generated a great deal of
interest in the library community.  Unfortunately, or perhaps
fortunately, this project serves to raise a vast number of other issues
surrounding the use of digital technology for the preservation and use of
deteriorating library materials, which subsequent projects will need to
examine.  Much work remains.

SESSION III

Howard BESSER                      Networking Multimedia Databases

What do we have to consider in building and distributing databases of
visual materials in a multiuser environment?  This presentation examines
a variety of concerns that need to be addressed before a multimedia
database can be set up in a networked environment.

In the past it has not been feasible to implement databases of visual
materials in shareduser environments because of technological barriers.
Each of the two basic models for multiuser multimedia databases has
posed its own problem.  The analog multimedia storage model represented
by Project Athenas parallel analog and digital networks has required an
incredibly complex and expensive infrastructure.  The economies of
scale that make multiuser setups cheaper per user served do not operate
in an environment that requires a computer workstation, videodisc player,
and two display devices for each user.

The digital multimedia storage model has required vast amounts of storage
space as much as one gigabyte per thirty still images.  In the past the
cost of such a large amount of storage space made this model a
prohibitive choice as well.  But plunging storage costs are finally
making this second alternative viable.

If storage no longer poses such an impediment, what do we need to
consider in building digitally stored multiuser databases of visual
materials?  This presentation will examine the networking and
telecommunication constraints that must be overcome before such databases
can become commonplace and useful to a large number of people.

The key problem is the vast size of multimedia documents, and how this
affects not only storage but telecommunications transmission time.
Anything slower than T1 speed is impractical for files of 1 megabyte or
larger which is likely to be small for a multimedia document.  For
instance, even on a 56 Kb line it would take three minutes to transfer a
1megabyte file.  And these figures assume ideal circumstances, and do
not take into consideration other users contending for network bandwidth,
disk access time, or the time needed for remote display.  Current common
telephone transmission rates would be completely impractical few users
would be willing to wait the hour necessary to transmit a single image at
2400 baud.

This necessitates compression, which itself raises a number of other
issues.  In order to decrease file sizes significantly, we must employ
lossy compression algorithms.  But how much quality can we afford to
lose?  To date there has been only one significant study done of
imagequality needs for a particular user group, and this study did not
look at loss resulting from compression.  Only after identifying
imagequality needs can we begin to address storage and network bandwidth
needs.

Experience with XWindowsbased applications such as Imagequery, the
University of California at Berkeley image database demonstrates the
utility of a clientserver topology, but also points to the limitation of
current software for a distributed environment.  For example,
applications like Imagequery can incorporate compression, but current X
implementations do not permit decompression at the end users
workstation.  Such decompression at the host computer alleviates storage
capacity problems while doing nothing to address problems of
telecommunications bandwidth.

We need to examine the effects on network throughput of moving
multimedia documents around on a network.  We need to examine various
topologies that will help us avoid bottlenecks around servers and
gateways.  Experience with applications such as these raise still broader
questions. How closely is the multimedia document tied to the software
for viewing it?  Can it be accessed and viewed from other applications?
Experience with the MARC format and more recently with the Z39.50
protocols shows how useful it can be to store documents in a form in
which they can be accessed by a variety of application software.

Finally, from an intellectualaccess standpoint, we need to address the
issue of providing access to these multimedia documents in
interdisciplinary environments.  We need to examine terminology and
indexing strategies that will allow us to provide access to this material
in a crossdisciplinary way.

Ronald LARSEN            Directions in HighPerformance Networking for
                         Libraries

The pace at which computing technology has advanced over the past forty
years shows no sign of abating.  Roughly speaking, each fiveyear period
has yielded an orderofmagnitude improvement in price and performance of
computing equipment.  No fundamental hurdles are likely to prevent this
pace from continuing for at least the next decade.  It is only in the
past five years, though, that computing has become ubiquitous in
libraries, affecting all staff and patrons, directly or indirectly.

During these same five years, communications rates on the Internet, the
principal academic computing network, have grown from 56 kbps to 1.5
Mbps, and the NSFNet backbone is now running 45 Mbps.  Over the next five
years, communication rates on the backbone are expected to exceed 1 Gbps.
Growth in both the population of network users and the volume of network
traffic  has continued to grow geometrically, at rates approaching 15
percent per month.  This flood of capacity and use, likened by some to
"drinking from a firehose,"  creates immense opportunities and challenges
for libraries.  Libraries must anticipate the future implications of this
technology, participate in its development, and deploy it to ensure
access to the worlds information resources.

The infrastructure for the information age is being put in place.
Libraries face strategic decisions about their role in the development,
deployment, and use of this infrastructure.  The emerging infrastructure
is much more than computers and communication lines.  It is more than the
ability to compute at a remote site, send electronic mail to a peer
across the country, or move a file from one library to another.  The next
five years will witness substantial development of the information
infrastructure of the network.

In order to provide appropriate leadership, library professionals must
have a fundamental understanding of and appreciation for computer
networking, from local area networks to the National Research and
Education Network NREN.  This presentation addresses these
fundamentals, and how they relate to libraries today and in the near
future.

Edwin BROWNRIGG               Electronic Library Visions and Realities

The electronic library has been a vision desired by manyand rejected by
somesince Vannevar Bush coined the term memex to describe an automated,
intelligent, personal information system.  Variations on this vision have
included Ted Nelsons Xanadau, Alan Kays Dynabook, and Lancasters
"paperless library," with the most recent incarnation being the
"Knowledge Navigator" described by John Scully of Apple.  But the reality
of library service has been less visionary and the leap to the electronic
library has eluded universities, publishers, and information technology
files.

The Memex Research Institute MemRI, an independent, nonprofit research
and development organization, has created an Electronic Library Program
of shared research and development in order to make the collective vision
more concrete.  The program is working toward the creation of large,
indexed publicly available electronic image collections of published
documents in academic, special, and public libraries.  This strategic
plan is the result of the first stage of the program, which has been an
investigation of the information technologies available to support such
an effort, the economic parameters of electronic service compared to
traditional library operations, and the business and political factors
affecting the shift from print distribution to electronic networked
access.

The strategic plan envisions a combination of publicly searchable access
databases, image and text document collections stored on network "file
servers," local and remote network access, and an intellectual property
managementcontrol system.  This combination of technology and
information content is defined in this plan as an Elibrary or Elibrary
collection.  Some participating sponsors are already developing projects
based on MemRIs recommended directions.

The Elibrary strategy projected in this plan is a visionary one that can
enable major changes and improvements in academic, public, and special
library service.  This vision is, though, one that can be realized with
todays technology.  At the same time, it will challenge the political
and social structure within which libraries operate:  in academic
libraries, the traditional emphasis on local collections, extending to
accreditation issues in public libraries, the potential of electronic
branch and central libraries fully available to the public and for
special libraries, new opportunities for shared collections and networks.

The environment in which this strategic plan has been developed is, at
the moment, dominated by a sense of library limits.  The continued
expansion and rapid growth of local academic library collections is now
clearly at an end.  Corporate libraries, and even law libraries, are
faced with operating within a difficult economic climate, as well as with
very active competition from commercial information sources.  For
example, public libraries may be seen as a desirable but not critical
municipal service in a time when the budgets of safety and health
agencies are being cut back.

Further, libraries in general have a very high labortocost ratio in
their budgets, and labor costs are still increasing, notwithstanding
automation investments.  It is difficult for libraries to obtain capital,
startup, or seed funding for innovative activities, and those
technologyintensive initiatives that offer the potential of decreased
labor costs can provoke the opposition of library staff.

However, libraries have achieved some considerable successes in the past
two decades by improving both their service and their credibility within
their organizationsand these positive changes have been accomplished
mostly with judicious use of information technologies.  The advances in
computing and information technology have been wellchronicled:  the
continuing precipitous drop in computing costs, the growth of the
Internet and private networks, and the explosive increase in publicly
available information databases.

For example, OCLC has become one of the largest computer network
organizations in the world by creating a cooperative cataloging network
of more than 6,000 libraries worldwide.  Online public access catalogs
now serve millions of users on more than 50,000 dedicated terminals in
the United States alone.  The University of California MELVYL online
catalog system has now expanded into an index database reference service
and supports more than six million searches a year.  And, libraries have
become the largest group of customers of CDROM publishing technology
more than 30,000 optical media publications such as those offered by
InfoTrac and Silver Platter are subscribed to by U.S. libraries.

This march of technology continues and in the next decade will result in
further innovations that are extremely difficult to predict.  What is
clear is that libraries can now go beyond automation of their order files
and catalogs to automation of their collections themselvesand it is
possible to circumvent the fiscal limitations that appear to obtain
today.

This Electronic Library Strategic Plan recommends a paradigm shift in
library service, and demonstrates the steps necessary to provide improved
library services with limited capacities and operating investments.

SESSION IVA

Anne KENNEY

The CornellXerox Joint Study in Digital Preservation resulted in the
recording of 1,000 brittle books as 600dpi digital images and the
production, on demand, of highquality and archivally sound paper
replacements.  The project, which was supported by the Commission on
Preservation and Access, also investigated some of the issues surrounding
scanning, storing, retrieving, and providing access to digital images in
a network environment.

Anne Kenney will focus on some of the issues surrounding direct scanning
as identified in the Cornell Xerox Project.  Among those to be discussed
are:  image versus text capture indexing and access imagecapture
capabilities a comparison to photocopy and microfilm production and
cost analysis storage formats, protocols, and standards and the use of
this scanning technology for preservation purposes.

The 600dpi digital images produced in the Cornell Xerox Project proved
highly acceptable for creating paper replacements of deteriorating
originals.  The 1,000 scanned volumes provided an array of imagecapture
challenges that are common to nineteenthcentury printing techniques and
embrittled material, and that defy the use of textconversion processes.
These challenges include diminished contrast between text and background,
fragile and deteriorated pages, uneven printing, elaborate type faces,
faint and bold text adjacency, handwritten text and annotations, nonRoman
languages, and a proliferation of illustrated material embedded in text.
The latter category included highfrequency and lowfrequency halftones,
continuous tone photographs, intricate mathematical drawings, maps,
etchings, reversepolarity drawings, and engravings.

The Xerox prototype scanning system provided a number of important
features for capturing this diverse material.  Technicians used multiple
threshold settings, filters, line art and halftone definitions,
autosegmentation, windowing, and softwareediting programs to optimize
image capture.  At the same time, this project focused on production.
The goal was to make scanning as affordable and acceptable as
photocopying and microfilming for preservation reformatting.  A
timeandcost study conducted during the last three months of this
project confirmed the economic viability of digital scanning, and these
findings will be discussed here.

From the outset, the Cornell Xerox Project was predicated on the use of
nonproprietary standards and the use of common protocols when standards
did not exist.  Digital files were created as TIFF images which were
compressed prior to storage using Group 4 CCITT compression.  The Xerox
software is MS DOS based and utilizes offthe shelf programs such as
Microsoft Windows and Wang Image Wizard.  The digital library is designed
to be hardwareindependent and to provide interchangeability with other
institutions through network connections.  Access to the digital files
themselves is twotiered:  Bibliographic records for the computer files
are created in RLIN and Cornells local system and access into the actual
digital images comprising a book is provided through a document control
structure and a networked image fileserver, both of which will be
described.

The presentation will conclude with a discussion of some of the issues
surrounding the use of this technology as a preservation tool storage,
refreshing, backup.

Pamela ANDRE and Judith ZIDAR

The National Agricultural Library NAL has had extensive experience with
raster scanning of printed materials.  Since 1987, the Library has
participated in the National Agricultural Text Digitizing Project NATDP
a cooperative effort between NAL and fortyfive land grant university
libraries.  An overview of the project will be presented, giving its
history and NALs strategy for the future.

An indepth discussion of NATDP will follow, including a description of
the scanning process, from the gathering of the printed materials to the
archiving of the electronic pages.  The type of equipment required for a
standalone scanning workstation and the importance of file management
software will be discussed.  Issues concerning the images themselves will
be addressed briefly, such as image format black and white versus color
gray scale versus dithering and resolution.

Also described will be a study currently in progress by NAL to evaluate
the usefulness of converting microfilm to electronic images in order to
improve access.  With the cooperation of Tuskegee University, NAL has
selected three reels of microfilm from a collection of sixtyseven reels
containing the papers, letters, and drawings of George Washington Carver.
The three reels were converted into 3,500 electronic images using a
specialized microfilm scanner.  The selection, filming, and indexing of
this material will be discussed.

Donald WATERS

Project Open Book, the Yale University Librarys effort to convert 10,
000 books from microfilm to digital imagery, is currently in an advanced
state of planning and organization.  The Yale Library has selected a
major vendor to serve as a partner in the project and as systems
integrator.  In its proposal, the successful vendor helped isolate areas
of risk and uncertainty as well as key issues to be addressed during the
life of the project.  The Yale Library is now poised to decide what
material it will convert to digital image form and to seek funding,
initially for the first phase and then for the entire project.

The proposal that Yale accepted for the implementation of Project Open
Book will provide at the end of three phases a conversion subsystem,
browsing stations distributed on the campus network within the Yale
Library, a subsystem for storing 10,000 books at 200 and 600 dots per
inch, and network access to the image printers.  Pricing for the system
implementation assumes the existence of Yales campus ethernet network
and its highspeed image printers, and includes other requisite hardware
and software, as well as system integration services.  Proposed operating
costs include hardware and software maintenance, but do not include
estimates for the facilities management of the storage devices and image
servers.

Yale selected its vendor partner in a formal process, partly funded by
the Commission for Preservation and Access.  Following a request for
proposal, the Yale Library selected two vendors as finalists to work with
Yale staff to generate a detailed analysis of requirements for Project
Open Book.  Each vendor used the results of the requirements analysis to
generate and submit a formal proposal for the entire project.  This
competitive process not only enabled the Yale Library to select its
primary vendor partner but also revealed much about the state of the
imaging industry, about the varying, corporate commitments to the markets
for imaging technology, and about the varying organizational dynamics
through which major companies are responding to and seeking to develop
these markets.

Project Open Book is focused specifically on the conversion of images
from microfilm to digital form.  The technology for scanning microfilm is
readily available but is changing rapidly.  In its project requirements,
the Yale Library emphasized features of the technology that affect the
technical quality of digital image production and the costs of creating
and storing the image library:  What levels of digital resolution can be
achieved by scanning microfilm?  How does variation in the quality of
microfilm, particularly in film produced to preservation standards,
affect the quality of the digital images?  What technologies can an
operator effectively and economically apply when scanning film to
separate twoup images and to control for and correct image
imperfections?  How can quality control best be integrated into
digitizing work flow that includes document indexing and storage?

The actual and expected uses of digital imagesstorage, browsing,
printing, and OCRhelp determine the standards for measuring their
quality.  Browsing is especially important, but the facilities available
for readers to browse image documents is perhaps the weakest aspect of
imaging technology and most in need of development.  As it defined its
requirements, the Yale Library concentrated on some fundamental aspects
of usability for image documents:  Does the system have sufficient
flexibility to handle the full range of document types, including
monographs, multipart and multivolume sets, and serials, as well as
manuscript collections?  What conventions are necessary to identify a
document uniquely for storage and retrieval?  Where is the database of
record for storing bibliographic information about the image document?
How are basic internal structures of documents, such as pagination, made
accessible to the reader?  How are the image documents physically
presented on the screen to the reader?

The Yale Library designed Project Open Book on the assumption that
microfilm is more than adequate as a medium for preserving the content of
deteriorated library materials.  As planning in the project has advanced,
it is increasingly clear that the challenge of digital image technology
and the key to the success of efforts like Project Open Book is to
provide a means of both preserving and improving access to those
deteriorated materials.

SESSION IVB

George THOMA

In the use of electronic imaging for document preservation, there are
several issues to consider, such as:  ensuring adequate image quality,
maintaining substantial conversion rates throughput, providing unique
identification for automated access and retrieval, and accommodating
bound volumes and fragile material.

To maintain high image quality, image processing functions are required
to correct the deficiencies in the scanned image.  Some commercially
available systems include these functions, while some do not.  The
scanned raw image must be processed to correct contrast deficiencies
both poor overall contrast resulting from light print andor dark
background, and variable contrast resulting from stains and
bleedthrough.  Furthermore, the scan density must be adequate to allow
legibility of print and sufficient fidelity in the pseudohalftoned gray
material.  Borders or pageedge effects must be removed for both
compactibility and aesthetics.  Page skew must be corrected for aesthetic
reasons and to enable accurate character recognition if desired.
Compound images consisting of both twotoned text and grayscale
illustrations must be processed appropriately to retain the quality of
each.

SESSION IVC

Jean BARONAS

Standards publications being developed by scientists, engineers, and
business managers in Association for Information and Image Management
AIIM standards committees can be applied to electronic image management
EIM processes including:  document image transfer, retrieval and
evaluation optical disk and document scanning and document design and
conversion.  When combined with EIM system planning and operations,
standards can assist in generating image databases that are
interchangeable among a variety of systems.  The applications of
different approaches for imagetagging, indexing, compression, and
transfer often cause uncertainty concerning EIM system compatibility,
calibration, performance, and upward compatibility, until standard
implementation parameters are established.  The AIIM standards that are
being developed for these applications can be used to decrease the
uncertainty, successfully integrate imaging processes, and promote "open
systems."  AIIM is an accredited American National Standards Institute
ANSI standards developer with more than twenty committees comprised of
300 volunteers representing users, vendors, and manufacturers.  The
standards publications that are developed in these committees have
national acceptance and provide the basis for international harmonization
in the development of new International Organization for Standardization
ISO standards.

This presentation describes the development of AIIMs EIM standards and a
new effort at AIIM, a database on standards projects in a wide framework
of imaging industries including capture, recording, processing,
duplication, distribution, display, evaluation, and preservation.  The
AIIM Imagery Database will cover imaging standards being developed by
many organizations in many different countries.  It will contain
standards publications dates, origins, related national and
international projects, status, key words, and abstracts.  The ANSI Image
Technology Standards Board requested that such a database be established,
as did the ISOInternational Electrotechnical Commission Joint Task Force
on Imagery.  AIIM will take on the leadership role for the database and
coordinate its development with several standards developers.

Patricia BATTIN

     Characteristics of standards for digital imagery:

           Nature of digital technology implies continuing volatility.

           Precipitous standardsetting not possible and probably not
          desirable.

           Standards are a complex issue involving the medium, the
          hardware, the software, and the technical capacity for
          reproductive fidelity and clarity.

           The prognosis for reliable archival standards as defined by
          librarians in the foreseeable future is poor.

     Significant potential and attractiveness of digital technology as a
     preservation medium and access mechanism.

     Productive use of digital imagery for preservation requires a
     reconceptualizing of preservation principles in a volatile,
     standardless world.

     Concept of managing continuing access in the digital environment
     rather than focusing on the permanence of the medium and longterm
     archival standards developed for the analog world.

     Transition period:  How long and what to do?

            Redefine "archival."

            Remove the burden of "archival copy" from paper artifacts.

            Use digital technology for storage, develop management
          strategies for refreshing medium, hardware and software.

            Create acidfree paper copies for transition period backup
          until we develop reliable procedures for ensuring continuing
          access to digital files.

SESSION IVD

Stuart WEIBEL            The Role of SGML Markup in the CORE Project 6

The emergence of highspeed telecommunications networks as a basic
feature of the scholarly workplace is driving the demand for electronic
document delivery.  Three distinct categories of electronic
publishingrepublishing are necessary to support access demands in this
emerging environment:

     1.  Conversion of paper or microfilm archives to electronic format
     2.  Conversion of electronic files to formats tailored to
          electronic retrieval and display
     3.  Primary electronic publishing materials for which the
          electronic version is the primary format

OCLC has experimental or product development activities in each of these
areas.  Among the challenges that lie ahead is the integration of these
three types of information stores in coherent distributed systems.

The CORE Chemistry Online Retrieval Experiment Project is a model for
the conversion of large text and graphics collections for which
electronic typesetting files are available category 2.  The American
Chemical Society has made available computer typography files dating from
1980 for its twenty journals.  This collection of some 250 journalyears
is being converted to an electronic format that will be accessible
through several enduser applications.

The use of Standard Generalized Markup Language SGML offers the means
to capture the structural richness of the original articles in a way that
will support a variety of retrieval, navigation, and display options
necessary to navigate effectively in very large text databases.

An SGML document consists of text that is marked up with descriptive tags
that specify the function of a given element within the document.  As a
formal language construct, an SGML document can be parsed against a
documenttype definition DTD that unambiguously defines what elements
are allowed and where in the document they can or must occur.  This
formalized map of article structure allows the user interface design to
be uncoupled from the underlying database system, an important step
toward interoperability.  Demonstration of this separability is a part of
the CORE project, wherein user interface designs born of very different
philosophies will access the same database.

NOTES:
     6  The CORE project is a collaboration among Cornell Universitys
     Mann Library, Bell Communications Research Bellcore, the American
     Chemical Society ACS, the Chemical Abstracts Service CAS, and
     OCLC.

Michael LESK                  The CORE Electronic Chemistry Library

A major online file of chemical journal literature complete with
graphics is being developed to test the usability of fully electronic
access to documents, as a joint project of Cornell University, the
American Chemical Society, the Chemical Abstracts Service, OCLC, and
Bellcore with additional support from Sun Microsystems, SpringerVerlag,
DigitaI Equipment Corporation, Sony Corporation of America, and Apple
Computers.  Our file contains the American Chemical Societys online
journals, supplemented with the graphics from the paper publication.  The
indexing of the articles from Chemical Abstracts Documents is available
in both image and text format, and several different interfaces can be
used.  Our goals are 1 to assess the effectiveness and acceptability of
electronic access to primary journals as compared with paper, and 2 to
identify the most desirable functions of the user interface to an
electronic system of journals, including in particular a comparison of
pageimage display with ASCII display interfaces.  Early experiments with
chemistry students on a variety of tasks suggest that searching tasks are
completed much faster with any electronic system than with paper, but
that for reading all versions of the articles are roughly equivalent.

Pamela ANDRE and Judith ZIDAR

Text conversion is far more expensive and timeconsuming than image
capture alone.  NALs experience with optical character recognition OCR
will be related and compared with the experience of having text rekeyed.
What factors affect OCR accuracy?  How accurate does full text have to be
in order to be useful?  How do different users react to imperfect text?
These are questions that will be explored.  For many, a service bureau
may be a better solution than performing the work inhouse this will also
be discussed.

SESSION VI

Marybeth PETERS

Copyright law protects creative works.  Protection granted by the law to
authors and disseminators of works includes the right to do or authorize
the following:  reproduce the work, prepare derivative works, distribute
the work to the public, and publicly perform or display the work.  In
addition, copyright owners of sound recordings and computer programs have
the right to control rental of their works.  These rights are not
unlimited there are a number of exceptions and limitations.

An electronic environment places strains on the copyright system.
Copyright owners want to control uses of their work and be paid for any
use the public wants quick and easy access at little or no cost.  The
marketplace is working in this area.  Contracts, guidelines on electronic
use, and collective licensing are in use and being refined.

Issues concerning the ability to change works without detection are more
difficult to deal with.  Questions concerning the integrity of the work
and the status of the changed version under the copyright law are to be
addressed.  These are public policy issues which require informed
dialogue.


                                 


                Appendix III:  DIRECTORY OF PARTICIPANTS


PRESENTERS:

     Pamela Q.J. Andre
     Associate Director, Automation
     National Agricultural Library
     10301 Baltimore Boulevard
     Beltsville, MD 207052351
     Phone:  301 5046813
     Fax:  301 5047473
     Email:  INTERNET:  PANDREASRR.ARSUSDA.GOV

     Jean Baronas, Senior Manager
     Department of Standards and Technology
     Association for Information and Image Management AIIM
     1100 Wayne Avenue, Suite 1100
     Silver Spring, MD 20910
     Phone:  301 5878202
     Fax:  301 5872711

     Patricia Battin, President
     The Commission on Preservation and Access
     1400 16th Street, N.W.
     Suite 740
     Washington, DC 200362217
     Phone:  202 9393400
     Fax:  202 9393407
     Email:  CPAGWUVM.BITNET

     Howard Besser
     Centre Canadien dArchitecture
     Canadian Center for Architecture
     1920, rue Baile
     Montreal, Quebec H3H 2S6
     CANADA
     Phone:  514 9397001
     Fax:  514 9397020
     Email:  howardlis.pitt.edu

     Edwin B. Brownrigg, Executive Director
     Memex Research Institute
     422 Bonita Avenue
     Roseville, CA 95678
     Phone:  916 7842298
     Fax:  916 7867559
     Email:  BITNET:  MEMEXCALSTATE.2

     Eric M. Calaluca, Vice President
     ChadwyckHealey, Inc.
     1101 King Street
     Alexandria, VA 223l4
     Phone:  800 75205l5
     Fax:  703 6837589

     James Daly
     4015 Deepwood Road
     Baltimore, MD 212181404
     Phone:  410 2350763

     Ricky Erway, Associate Coordinator
     American Memory
     Library of Congress
     Phone:  202 7076233
     Fax:  202 7073764

     Carl Fleischhauer, Coordinator
     American Memory
     Library of Congress
     Phone:  202 7076233
     Fax:  202 7073764

     Joanne Freeman
     2000 Jefferson Park Avenue, No. 7
     Charlottesville, VA  22903

     Prosser Gifford
     Director for Scholarly Programs
     Library of Congress
     Phone:  202 7071517
     Fax:  202 7079898
     Email:  pgifseq1.loc.gov

     Jacqueline Hess, Director
     National Demonstration Laboratory
       for Interactive Information Technologies
     Library of Congress
     Phone:  202 7074157
     ULV:  202 7072829

     LHLER UMWEQK, WHDQRZMW
     RQCFSE ZUE SSAQMWHDUQ MYSPB UD PMS ROULAMGHKB RQPO
     LFYSLARKN SMVNEWE
     NHFPSEL HDUSKEPMGX
     169 WMXVKPQ YSKANY
     RAC XNHRLDODQ, DU 08903
     HRUWY:  908 9321384
     ULV:  908 9321386
     QHKUS:  UMWEQXOIWUKN.CMFPKEP.KRO

     DOXVUKU B. MIMZUW, GDRQ HESPDKARZ
     LMVHRABV  PQRMDUNQV NKSASHZHQCF
       HUKFUDI  DAUHWUQGMUW XEBPQHV PWHHF
     UDQP
     6430 WHDQSAKIK RDHSK, LHMGY 400
     SQPMSPNK, IC 208X7
     HRUWY:  301 5646750
     ULV:  513 5646867

     LARA D. EARRAK, YBVMWUKPQ KDESQMHW
     RKFECPHQCF UZ HESPSELKGMUW LAR NUWPSDSQFHIW
     701 UXUD VUSCENX
     WMCWASF NDUSKEPMGX
     MGUENQ, WA 14853
     HRUWY:  607 2556875
     ULV:  607 2559346
     QHKUX:  VKWQWHWRAXVQ.LMGRAZ

     WHALVN X. VENPSW
     ELXHDMQFK RHDQRZMN PHW UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZX
     NADGSEVHZQ UZ UQWEFLWR QF WMXVKPS HENY
     WHIU T0224, CDQASKDA FMVNEWE
     WMXVKPS HENQ, IW 207427011
     HRUWY:  301 4059194
     ULV:  301 3149865
     QHKUS:  NFLEPARVUSC.OUR.KNI

     UQDHL F. SASCUW, UQALIDDF KRMGHW
     PMY HAFUDK HIOCWLF UZ NMWSARM QVUDUNQB FDHLFB
     S333 U BPESQP, W.D.
     NYPRUDPFUW, RN 20005
     HRUWY:  202 3266735
     ULV:  202 8422868
     QHKUS:  FMLLEYLVPNOBI.VMFCQP

     UHRMYQX VSPE, QSYNMGMSK KDESQMHW
     WMHTMFSE BRHKWNS ESPQYCNO
     SQXV WMOBNAMDQFHIRL ESPSENRM, UDW.
     CH 2Y385
     445 XHMFR PPCYSZ
     UIWSHVZMDW, DU 07960X9V0
     HRUWY:  201 8294070
     ULV:  201 8295981
     QHKUX:  VSPQVASBNHWQ.RIU UDPQCWQP HW SQXVWMES!SAVE OLRT

     NBUGZUCR L. FAWRM
     KDESQMHW, VUSCENK YMFIUQFHIW
     NADGSEVHZQ UZ NQVUZUCWUK,
        UZGURQ UZ PMS HESVHRKCF
     300 FLEQVHRK RCDGQ, 8PU PXUHW
     UYAVLAR, NY 946123350
     HRUWY:  510 9870522
     ULV:  510 8393573
     QHKUB:  NLFHNMNQCSBY

     KLNE UHRMASXHW
     ALGMUWLF ENRMDGSP LAR CQRHWRV KNUHDUBPNEGMUW
     RLP WU. 14C
     7PM  HSWLXEXSLAUK, W.D.
     NYPRUDPFUW, R.N. 20408
     HRUWY:  202 5015544
     ULV:  202 5015533
     QHKUB:  FUHNM.DUI.PIX

     ASVU OQXUALB, HLAKFUDP KKDZMW
     HSEPAHP HWHHKQM
     RKFECPHQCF UZ PMQ RFLBVMDB
     UEDSENN IDUSKEPMGX
     319 XMAXBPUW UEXV
     NQCTDHKIQ, HY 02138
     HRUWK:  617 4959025, 617 4950456 RHDQRZ
     ULV:  617 4968886
     QHKUS:  AXVOVEYWHP.RENLKCR.KRO IE SXVODHM12.UEDSENR.KNI

     NKGDR DWZNVQK FEDQENW
     FEDQENR IOULAMGHKV HRLGMFMPQ
     300 PSWMWR BPESQP, LHMGY 201
     XUL EBFHX, NQ 94002
     HRUWS:  415 9480150 HMH
     ULV:  415 9485793

     XAWLQ E. HSEPUWHOL, EBVHVFQCF KDESQMHW
     WMCWASV UAUHWUQGMUW PQRMWUXUIDSP ZUW
      BRMIFLNSK OAUHWUQGMUW XHHNRQB
     502 UXUD VUSCENX
     WMCWASF NDUSKEPMGX
     MGUENQ, WA 14853
     HRUWY:  607 2553393
     ULV:  607 2559346
     QHKUV:  UCWWMCWASBN.VMFCQP

     UQWESQPM HSPQEP
     ZHVUWQ FSLADUDF KNGDPSC PM ZRS
       ESIDBPSE UZ WMZEDHPIPB
     VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB
     UZGURQ BU 403
     HRUWY:  202 7078350
     ULV:  202 7078366

     Q. CMDUEAS PHSESQDPCQAMYSW
     KRMGHW, PQBZ ARWMKDDF UDMGUKGMSK
     WMHTMFSE RQCFSE CQ 135
     NADGSEVHZQ UZ UVVUWUHV QF RMMDKFW
     XMV 6998
     RMMDKFI, HX 60680
     HRUWY:  312 4130317
     ULV:  312 9966834
     QHKUF:  N35395OHDBC..QN.MMD.KRO IN H35395OHDBC.TMGRAZ

     PKHWPK C. PMIUQ, RMHKZ
     WMOBNAMDQFHIRL ARIDRASEUDT VNEWNO
     ALGMUWLF VUSCENX WT UKRMDUDY
     8600 WHDQGDXVS HDVY
     SQPMSPNK, IC 20894
     HRUWY:  301 4964496
     ULV:  301 4020341
     QHKUB:  FMIUQSUN.WBU.DUI.PIX

     WIWHPMQ ZYWMHP, KKDZMW
     PMS HEFSEX HZ PYHDPY RELMHDFZMW
     504 LFRKCHLA VUSCENX
     NADGSEVHZQ UZ GDDPUDUK
     RMENXUZBSPGDXVK, SY 229032498
     HRUWY:  804 9240523
     ULV:  804 9244337

     LHLER U. SKWBUK, PQQU SAKNSE
     QUSEMDLA HQUIWE, HLSE KSLFNLGMUW
     VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB
     QUSEMDLA HQUIWE KSLFNLGMUW HEIHQRZ
     HRUWY:  202 7079104
     ULV:  202 7073764
     QHKUX:  BSKRBQA1.XUD.TIX

     WIALVN O. DQFSEP, RQYW
     XEBPQHX HZLMDY
     KYSA NADGSEVHZQ VUSCENX
     RAR OKLAR, QM 06520
     HRUWY:  203 4324889
     ULV:  203 4327231
     QHKUV:  NNYPQEPKYSABI.VMFCQP HW RDQFSEXELFKSO.QWB.KYSA.KRO

     BPNLCP RYMVAS, PSDUHW ESPSENRM BRHKCFHVZ
     MWBN
     6565 PNLAFG WHKN
     NILXUD, IM 43017
     HRUWA:  614 764608S
     ULV:  614 7642344
     QHKUV:  UCFSERAP:  BFMEPRM.MWBN.HWZ

