Yet with submiss approach and reverence meek,
As to a superiour nature bowing low,
Thus said.  Native of Heaven, for other place
None can than Heaven such glorious shape contain
Since, by descending from the thrones above,
Those happy places thou hast deigned a while
To want, and honour these, vouchsafe with us
Two only, who yet by sovran gift possess
This spacious ground, in yonder shady bower
To rest and what the garden choicest bears
To sit and taste, till this meridian heat
Be over, and the sun more cool decline.
Whom thus the angelick Virtue answered mild.
Adam, I therefore came nor art thou such
Created, or such place hast here to dwell,
As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heaven,
To visit thee lead on then where thy bower
Oershades for these midhours, till evening rise,
I have at will.  So to the sylvan lodge
They came, that like Pomonas arbour smiled,
With flowerets decked, and fragrant smells but Eve,
Undecked save with herself, more lovely fair
Than WoodNymph, or the fairest Goddess feigned
Of three that in mount Ida naked strove,
Stood to entertain her guest from Heaven no veil
She needed, virtueproof no thought infirm
Altered her cheek.  On whom the Angel Hail
Bestowed, the holy salutation used
Long after to blest Mary, second Eve.
Hail, Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful womb
Shall fill the world more numerous with thy sons,
Than with these various fruits the trees of God
Have heaped this table!Raised of grassy turf
Their table was, and mossy seats had round,
And on her ample square from side to side
All autumn piled, though spring and autumn here
Danced hand in hand.  A while discourse they hold
No fear lest dinner cool when thus began
Our author.  Heavenly stranger, please to taste
These bounties, which our Nourisher, from whom
All perfect good, unmeasured out, descends,
To us for food and for delight hath caused
The earth to yield unsavoury food perhaps
To spiritual natures only this I know,
That one celestial Father gives to all.
To whom the Angel.  Therefore what he gives
Whose praise be ever sung to Man in part
Spiritual, may of purest Spirits be found
No ingrateful food:  And food alike those pure
Intelligential substances require,
As doth your rational and both contain
Within them every lower faculty
Of sense, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste,
Tasting concoct, digest, assimilate,
And corporeal to incorporeal turn.
For know, whatever was created, needs
To be sustained and fed:  OP ASAHQCFB
PMK PWHBVSE PAKRB PRS FHESE, SENPM PMS PQY,
QYCPU EWR PMS PQY PAKR KUC, PRS KUC PMIPS GUESB
QPRSESLF, LAN KB XWYSPF ZHDBP PMQ HWZW
ROARRQ UD RSD SHVKFS EIOWR PMHXS PZHPB, NAFHDPKR
LKZHHNL RMZ KQG MCFI MSE LHLBFQWNQ PHNRAW.
WUC RMZM PRS UIUW WU WUHNHVMUARP QSOLFY
