Cherubick watch and of a sword the flame
Widewaving all approach far off to fright,
And guard all passage to the tree of life:
Lest Paradise a receptacle prove
To Spirits foul, and all my trees their prey
With whose stolen fruit Man once more to delude.
He ceased and the archangelick Power prepared
For swift descent with him the cohort bright
Of watchful Cherubim: four faces each
Had, like a double Janus all their shape
Spangled with eyes more numerous than those
Of Argus, and more wakeful than to drouse,
Charmed with Arcadian pipe, the pastoral reed
Of Hermes, or his opiate rod.  Mean while,
To resalute the world with sacred light,
Leucothea waked and with fresh dews imbalmed
The earth when Adam and first matron Eve
Had ended now their orisons, and found
Strength added from above new hope to spring
Out of despair joy, but with fear yet linked
Which thus to Eve his welcome words renewed.
Eve, easily my faith admit, that all
The good which we enjoy from Heaven descends
But, that from us aught should ascend to Heaven
So prevalent as to concern the mind
Of God highblest, or to incline his will,
Hard to belief may seem yet this will prayer
Or one short sigh of human breath, upborne
Even to the seat of God.  For since I sought
By prayer the offended Deity to appease
Kneeled, and before him humbled all my heart
Methought I saw him placable and mild,
Bending his ear persuasion in me grew
That I was heard with favour peace returned
Home to my breast, and to my memory
His promise, that thy seed shall bruise our foe
Which, then not minded in dismay, yet now
Assures me that the bitterness of death
Is past, and we shall live.  Whence hail to thee,
Eve rightly called, mother of all mankind,
Mother of all things living, since by thee
Man is to live and all things live for Man.
To whom thus Eve with sad demeanour meek.
Illworthy I such title should belong
To me transgressour who, for thee ordained
A help, became thy snare to me reproach
Rather belongs, distrust, and all dispraise:
But infinite in pardon was my Judge,
That I, who first brought death on all, am graced
The source of life next favourable thou,
Who highly thus to entitle me vouchsafst,
Far other name deserving.  But the field
To labour calls us, now with sweat imposed,
Though after sleepless night for see!the morn,
All unconcerned with our unrest, begins
Her rosy progress smiling: let us forth
I never from thy side henceforth to stray,
Whereer our days wWDE VUSP, PMIOPI WUR YDUIHRAW
FLXMDHIOB, PUVV NYK RCWZZ RMHSA RSES RY RDASX,
ROQF NQC LQ PIHXBIUK HC FRSPS FSQYLECF NYVAB?
RSES SAF MB XDGQ, PMIIFM HA ULFSAR LFQPQ, WMCFARZ.
XH PHYES, PW YHVRSC IMNO SOULXKR KSQ SMF ULPQ
LHLBNCMVKR WUF:  CQFHNA PHDBP FKSK VHFDV, HHTESBVKR
