So spake our sire, and by his countenance seemed
Entering on studious thoughts abstruse which Eve
Perceiving, where she sat retired in sight,
With lowliness majestick from her seat,
And grace that won who saw to wish her stay,
Rose, and went forth among her fruits and flowers,
To visit how they prospered, bud and bloom,
Her nursery they at her coming sprung,
And, touched by her fair tendance, gladlier grew.
Yet went she not, as not with such discourse
Delighted, or not capable her ear
Of what was high: such pleasure she reserved,
Adam relating, she sole auditress
Her husband the relater she preferred
Before the Angel, and of him to ask
Chose rather he, she knew, would intermix
Grateful digressions, and solve high dispute
With conjugal caresses: from his lip
Not words alone pleased her.  O! when meet now
Such pairs, in love and mutual honour joined?
With Goddesslike demeanour forth she went,
Not unattended for on her, as Queen,
A pomp of winning Graces waited still,
And from about her shot darts of desire
Into all eyes, to wish her still in sight.
And Raphael now, to Adams doubt proposed,
Benevolent and facile thus replied.
To ask or search, I blame thee not for Heaven
Is as the book of God before thee set,
Wherein to read his wonderous works, and learn
His seasons, hours, or days, or months, or years:
This to attain, whether Heaven move or Earth,
Imports not, if thou reckon right the rest
From Man or Angel the great Architect
Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge
His secrets to be scanned by them who ought
Rather admire or, if they list to try
Conjecture, he his fabrick of the Heavens
Hath left to their disputes, perhaps to move
His laughter at their quaint opinions wide
Hereafter when they come to model Heaven
And calculate the stars, how they will wield
The mighty frame how build, unbuild, contrive
To save appearances how gird the sphere
With centrick and eccentrick scribbled oer,
Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb:
Already by thy reasoning this I guess,
Who art to lead thy offspring, and supposest
That bodies bright and greater should not serve
The less not bright, nor Heaven such journeys run,
Earth sitting still, when she alone receives
The benefit:  Consider first, that great
Or bright infers not excellence: the Earth
Though, in comparison of Heaven, so small,
Nor glistering, may of solid good contain
More plenty than the sun that barren shines
Whose virtue on itself works no effect,
But in the fruitful Earth there first received,
His beams, unactive else, their vigour find.
Yet not to Earth are those bright luminaries
Officious but to thee, Earths habitant.
And for the Heavens wide circuit, let it speak
The Makers high magnificence, who built
So spacious, and his line stretched out so far
That Man may know he dwells not in his own
An edifice too large for him to fill,
Lodged in a small partition and the rest
Ordained for uses to his Lord best known.
The swiftness of those circles attribute,
Though numberless, to his Omnipotence,
That to corporeal substances could add
Speed almost spiritual:  Me thou thinkest not slow,
Who since the morninghour set out from Heaven
Where God resides, and ere midday arrived
In Eden distance inexpressible
By numbers that have name.  But this I urge,
Admitting motion in the Heavens, to show
Invalid that which thee to doubt it moved
Not that I so affirm, though so it seem
To thee who hast thy dwelling here on Earth.
God, to remove his ways from human sense,
Placed Heaven from Earth so far, that earthly sight,
If it presume, might err in things too high,
And no advantage gain.  What if the sun
Be center to the world and other stars,
By his attractive virtue and their own
Incited, dance about him various rounds?
Their wandering course now high, now low, then hid,
Progressive, retrograde, or standing still,
In six thou seest and what if seventh to these
The planet earth, so stedfast though she seem,
Insensibly three different motions move?
Which else to several spheres thou must ascribe,
Moved contrary with thwart obliquities
Or save the sun his labour, and that swift
Nocturnal and diurnal rhomb supposed,
Invisible else above all stars, the wheel
Of day and night which needs not thy belief,
If earth, industrious of herself, fetch day
Travelling east, and with her part averse
From the suns beam meet night, her other part
Still luminous by his ray.  What if that light,
Sent from her through the wide transpicuous air,
To the terrestrial moon be as a star,
Enlightening her by day, as she by night
This earth? reciprocal, if land be there,
Fields and inhabitants:  Her spots thou seest
As clouds, and clouds may rain, and rain produce
Fruits in her softened soil for some to eat
Allotted there and other suns perhaps,
With their attendant moons, thou wilt descry,
Communicating male and female light
Which two great sexes animate the world,
Stored in each orb perhaps with some that live.
For such vast room in Nature unpossessed
By living soul, desart and desolate,
Only to shine, yet scarce to contribute
Each orb a glimpse of light, conveyed so far
Down to this habitable, which returns
Light back to them, is obvious to dispute.
But whether thus these things, or whether not
But whether the sun, predominant in Heaven,
Rise on the earth or earth rise on the sun
He from the east his flaming road begin
Or she from west her silent course advance,
With inoffensive pace that spinning sleeps
On her soft axle, while she paces even,
And bears thee soft with the smooth hair along
Sollicit not thy thoughts with matters hid
Leave them to God above him serve, and fear!
Of other creatures, as him pleases best,
Wherever placed, let him dispose joy thou
In what he gives to thee, this Paradise
And thy fair Eve Heaven is for thee too high
To know what passes there be lowly wise:
Think only what concerns thee, and thy being
Dream not of other worlds, what creatures there
Live, in what state, condition, or degree
Contented that thus far hath been revealed
Not of Earth only, but of highest Heaven.
To whom thus Adam, cleared of doubt, replied.
How fully hast thou satisfied me, pure
Intelligence of Heaven, Angel serene!
And, freed from intricacies, taught to live
The easiest way nor with perplexing thoughts
To interrupt the sweet of life, from which
God hath bid dwell far off all anxious cares,
And not molest us unless we ourselves
Seek them with wandering thoughts, and notions vain.
But apt the mind or fancy is to rove
Unchecked, and of her roving is no end
Till warned, or by experience taught, she learn,
That, not to know at large of things remote
From use, obscure and subtle but, to know
That which before us lies in daily life,
Is the prime wisdom:  What is more, is fume,
Or emptiness, or fond impertinence:
And renders us, in things that most concern,
Unpractised, unprepared, and still to seek.
Therefore from this high pitch let us descend
A lower flight, and speak of things at hand
Useful whence, haply, mention may arise
Of something not unseasonable to ask,
By sufferance, and thy wonted favour, deigned.
Thee I have heard relating what was done
Ere my remembrance: now, hear me relate
My story, which perhaps thou hast not heard
And day is not yet spent till then thou seest
How subtly to detain thee I devise
Inviting thee to hear while I relate
Fond! were it not in hope of thy reply:
For, while I sit with thee, I seem in Heaven
And sweeter thy discourse is to my ear
Than fruits of palmtree pleasantest to thirst
And hunger both, from labour, at the hour
Of sweet repast they satiate, and soon fill,
Though pleasant but thy words, with grace divine
Imbued, bring to their sweetness no satiety.
To whom thus Raphael answered heavenly meek.
Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of men,
Nor tongue ineloquent for God on thee
Abundantly his gifts hath also poured
Inward and outward both, his image fair:
Speaking, or mute, all comeliness and grace
Attends thee and each word, each motion, forms
Nor less think we in Heaven of thee on Earth
Than of our fellowservant, and inquire
Gladly into the ways of God with Man:
For God, we see, hath honoured thee, and set
On Man his equal love:  Say therefore on
For I that day was absent, as befel,
Bound on a voyage uncouth and obscure,
Far on excursion toward the gates of Hell
Squared in full legion such command we had
To see that none thence issued forth a spy,
Or enemy, while God was in his work
Lest he, incensed at such eruption bold,
Destruction with creation might have mixed.
Not that they durst without his leave attempt
But us he sends upon his high behests
For state, as Sovran King and to inure
Our prompt obedience.  Fast we found, fast shut,
The dismal gates, and barricadoed strong
But long ere our approaching heard within
Noise, other than the sound of dance or song,
Torment, and loud lament, and furious rage.
Glad we returned up to the coasts of light
Ere sabbathevening: so we had in charge.
But thy relation now for I attend,
Pleased with thy words no less than thou with mine.
So spake the Godlike Power, and thus our Sire.
For Man to tell how human life began
Is hard for who himself beginning knew
Desire with thee still longer to converse
Induced me.  As new waked from soundest sleep,
Soft on the flowery herb I found me laid,
In balmy sweat which with his beams the sun
Soon dried, and on the reeking moisture fed.
Straight toward Heaven my wondering eyes I turned,
And gazed a while the ample sky till, raised
By quick instinctive motion, up I sprung,
As thitherward endeavouring, and upright
Stood on my feet: about me round I saw
Hill, dale, and shady woods, and sunny plains,
And liquid lapse of murmuring streams by these,
Creatures that lived and moved, and walked, or flew
Birds on the branches warbling all things smiled
With fragrance and with joy my heart oerflowed.
Myself I then perused, and limb by limb
Surveyed, and sometimes went, and sometimes ran
With supple joints, as lively vigour led:
But who I was, or where, or from what cause,
Knew not to speak I tried, and forthwith spake
My tongue obeyed, and readily could name
Whateer I saw.  Thou Sun, said I, fair light,
And thou enlightened Earth, so fresh and gay,
Ye Hills, and Dales, ye Rivers, Woods, and Plains,
And ye that live and move, fair Creatures, tell,
Tell, if ye saw, how I came thus, how here?
Not of myselfby some great Maker then,
In goodness and in power preeminent:
Tell me, how may I know him, how adore,
From whom I have that thus I move and live,
And feel that I am happier than I know.
While thus I called, and strayed I knew not whither,
From where I first drew air, and first beheld
This happy light when, answer none returned,
On a green shady bank, profuse of flowers,
Pensive I sat me down:  There gentle sleep
First found me, and with soft oppression seised
My droused sense, untroubled, though I thought
I then was passing to my former state
Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve:
When suddenly stood at my head a dream,
Whose inward apparition gently moved
My fancy to believe I yet had being,
And lived:  One came, methought, of shape divine,
And said, Thy mansion wants thee, Adam rise,
First Man, of men innumerable ordained
First Father! called by thee, I come thy guide
To the garden of bliss, thy seat prepared.
So saying, by the hand he took me raised,
And over fields and waters, as in air
Smoothsliding without step, last led me up
A woody mountain whose high top was plain,
A circuit wide, enclosed, with goodliest trees
Planted, with walks, and bowers that what I saw
Of Earth before scarce pleasant seemed.  Each tree,
Loaden with fairest fruit that hung to the eye
Tempting, stirred in me sudden appetite
To pluck and eat whereat I waked, and found
Before mine eyes all real, as the dream
Had lively shadowed:  Here had new begun
My wandering, had not he, who was my guide
Up hither, from among the trees appeared,
Presence Divine.  Rejoicing, but with awe,
In adoration at his feet I fell
Submiss:  He reared me, and Whom thou soughtest I am,
Said mildly, Author of all this thou seest
Above, or round about thee, or beneath.
This Paradise I give thee, count it thine
To till and keep, and of the fruit to eat:
Of every tree that in the garden grows
Eat freely with glad heart fear here no dearth:
But of the tree whose operation brings
Knowledge of good and ill, which I have set
The pledge of thy obedience and thy faith,
Amid the garden by the tree of life,
Remember what I warn thee, shun to taste,
And shun the bitter consequence: for know,
The day thou eatest thereof, my sole command
Transgressed, inevitably thou shalt die,
From that day mortal and this happy state
Shalt lose, expelled from hence into a world
Of woe and sorrow.  Sternly he pronounced
The rigid interdiction, which resounds
Yet dreadful in mine ear, though in my choice
Not to incur but soon his clear aspect
Returned, and gracious purpose thus renewed.
Not only these fair bounds, but all the Earth
To thee and to thy race I give as lords
Possess it, and all things that therein live,
Or live in sea, or air beast, fish, and fowl.
In sign whereof, each bird and beast behold
After their kinds I bring them to receive
From thee their names, and pay thee fealty
With low subjection understand the same
Of fish within their watery residence,
Not hither summoned, since they cannot change
Their element, to draw the thinner air.
As thus he spake, each bird and beast behold
Approaching two and two these cowering low
With blandishment each bird stooped on his wing.
I named them, as they passed, and understood
Their nature, with such knowledge God endued
My sudden apprehension:  But in these
I found not what methought I wanted still
And to the heavenly Vision thus presumed.
O, by what name, for thou above all these,
Above mankind, or aught than mankind higher,
Surpassest far my naming how may I
Adore thee, Author of this universe,
And all this good to man? for whose well being
So amply, and with hands so liberal,
Thou hast provided all things:  But with me
I see not who partakes.  In solitude
What happiness, who can enjoy alone,
Or, all enjoying, what contentment find?
Thus I presumptuous and the Vision bright,
As with a smile more brightened, thus replied.
What callest thou solitude?  Is not the Earth
With various living creatures, and the air
Replenished, and all these at thy command
To come and play before thee?  Knowest thou not
Their language and their ways?  They also know,
And reason not contemptibly:  With these
Find pastime, and bear rule thy realm is large.
So spake the Universal Lord, and seemed
So ordering:  I, with leave of speech implored,
And humble deprecation, thus replied.
Let not my words offend thee, Heavenly Power
My Maker, be propitious while I speak.
Hast thou not made me here thy substitute,
And these inferiour far beneath me set?
Among unequals what society
Can sort, what harmony, or true delight?
Which must be mutual, in proportion due
Given and received but, in disparity
The one intense, the other still remiss,
Cannot well suit with either, but soon prove
Tedious alike:  Of fellowship I speak
Such as I seek, fit to participate
All rational delight: wherein the brute
Cannot be human consort:  They rejoice
Each with their kind, lion with lioness
So fitly them in pairs thou hast combined:
Much less can bird with beast, or fish with fowl
So well converse, nor with the ox the ape
Worse then can man with beast, and least of all.
Whereto the Almighty answered, not displeased.
A nice and subtle happiness, I see,
Thou to thyself proposest, in the choice
Of thy associates, Adam! and wilt taste
No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitary.
What thinkest thou then of me, and this my state?
Seem I to thee sufficiently possessed
Of happiness, or not? who am alone
From all eternity for none I know
Second to me or like, equal much less.
How have I then with whom to hold converse,
Save with the creatures which I made, and those
To me inferiour, infinite descents
Beneath what other creatures are to thee?
He ceased I lowly answered.  To attain
The highth and depth of thy eternal ways
All human thoughts come short, Supreme of things!
Thou in thyself art perfect, and in thee
Is no deficience found:  Not so is Man,
But in degree the cause of his desire
By conversation with his like to help
Or solace his defects.  No need that thou
Shouldst propagate, already Infinite
And through all numbers absolute, though One:
But Man by number is to manifest
His single imperfection, and beget
Like of his like, his image multiplied,
In unity defective which requires
Collateral love, and dearest amity.
Thou in thy secresy although alone,
Best with thyself accompanied, seekest not
Social communication yet, so pleased,
Canst raise thy creature to what highth thou wilt
Of union or communion, deified:
I, by conversing, cannot these erect
From prone nor in their ways complacence find.
Thus I emboldened spake, and freedom used
Permissive, and acceptance found which gained
This answer from the gracious Voice Divine.
Thus far to try thee, Adam, I was pleased
And find thee knowing, not of beasts alone,
Which thou hast rightly named, but of thyself
Expressing well the spirit within thee free,
My image, not imparted to the brute
Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee
Good reason was thou freely shouldst dislike
And be so minded still:  I, ere thou spakest,
Knew it not good for Man to be alone
And no such company as then thou sawest
Intended thee for trial only brought,
To see how thou couldest judge of fit and meet:
What next I bring shall please thee, be assured,
Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,
Thy wish exactly to thy hearts desire.
He ended, or I heard no more for now
My earthly by his heavenly overpowered,
Which it had long stood under, strained to the highth
In that celestial colloquy sublime,
As with an object that excels the sense
Dazzled and spent, sunk down and sought repair
Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, called
By Nature as in aid, and closed mine eyes.
Mine eyes he closed, but open left the cell
Of fancy, my internal sight by which,
Abstract as in a trance, methought I saw,
Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape
Still glorious before whom awake I stood:
Who stooping opened my left side, and took
From thence a rib, with cordial spirits warm,
And lifeblood streaming fresh wide was the wound,
But suddenly with flesh filled up and healed:
The rib he formed and fashioned with his hands
Under his forming hands a creature grew,
Manlike, but different sex so lovely fair,
That what seemed fair in all the world, seemed now
Mean, or in her summed up, in her contained
And in her looks which from that time infused
Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before,
And into all things from her air inspired
The spirit of love and amorous delight.
She disappeared, and left me dark I waked
To find her, or for ever to deplore
Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure:
When out of hope, behold her, not far off,
Such as I saw her in my dream, adorned
With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow
To make her amiable:  On she came,
Led by her heavenly Maker, though unseen,
And guided by his voice nor uninformed
Of nuptial sanctity, and marriage rites:
Grace was in all her steps, Heaven in her eye,
In every gesture dignity and love.
I, overjoyed, could not forbear aloud.
This turn hath made amends thou hast fulfilled
Thy words, Creator bounteous and benign,
Giver of all things fair! but fairest this
Of all thy gifts! nor enviest.  I now see
Bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh, myself
Before me:  Woman is her nameof Man
Extracted: for this cause he shall forego
Father and mother, and to his wife adhere
And they shall be one flesh, one heart, one soul.
She heard me thus and though divinely brought,
Yet innocence, and virgin modesty,
Her virtue, and the conscience of her worth,
That would be wooed, and not unsought be won,
Not obvious, not obtrusive, but, retired,
The more desirable or, to say all,
Nature herself, though pure of sinful thought,
Wrought in her so, that, seeing me, she turned:
I followed her she what was honour knew,
And with obsequious majesty approved
My pleaded reason.  To the nuptial bower
I led her blushing like the morn: All Heaven,
And happy constellations, on that hour
Shed their selectest influence the Earth
Gave sign of gratulation, and each hill
Joyous the birds fresh gales and gentle airs
Whispered it to the woods, and from their wings
Flung rose, flung odours from the spicy shrub,
Disporting, till the amorous bird of night
Sung spousal, and bid haste the eveningstar
On his hill top, to light the bridal lamp.
Thus have I told thee all my state, and brought
My story to the sum of earthly bliss,
Which I enjoy and must confess to find
In all things else delight indeed, but such
As, used or not, works in the mind no change,
Nor vehement desire these delicacies
I mean of taste, sight, smell, herbs, fruits, and flowers,
Walks, and the melody of birds: but here
Far otherwise, transported I behold,
Transported touch here passion first I felt,
Commotion strange! in all enjoyments else
Superiour and unmoved here only weak
Against the charm of Beautys powerful glance.
Or Nature failed in me, and left some part
Not proof enough such object to sustain
Or, from my side subducting, took perhaps
More than enough at least on her bestowed
Too much of ornament, in outward show
Elaborate, of inward less exact.
For well I understand in the prime end
Of Nature her the inferiour, in the mind
And inward faculties, which most excel
In outward also her resembling less
His image who made both, and less expressing
The character of that dominion given
Oer other creatures:  Yet when I approach
Her loveliness, so absolute she seems
And in herself complete, so well to know
Her own, that what she wills to do or say,
Seems wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best:
All higher knowledge in her presence falls
Degraded  Wisdom in discourse with her
Loses discountenanced, and like Folly shows
Authority and Reason on her wait,
As one intended first, not after made
Occasionally and, to consummate all,
Greatness of mind and Nobleness their seat
Build in her loveliest, and create an awe
About her, as a guard angelick placed.
To whom the Angel with contracted brow.
Accuse not Nature, she hath done her part
Do thou but thine and be not diffident
Of Wisdom she deserts thee not, if thou
Dismiss not her, when most thou needest her nigh,
By attributing overmuch to things
Less excellent, as thou thyself perceivest.
For, what admirest thou, what transports thee so,
An outside? fair, no doubt, and worthy well
Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love
Not thy subjection:  Weigh with her thyself
Then value:  Ofttimes nothing profits more
Than selfesteem, grounded on just and right
Well managed of that skill the more thou knowest,
The more she will acknowledge thee her head,
And to realities yield all her shows:
Made so adorn for thy delight the more,
So awful, that with honour thou mayest love
Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise.
But if the sense of touch, whereby mankind
Is propagated, seem such dear delight
Beyond all other think the same vouchsafed
To cattle and each beast which would not be
To them made common and divulged, if aught
Therein enjoyed were worthy to subdue
The soul of man, or passion in him move.
What higher in her society thou findest
Attractive, human, rational, love still
In loving thou dost well, in passion not,
Wherein true love consists not:  Love refines
The thoughts, and heart enlarges hath his seat
In reason, and is judicious is the scale
By which to heavenly love thou mayest ascend,
Not sunk in carnal pleasure for which cause,
Among the beasts no mate for thee was found.
To whom thus, half abashed, Adam replied.
Neither her outside formed so fair, nor aught
In procreation common to all kinds,
Though higher of the genial bed by far,
And with mysterious reverence I deem,
So much delights me, as those graceful acts,
Those thousand decencies, that daily flow
From all her words and actions mixed with love
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned
Union of mind, or in us both one soul
Harmony to behold in wedded pair
More grateful than harmonious sound to the ear.
Yet these subject not I to thee disclose
What inward thence I feel, not therefore foiled,
Who meet with various objects, from the sense
Variously representing yet, still free,
Approve the best, and follow what I approve.
To love, thou blamest me not for Love, thou sayest,
Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask:
Love not the heavenly Spirits, and how their love
Express they? by looks only? or do they mix
Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch?
To whom the Angel, with a smile that glowed
Celestial rosy red, Loves proper hue,
Answered.  Let it suffice thee that thou knowest
Us happy, and without love no happiness.
Whatever pure thou in the body enjoyest,
And pure thou wert created we enjoy
In eminence and obstacle find none
Of membrane, joint, or limb, exclusive bars
Easier than air with air, if Spirits embrace,
Total they mix, union of pure with pure
Desiring, nor restrained conveyance need,
As flesh to mix with flesh, or soul with soul.
But I can now no more the parting sun
Beyond the Earths green Cape and verdant Isles
Hesperian sets, my signal to depart.
Be strong, live happy, and love!  But, first of all,
Him, whom to love is to obey, and keep
His great command take heed lest passion sway
Thy judgement to do aught, which else free will
Would not admit: thine, and of all thy sons,
The weal or woe in thee is placed beware!
I in thy persevering shall rejoice,
And all the Blest:  Stand fastto stand or fall
Free in thine own arbitrement it lies.
Perfect within, no outward aid require
And all temptation to transgress repel.
So saying, he arose whom Adam thus
Followed with benediction.  Since to part,
Go, heavenly guest, ethereal Messenger,
Sent from whose sovran goodness I adore!
Gentle to me and affable hath been
Thy condescension, and shall be honoured ever
With grateful memory:  Thou to mankind
Be good and friendly still, and oft return!
So parted they the Angel up to Heaven
From the thick shade, and Adam to his bower.



Book IX


No more of talk where God or Angel guest
With Man, as with his friend, familiar usd,
To sit indulgent, and with him partake
Rural repast permitting him the while
Venial discourse unblamd. I now must change
Those notes to tragick foul distrust, and breach
Disloyal on the part of Man, revolt,
And disobedience: on the part of Heaven
Now alienated, distance and distaste,
Anger and just rebuke, and judgement given,
That brought into this world a world of woe,
Sin and her shadow Death, and Misery
Deaths harbinger: Sad talk!yet argument
Not less but more heroick than the wrath
Of stern Achilles on his foe pursued
Thrice fugitive about Troy wall or rage
Of Turnus for Lavinia disespousd
Or Neptunes ire, or Junos, that so long
Perplexed the Greek, and Cythereas son:

   00482129
If answerable style I can obtain
Of my celestial patroness, who deigns
Her nightly visitation unimplord,
And dictates to me slumbering or inspires
Easy my unpremeditated verse:
Since first this subject for heroick song
Pleasd me long choosing, and beginning late
Not sedulous by nature to indite
Wars, hitherto the only argument
Heroick deemd chief mastery to dissect
With long and tedious havock fabled knights
In battles feignd the better fortitude
Of patience and heroick martyrdom
Unsung or to describe races and games,
Or tilting furniture, imblazond shields,
Impresses quaint, caparisons and steeds,
Bases and tinsel trappings, gorgeous knights
At joust and tournament then marshalld feast
Servd up in hall with sewers and seneshals
The skill of artifice or office mean,
Not that which justly gives heroick name
To person, or to poem.  Me, of these
Nor skilld nor studious, higher argument
Remains sufficient of itself to raise
That name, unless an age too late, or cold
Climate, or years, damp my intended wing
Depressd and much they may, if all be mine,
Not hers, who brings it nightly to my ear.
The sun was sunk, and after him the star
Of Hesperus, whose office is to bring
Twilight upon the earth, short arbiter
"twixt day and night, and now from end to end
Nights hemisphere had veild the horizon round:
When satan, who late fled before the threats
Of Gabriel out of Eden, now improvd
In meditated fraud and malice, bent
On Mans destruction, maugre what might hap
Of heavier on himself, fearless returned
From compassing the earth cautious of day,
Since Uriel, regent of the sun, descried
His entrance, and foreworned the Cherubim
That kept their watch thence full of anguish driven,
The space of seven continued nights he rode
With darkness thrice the equinoctial line
He circled four times crossed the car of night
From pole to pole, traversing each colure
On the eighth returned and, on the coast averse
From entrance or Cherubick watch, by stealth
Found unsuspected way.  There was a place,
Now not, though sin, not time, first wrought the change,
Where Tigris, at the foot of Paradise,
Into a gulf shot under ground, till part
Rose up a fountain by the tree of life:
In with the river sunk, and with it rose
Satan, involved in rising mist then sought
Where to lie hid sea he had searched, and land,
From Eden over Pontus and the pool
Maeotis, up beyond the river Ob
Downward as far antarctick and in length,
West from Orontes to the ocean barred
At Darien  thence to the land where flows
Ganges and Indus: Thus the orb he roamed
With narrow search and with inspection deep
Considered every creature, which of all
Most opportune might serve his wiles and found
The Serpent subtlest beast of all the field.
Him after long debate, irresolute
Of thoughts revolved, his final sentence chose
Fit vessel, fittest imp of fraud, in whom
To enter, and his dark suggestions hide
From sharpest sight: for, in the wily snake
Whatever sleights, none would suspicious mark,
As from his wit and native subtlety
Proceeding which, in other beasts observed,
Doubt might beget of diabolick power
Active within, beyond the sense of brute.
Thus he resolved, but first from inward grief
His bursting passion into plaints thus poured.
More justly, seat worthier of Gods, as built
With second thoughts, reforming what was old!
O Earth, how like to Heaven, if not preferred
For what God, after better, worse would build?
Terrestrial Heaven, danced round by other Heavens
That shine, yet bear their bright officious lamps,
Light above light, for thee alone, as seems,
In thee concentring all their precious beams
Of sacred influence!  As God in Heaven
Is center, yet extends to all so thou,
Centring, receivest from all those orbs: in thee,
Not in themselves, all their known virtue appears
Productive in herb, plant, and nobler birth
Of creatures animate with gradual life
Of growth, sense, reason, all summed up in Man.
With what delight could I have walked thee round,
If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange
Of hill, and valley, rivers, woods, and plains,
Now land, now sea and shores with forest crowned,
Rocks, dens, and caves!  But I in none of these
Find place or refuge and the more I see
Pleasures about me, so much more I feel
Torment within me, as from the hateful siege
Of contraries: all good to me becomes
Bane, and in Heaven much worse would be my state.
But neither here seek I, no nor in Heaven
To dwell, unless by mastering Heavens Supreme
Nor hope to be myself less miserable
By what I seek, but others to make such
As I, though thereby worse to me redound:
For only in destroying I find ease
To my relentless thoughts and, him destroyed,
Or won to what may work his utter loss,
For whom all this was made, all this will soon
Follow, as to him linked in weal or woe
In woe then that destruction wide may range:
To me shall be the glory sole among
The infernal Powers, in one day to have marred
What he, Almighty styled, six nights and days
Continued making and who knows how long
Before had been contriving? though perhaps
Not longer than since I, in one night, freed
From servitude inglorious well nigh half
The angelick name, and thinner left the throng
Of his adorers: He, to be avenged,
And to repair his numbers thus impaired,
Whether such virtue spent of old now failed
More Angels to create, if they at least
Are his created, or, to spite us more,
Determined to advance into our room
A creature formed of earth, and him endow,
Exalted from so base original,
With heavenly spoils, our spoils: What he decreed,
He effected Man he made, and for him built
Magnificent this world, and earth his seat,
Him lord pronounced and, O indignity!
Subjected to his service angelwings,
And flaming ministers to watch and tend
Their earthly charge: Of these the vigilance
I dread and, to elude, thus wrapt in mist
Of midnight vapour glide obscure, and pry
In every bush and brake, where hap may find
The serpent sleeping in whose mazy folds
To hide me, and the dark intent I bring.
O foul descent! that I, who erst contended
With Gods to sit the highest, am now constrained
Into a beast and, mixed with bestial slime,
This essence to incarnate and imbrute,
That to the highth of Deity aspired!
But what will not ambition and revenge
Descend to?  Who aspires, must down as low
As high he soared obnoxious, first or last,
To basest things.  Revenge, at first though sweet,
Bitter ere long, back on itself recoils:
Let it I reck not, so it light well aimed,
Since higher I fall short, on him who next
Provokes my envy, this new favourite
Of Heaven, this man of clay, son of despite,
Whom, us the more to spite, his Maker raised
From dust: Spite then with spite is best repaid.
So saying, through each thicket dank or dry,
Like a black mist lowcreeping, he held on
His midnightsearch, where soonest he might find
The serpent him fastsleeping soon he found
In labyrinth of many a round selfrolled,
His head the midst, well stored with subtile wiles:
Not yet in horrid shade or dismal den,
Nor nocent yet but, on the grassy herb,
Fearless unfeared he slept: in at his mouth
The Devil entered and his brutal sense,
In heart or head, possessing, soon inspired
With act intelligential but his sleep
Disturbed not, waiting close the approach of morn.
Now, when as sacred light began to dawn
In Eden on the humid flowers, that breathed
Their morning incense, when all things, that breathe,
From the Earths great altar send up silent praise
To the Creator, and his nostrils fill
With grateful smell, forth came the human pair,
And joined their vocal worship to the quire
Of creatures wanting voice that done, partake
The season prime for sweetest scents and airs:
Then commune, how that day they best may ply
Their growing work: for much their work outgrew
The hands dispatch of two gardening so wide,
And Eve first to her husband thus began.
Adam, well may we labour still to dress
This garden, still to tend plant, herb, and flower,
Our pleasant task enjoined but, till more hands
Aid us, the work under our labour grows,
Luxurious by restraint what we by day
Lop overgrown, or prune, or prop, or bind,
One night or two with wanton growth derides
Tending to wild.  Thou therefore now advise,
Or bear what to my mind first thoughts present:
Let us divide our labours thou, where choice
Leads thee, or where most needs, whether to wind
The woodbine round this arbour, or direct
The clasping ivy where to climb while I,
In yonder spring of roses intermixed
With myrtle, find what to redress till noon:
For, while so near each other thus all day
Our task we choose, what wonder if so near
Looks intervene and smiles, or object new
Casual discoursK RNEY WW DMHRM UDPQCHMGB
IOC RYKX RHWQ, VWHIFMP ZM VUZBSA, PMIOPI SQFIW
QYNSK, YWR PMS RIOW HP LHFHSC NIUSP NAQYCWKR?
ZM ROIU UHVN LAXRSE KNQU PMHL ESFMCWKR.
XHSA KSQ, YBVMWUKPQ XHSA, ZM HQ SQXWWR
WMHTENQ YXMSK LFX VDGUDT DESQFHNSP RKEN!
RYXV UEBP PMIO UIGMUWKR, RYXV PMQ ZMIIFMPP SHTXUKQW,
MIY ZQ HDIMP SQBP UNFUUV PMY RHWY DMHRM RSES
ZIR IQFU EBVDIRAN IL RHW UZ HQ PRLFF TELB
NAHEKUPSN: GHW WUPMUDF VIXASHKC NLA SQ ZUNAW
UD YWUQC, FUEC FH XFMWK MIHLMIVN ZIIW,
LAK IWZR DHWEV UD RSE RHLLQWR ZM HEIUMZY.
KQF CMZ XH BPDHQMXA UEPM ION SHWK DHTHXKR
FLXMHN, EL ZM RKLQN HX RRSW DA RYSW
ESPNSPMUARZ, CRSPMSE ZUIW, HW FQVA SQZCYSW,
ZUIW UZ PMQ HUDW, IC PMHB VRYQP UDPQCNIOEPY
UZ XUIYL EWR BHUVSP ZUE PUHSAL PWHH CQYXHA UXUY,
ZM SCMFK RARHKN, KWR ENY HU FIXQ PRS ZUIW
XUSK, WUZ BRS XURYBP ARW IP UOULA VUPA.
ZUC WMZ ZM HDEVIUQ PIHX, LMF ZM RKVUPIZ,
RS UQRK HL, LAW VASDIMP ZM ESELUW HIUDKR.
PMSPS HQFRP LAC VWYSEV RIOTM WUM TMF IOD HIHCF UEWRB
DOXV EQSH PNIU DOVNSERABV DOPM QYPS, EL DORK
EL RY RAKR NYVA, GMXV XWNAPKE RLARV SEA SUWZ
ELVHBP HL LMG, MT UMNM RUWSKEPS HSEUEHP
PMYS LEGMQFQ, PH XMICP QLPSWNK H WMNFW KHKVN:
ZUE PUXMGINS PIUQPHUSP HV SQBP XHDMQPX,
LAR VMICP ESGMESHQCF HNPKB VRYQP ESFMCW.
LMZ MPMSE WIMLF THXPSBVSP HQ, SABP UECH
SQULXV PMYS PSSKESN GWHO BA PHW PMIO ADWYSPZ
ROQF UEPM SQAR NYCWKR HL, ROQF UQVUDMIOL PHY
ARXKUDZ IHN UEZSUDSPL, EWR UZ MHX HDW
RKPHKUDHDF, PSQEB PW YHWA IX RHY LAR VUEHQ
XQ BXK YBVLNBF LAR VIUYRRSES DUPI QF UEWR
NYMQRSL, RI WIOTM, DOPM PDYSWK MIHS ZM GUWR
MHX RHVU EWR SQBP KNLKCFKFA, HL ELHWRSE
MIHSSABV ZM DMCNOUSKCF HL HIUDKR, ROSEY SQNO
ZM MZRSE PHSKRK YDK UHPIF BARN KF CYSW:
ROQPRSE RHV GUEPG CSPDIC LQ PW YMGIRNEY
ION PQYBFA ZWHI TIW, HW ZM KDBPHNL
WMDUIFLF XUSK, PMLA ROMDR HSEUEHP WU LXHVB
ARHIKQC VA OP SBWMGSP MHP SDLQ OHWY
HW PMHV, HW YWEPA, SQYSK WUZ BRS ULMGUPNF VHRK
PMQF FKSK PMYS SQUDP, VGMXV PRKNSP PMYS, LAR GWHPQQMB.
