



                ALICES ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND

                          Lewis Carroll

               THE MILLENNIUM FULCRUM EDITION 2.9




                            CHAPTER I

                      Down the RabbitHole


  Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister
on the bank, and of having nothing to do:  once or twice she had
peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no
pictures or conversations in it, and what is the use of a book,
thought Alice without pictures or conversation?

  So she was considering in her own mind as well as she could,
for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid, whether
the pleasure of making a daisychain would be worth the trouble
of getting up and picking the daisies, when suddenly a White
Rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her.

  There was nothing so VERY remarkable in that nor did Alice
think it so VERY much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to
itself, Oh dear!  Oh dear!  I shall be late!  when she thought
it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have
wondered at this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural
but when the Rabbit actually TOOK A WATCH OUT OF ITS WAISTCOAT
POCKET, and looked at it, and then hurried on, Alice started to
her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had never
before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoatpocket, or a watch to
take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the
field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop
down a large rabbithole under the hedge.

  In another moment down went Alice after it, never once
considering how in the world she was to get out again.

  The rabbithole went straight on like a tunnel for some way,
and then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a
moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself
falling down a very deep well.

  Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she
had plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to
wonder what was going to happen next.  First, she tried to look
down and make out what she was coming to, but it was too dark to
see anything then she looked at the sides of the well, and
noticed that they were filled with cupboards and bookshelves
here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs.  She
took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed it was
labelled ORANGE MARMALADE, but to her great disappointment it
was empty:  she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing
somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she
fell past it.

  Well! thought Alice to herself, after such a fall as this, I
shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs!  How brave theyll
all think me at home!  Why, I wouldnt say anything about it,
even if I fell off the top of the house! Which was very likely
true.

  Down, down, down.  Would the fall NEVER come to an end!  I
wonder how many miles Ive fallen by this time? she said aloud.
I must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth.  Let
me see:  that would be four thousand miles down, I think for,
you see, Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her
lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was not a VERY good
opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to
listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over yes,
thats about the right distancebut then I wonder what Latitude
or Longitude Ive got to?  Alice had no idea what Latitude was,
or Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to
say.

  Presently she began again.  I wonder if I shall fall right
THROUGH the earth!  How funny itll seem to come out among the
people that walk with their heads downward!  The Antipathies, I
think she was rather glad there WAS no one listening, this
time, as it didnt sound at all the right word but I shall
have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know.
Please, Maam, is this New Zealand or Australia? and she tried
to curtsey as she spokefancy CURTSEYING as youre falling
through the air!  Do you think you could manage it?  And what
an ignorant little girl shell think me for asking!  No, itll
never do to ask:  perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.

  Down, down, down.  There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon
began talking again.  Dinahll miss me very much tonight, I
should think!  Dinah was the cat.  I hope theyll remember
her saucer of milk at teatime.  Dinah my dear!  I wish you were
down here with me!  There are no mice in the air, Im afraid, but
you might catch a bat, and thats very like a mouse, you know.
But do cats eat bats, I wonder?  And here Alice began to get
rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of
way, Do cats eat bats?  Do cats eat bats? and sometimes, Do
bats eat cats? for, you see, as she couldnt answer either
question, it didnt much matter which way she put it.  She felt
that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she
was walking hand in hand with Dinah, and saying to her very
earnestly, Now, Dinah, tell me the truth:  did you ever eat a
bat? when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of
sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

  Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a
moment:  she looked up, but it was all dark overhead before her
was another long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in
sight, hurrying down it.  There was not a moment to be lost:
away went Alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it
say, as it turned a corner, Oh my ears and whiskers, how late
its getting!  She was close behind it when she turned the
corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen:  she found
herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps
hanging from the roof.

  There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked
and when Alice had been all the way down one side and up the
other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle,
wondering how she was ever to get out again.

  Suddenly she came upon a little threelegged table, all made of
solid glass there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key,
and Alices first thought was that it might belong to one of the
doors of the hall but, alas! either the locks were too large, or
the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of
them.  However, on the second time round, she came upon a low
curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little
door about fifteen inches high:  she tried the little golden key
in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

  Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small
passage, not much larger than a rathole:  she knelt down and
looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw.
How she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about
among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but
she could not even get her head though the doorway and even if
my head would go through, thought poor Alice, it would be of
very little use without my shoulders.  Oh, how I wish
I could shut up like a telescope!  I think I could, if I only
know how to begin.  For, you see, so many outoftheway things
had happened lately, that Alice had begun to think that very few
things indeed were really impossible.

  There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she
went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on
it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like
telescopes:  this time she found a little bottle on it, which
certainly was not here before, said Alice, and round the neck
of the bottle was a paper label, with the words DRINK ME
beautifully printed on it in large letters.

  It was all very well to say Drink me, but the wise little
Alice was not going to do THAT in a hurry.  No, Ill look
first, she said, and see whether its marked "poison" or not
for she had read several nice little histories about children who
had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant
things, all because they WOULD not remember the simple rules
their friends had taught them:  such as, that a redhot poker
will burn you if you hold it too long and that if you cut your
finger VERY deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds and she had
never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked
poison, it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or
later.

  However, this bottle was NOT marked poison, so Alice ventured
to taste it, and finding it very nice, it had, in fact, a sort
of mixed flavour of cherrytart, custard, pineapple, roast
turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast, she very soon finished
it off.

                                               

                                            

                                               

  What a curious feeling! said Alice I must be shutting up
like a telescope.

  And so it was indeed:  she was now only ten inches high, and
her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right
size for going though the little door into that lovely garden.
First, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was
going to shrink any further:  she felt a little nervous about
this for it might end, you know, said Alice to herself, in my
going out altogether, like a candle.  I wonder what I should be
like then?  And she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is
like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember
ever having seen such a thing.

  After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided
on going into the garden at once but, alas for poor Alice! when
she got to the door, she found he had forgotten the little golden
key, and when she went back to the table for it, she found she
could not possibly reach it:  she could see it quite plainly
through the glass, and she tried her best to climb up one of the
legs of the table, but it was too slippery and when she had
tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing sat down and
cried.

  Come, theres no use in crying like that! said Alice to
herself, rather sharply I advise you to leave off this minute!
She generally gave herself very good advice, though she very
seldom followed it, and sometimes she scolded herself so
severely as to bring tears into her eyes and once she remembered
trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game
of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious
child was very fond of pretending to be two people.  But its no
use now, thought poor Alice, to pretend to be two people!  Why,
theres hardly enough of me left to make ONE respectable
person!

  Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under
the table:  she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on
which the words EAT ME were beautifully marked in currants.
Well, Ill eat it, said Alice, and if it makes me grow larger,
I can reach the key and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep
under the door so either way Ill get into the garden, and I
dont care which happens!

  She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, Which
way?  Which way?, holding her hand on the top of her head to
feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to
find that she remained the same size:  to be sure, this generally
happens when one eats cake, but Alice had got so much into the
way of expecting nothing but outoftheway things to happen,
that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the
common way.

  So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.

                                               

                                            

                                               




                           CHAPTER II

                        The Pool of Tears


  Curiouser and curiouser! cried Alice she was so much
surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good
English now Im opening out like the largest telescope that
ever was!  Goodbye, feet! for when she looked down at her
feet, they seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting so
far off.  Oh, my poor little feet, I wonder who will put on
your shoes and stockings for you now, dears?  Im sure I shant
be able!  I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble myself
about you:  you must manage the best way you can but I must be
kind to them, thought Alice, or perhaps they wont walk the
way I want to go!  Let me see:  Ill give them a new pair of
boots every Christmas.

  And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it.
They must go by the carrier, she thought and how funny itll
seem, sending presents to ones own feet!  And how odd the
directions will look!

            ALICES RIGHT FOOT, ESQ.
                HEARTHRUG,
                    NEAR THE FENDER,
                        WITH ALICES LOVE.

Oh dear, what nonsense Im talking!

  Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall:  in
fact she was now more than nine feet high, and she at once took
up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.

  Poor Alice!  It was as much as she could do, lying down on one
side, to look through into the garden with one eye but to get
through was more hopeless than ever:  she sat down and began to
cry again.

  You ought to be ashamed of yourself, said Alice, a great
girl like you, she might well say this, to go on crying in
this way!  Stop this moment, I tell you!  But she went on all
the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool
all round her, about four inches deep and reaching half down the
hall.

  After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the
distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming.
It was the White Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a
pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the
other:  he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to
himself as he came, Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess! Oh! wont she
be savage if Ive kept her waiting!  Alice felt so desperate
that she was ready to ask help of any one so, when the Rabbit
came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, If you please,
sir  The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid
gloves and the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard
as he could go.

  Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very
hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking:
Dear, dear!  How queer everything is today!  And yesterday
things went on just as usual.  I wonder if Ive been changed in
the night?  Let me think:  was I the same when I got up this
morning?  I almost think I can remember feeling a little
different.  But if Im not the same, the next question is, Who in
the world am I?  Ah, THATS the great puzzle!  And she began
thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age
as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of
them.

  Im sure Im not Ada, she said, for her hair goes in such
long ringlets, and mine doesnt go in ringlets at all and Im
sure I cant be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she,
oh! she knows such a very little!  Besides, SHES she, and Im I,
andoh dear, how puzzling it all is!  Ill try if I know all the
things I used to know.  Let me see:  four times five is twelve,
and four times six is thirteen, and four times seven isoh dear!
I shall never get to twenty at that rate!  However, the
Multiplication Table doesnt signify:  lets try Geography.
London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of Rome,
and Romeno, THATS all wrong, Im certain!  I must have been
changed for Mabel!  Ill try and say "How doth the little"
and she crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons,
and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and
strange, and the words did not come the same as they used to do:

            How doth the little crocodile
              Improve his shining tail,
            And pour the waters of the Nile
              On every golden scale!

            How cheerfully he seems to grin,
              How neatly spread his claws,
            And welcome little fishes in
              With gently smiling jaws!

  Im sure those are not the right words, said poor Alice, and
her eyes filled with tears again as she went on, I must be Mabel
after all, and I shall have to go and live in that poky little
house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh! ever so
many lessons to learn!  No, Ive made up my mind about it if Im
Mabel, Ill stay down here!  Itll be no use their putting their
heads down and saying "Come up again, dear!"  I shall only look
up and say "Who am I then?  Tell me that first, and then, if I
like being that person, Ill come up:  if not, Ill stay down
here till Im somebody else"but, oh dear! cried Alice, with a
sudden burst of tears, I do wish they WOULD put their heads
down!  I am so VERY tired of being all alone here!

  As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was
surprised to see that she had put on one of the Rabbits little
white kid gloves while she was talking.  How CAN I have done
that? she thought.  I must be growing small again.  She got up
and went to the table to measure herself by it, and found that,
as nearly as she could guess, she was now about two feet high,
and was going on shrinking rapidly:  she soon found out that the
cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it
hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

That WAS a narrow escape! said Alice, a good deal frightened at
the sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in
existence and now for the garden! and she ran with all speed
back to the little door:  but, alas! the little door was shut
again, and the little golden key was lying on the glass table as
before, and things are worse than ever, thought the poor child,
for I never was so small as this before, never!  And I declare
its too bad, that it is!

  As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another
moment, splash! she was up to her chin in salt water.  He first
idea was that she had somehow fallen into the sea, and in that
case I can go back by railway, she said to herself.  Alice had
been to the seaside once in her life, and had come to the general
conclusion, that wherever you go to on the English coast you find
a number of bathing machines in the sea, some children digging in
the sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging houses, and
behind them a railway station.  However, she soon made out that
she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was nine
feet high.

  I wish I hadnt cried so much! said Alice, as she swam about,
trying to find her way out.  I shall be punished for it now, I
suppose, by being drowned in my own tears!  That WILL be a queer
thing, to be sure!  However, everything is queer today.

  Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a
little way off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was:  at
first she thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then
she remembered how small she was now, and she soon made out that
it was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself.

  Would it be of any use, now, thought Alice, to speak to this
mouse?  Everything is so outoftheway down here, that I should
think very likely it can talk:  at any rate, theres no harm in
trying.  So she began:  O Mouse, do you know the way out of
this pool?  I am very tired of swimming about here, O Mouse!
Alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse:
she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having
seen in her brothers Latin Grammar, A mouseof a mouseto a
mousea mouseO mouse!  The Mouse looked at her rather
inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little
eyes, but it said nothing.

  Perhaps it doesnt understand English, thought Alice I
daresay its a French mouse, come over with William the
Conqueror.  For, with all her knowledge of history, Alice had
no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened.  So she
began again:  Ou est ma chatte? which was the first sentence in
her French lessonbook.  The Mouse gave a sudden leap out of the
water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.  Oh, I beg
your pardon! cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the
poor animals feelings.  I quite forgot you didnt like cats.

  Not like cats! cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate
voice.  Would YOU like cats if you were me?

  Well, perhaps not, said Alice in a soothing tone:  dont be
angry about it.  And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah:
I think youd take a fancy to cats if you could only see her.
She is such a dear quiet thing, Alice went on, half to herself,
as she swam lazily about in the pool, and she sits purring so
nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her faceand
she is such a nice soft thing to nurseand shes such a capital
one for catching miceoh, I beg your pardon! cried Alice again,
for this time the Mouse was bristling all over, and she felt
certain it must be really offended.  We wont talk about her any
more if youd rather not.

  We indeed! cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end
of his tail.  As if I would talk on such a subject!  Our family
always HATED cats:  nasty, low, vulgar things!  Dont let me hear
the name again!

  I wont indeed! said Alice, in a great hurry to change the
subject of conversation.  Are youare you fondofof dogs?
The Mouse did not answer, so Alice went on eagerly:  There is
such a nice little dog near our house I should like to show you!
A little brighteyed terrier, you know, with oh, such long curly
brown hair!  And itll fetch things when you throw them, and
itll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts of thingsI
cant remember half of themand it belongs to a farmer, you
know, and he says its so useful, its worth a hundred pounds!
He says it kills all the rats andoh dear! cried Alice in a
sorrowful tone, Im afraid Ive offended it again!  For the
Mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and
making quite a commotion in the pool as it went.

  So she called softly after it, Mouse dear!  Do come back
again, and we wont talk about cats or dogs either, if you dont
like them!  When the Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam
slowly back to her:  its face was quite pale with passion, Alice
thought, and it said in a low trembling voice, Let us get to
the shore, and then Ill tell you my history, and youll
understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.

  It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded
with the birds and animals that had fallen into it:  there were a
Duck and a Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious
creatures.  Alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the
shore.



                           CHAPTER III

                  A CaucusRace and a Long Tale


  They were indeed a queerlooking party that assembled on the
bankthe birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their
fur clinging close to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and
uncomfortable.

  The first question of course was, how to get dry again:  they
had a consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed
quite natural to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with
them, as if she had known them all her life.  Indeed, she had
quite a long argument with the Lory, who at last turned sulky,
and would only say, I am older than you, and must know better
and this Alice would not allow without knowing how old it was,
and, as the Lory positively refused to tell its age, there was no
more to be said.

  At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among
them, called out, Sit down, all of you, and listen to me!  ILL
soon make you dry enough!  They all sat down at once, in a large
ring, with the Mouse in the middle.  Alice kept her eyes
anxiously fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad
cold if she did not get dry very soon.

  Ahem! said the Mouse with an important air, are you all ready?
This is the driest thing I know.  Silence all round, if you please!
"William the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was
soon submitted to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been
of late much accustomed to usurpation and conquest.  Edwin and
Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria"

  Ugh! said the Lory, with a shiver.

  I beg your pardon! said the Mouse, frowning, but very
politely:  Did you speak?

  Not I! said the Lory hastily.

  I thought you did, said the Mouse.  I proceed.  "Edwin and
Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him:
and even Stigand, the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found
it advisable"

  Found WHAT? said the Duck.

  Found IT, the Mouse replied rather crossly:  of course you
know what "it" means.

  I know what "it" means well enough, when I find a thing, said
the Duck:  its generally a frog or a worm.  The question is,
what did the archbishop find?

  The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on,
"found it advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William
and offer him the crown.  Williams conduct at first was
moderate.  But the insolence of his Normans"  How are you
getting on now, my dear? it continued, turning to Alice as it
spoke.

  As wet as ever, said Alice in a melancholy tone:  it doesnt
seem to dry me at all.

  In that case, said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, I
move that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more
energetic remedies

  Speak English! said the Eaglet.  I dont know the meaning of
half those long words, and, whats more, I dont believe you do
either!  And the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile:
some of the other birds tittered audibly.

  What I was going to say, said the Dodo in an offended tone,
was, that the best thing to get us dry would be a Caucusrace.

  What IS a Caucusrace? said Alice not that she wanted much
to know, but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that SOMEBODY
ought to speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.

  Why, said the Dodo, the best way to explain it is to do it.
And, as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter
day, I will tell you how the Dodo managed it.

  First it marked out a racecourse, in a sort of circle, the
exact shape doesnt matter, it said, and then all the party
were placed along the course, here and there.  There was no One,
two, three, and away, but they began running when they liked,
and left off when they liked, so that it was not easy to know
when the race was over.  However, when they had been running half
an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the Dodo suddenly called
out The race is over! and they all crowded round it, panting,
and asking, But who has won?

  This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of
thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon
its forehead the position in which you usually see Shakespeare,
in the pictures of him, while the rest waited in silence.  At
last the Dodo said, EVERYBODY has won, and all must have
prizes.

  But who is to give the prizes? quite a chorus of voices
asked.

  Why, SHE, of course, said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with
one finger and the whole party at once crowded round her,
calling out in a confused way, Prizes! Prizes!

  Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand
in her pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, luckily the salt
water had not got into it, and handed them round as prizes.
There was exactly one apiece all round.

  But she must have a prize herself, you know, said the Mouse.

  Of course, the Dodo replied very gravely.  What else have
you got in your pocket? he went on, turning to Alice.

  Only a thimble, said Alice sadly.

  Hand it over here, said the Dodo.

  Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo
solemnly presented the thimble, saying We beg your acceptance of
this elegant thimble and, when it had finished this short
speech, they all cheered.

  Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked
so grave that she did not dare to laugh and, as she could not
think of anything to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble,
looking as solemn as she could.

  The next thing was to eat the comfits:  this caused some noise
and confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not
taste theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on
the back.  However, it was over at last, and they sat down again
in a ring, and begged the Mouse to tell them something more.

  You promised to tell me your history, you know, said Alice,
and why it is you hateC and D, she added in a whisper, half
afraid that it would be offended again.

  Mine is a long and a sad tale! said the Mouse, turning to
Alice, and sighing.

  It IS a long tail, certainly, said Alice, looking down with
wonder at the Mouses tail but why do you call it sad?  And
she kept on puzzling about it while the Mouse was speaking, so
that her idea of the tale was something like this:

                    Fury said to a
                   mouse, That he
                 met in the
               house,
            "Let us
              both go to
                law:  I will
                  prosecute
                    YOU.  Come,
                       Ill take no
                        denial We
                     must have a
                 trial:  For
              really this
           morning Ive
          nothing
         to do."
           Said the
             mouse to the
               cur, "Such
                 a trial,
                   dear Sir,
                         With
                     no jury
                  or judge,
                would be
              wasting
             our
              breath."
               "Ill be
                 judge, Ill
                   be jury,"
                         Said
                    cunning
                      old Fury:
                     "Ill
                      try the
                         whole
                          cause,
                             and
                        condemn
                       you
                      to
                       death."


  You are not attending! said the Mouse to Alice severely.
What are you thinking of?

  I beg your pardon, said Alice very humbly:  you had got to
the fifth bend, I think?

  I had NOT! cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily.

  A knot! said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and
looking anxiously about her.  Oh, do let me help to undo it!

  I shall do nothing of the sort, said the Mouse, getting up
and walking away.  You insult me by talking such nonsense!

  I didnt mean it! pleaded poor Alice.  But youre so easily
offended, you know!

  The Mouse only growled in reply.

  Please come back and finish your story! Alice called after
it and the others all joined in chorus, Yes, please do! but
the Mouse only shook its head impatiently, and walked a little
quicker.

  What a pity it wouldnt stay! sighed the Lory, as soon as it
was quite out of sight and an old Crab took the opportunity of
saying to her daughter Ah, my dear!  Let this be a lesson to you
never to lose YOUR temper!  Hold your tongue, Ma! said the
young Crab, a little snappishly.  Youre enough to try the
patience of an oyster!

  I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do! said Alice aloud,
addressing nobody in particular.  Shed soon fetch it back!

  And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question?
said the Lory.

  Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about
her pet:  Dinahs our cat.  And shes such a capital one for
catching mice you cant think!  And oh, I wish you could see her
after the birds!  Why, shell eat a little bird as soon as look
at it!

  This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party.
Some of the birds hurried off at once:  one the old Magpie began
wrapping itself up very carefully, remarking, I really must be
getting home the nightair doesnt suit my throat! and a Canary
called out in a trembling voice to its children, Come away, my
dears!  Its high time you were all in bed!  On various pretexts
they all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.

  I wish I hadnt mentioned Dinah! she said to herself in a
melancholy tone.  Nobody seems to like her, down here, and Im
sure shes the best cat in the world!  Oh, my dear Dinah!  I
wonder if I shall ever see you any more!  And here poor Alice
began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and lowspirited.
In a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of
footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping
that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was coming back to
finish his story.



                           CHAPTER IV

                The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill


  It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and
looking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something
and she heard it muttering to itself The Duchess!  The Duchess!
Oh my dear paws!  Oh my fur and whiskers!  Shell get me
executed, as sure as ferrets are ferrets!  Where CAN I have
dropped them, I wonder?  Alice guessed in a moment that it was
looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves, and she
very goodnaturedly began hunting about for them, but they were
nowhere to be seeneverything seemed to have changed since her
swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and
the little door, had vanished completely.

  Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about,
and called out to her in an angry tone, Why, Mary Ann, what ARE
you doing out here?  Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of
gloves and a fan!  Quick, now!  And Alice was so much frightened
that she ran off at once in the direction it pointed to, without
trying to explain the mistake it had made.

  He took me for his housemaid, she said to herself as she ran.
How surprised hell be when he finds out who I am!  But Id
better take him his fan and glovesthat is, if I can find them.
As she said this, she came upon a neat little house, on the door
of which was a bright brass plate with the name W. RABBIT
engraved upon it.  She went in without knocking, and hurried
upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the real Mary Ann,
and be turned out of the house before she had found the fan and
gloves.

  How queer it seems, Alice said to herself, to be going
messages for a rabbit!  I suppose Dinahll be sending me on
messages next!  And she began fancying the sort of thing that
would happen:  "Miss Alice!  Come here directly, and get ready
for your walk!" "Coming in a minute, nurse!  But Ive got to see
that the mouse doesnt get out."  Only I dont think, Alice went
on, that theyd let Dinah stop in the house if it began ordering
people about like that!

  By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with
a table in the window, and on it as she had hoped a fan and two
or three pairs of tiny white kid gloves:  she took up the fan and
a pair of the gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when
her eye fell upon a little bottle that stood near the looking
glass.  There was no label this time with the words DRINK ME,
but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips.  I know
SOMETHING interesting is sure to happen, she said to herself,
whenever I eat or drink anything so Ill just see what this
bottle does.  I do hope itll make me grow large again, for
really Im quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!

  It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected:
before she had drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing
against the ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from being
broken.  She hastily put down the bottle, saying to herself
Thats quite enoughI hope I shant grow any moreAs it is, I
cant get out at the doorI do wish I hadnt drunk quite so
much!

  Alas! it was too late to wish that!  She went on growing, and
growing, and very soon had to kneel down on the floor:  in
another minute there was not even room for this, and she tried
the effect of lying down with one elbow against the door, and the
other arm curled round her head.  Still she went on growing, and,
as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one
foot up the chimney, and said to herself Now I can do no more,
whatever happens.  What WILL become of me?

  Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full
effect, and she grew no larger:  still it was very uncomfortable,
and, as there seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting
out of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy.

  It was much pleasanter at home, thought poor Alice, when one
wasnt always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about
by mice and rabbits.  I almost wish I hadnt gone down that
rabbitholeand yetand yetits rather curious, you know,
this sort of life!  I do wonder what CAN have happened to me!
When I used to read fairytales, I fancied that kind of thing
never happened, and now here I am in the middle of one!  There
ought to be a book written about me, that there ought!  And when
I grow up, Ill write onebut Im grown up now, she added in a
sorrowful tone at least theres no room to grow up any more
HERE.

  But then, thought Alice, shall I NEVER get any older than I
am now?  Thatll be a comfort, one waynever to be an old woman
but thenalways to have lessons to learn!  Oh, I shouldnt like
THAT!

  Oh, you foolish Alice! she answered herself.  How can you
learn lessons in here?  Why, theres hardly room for YOU, and no
room at all for any lessonbooks!

  And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other,
and making quite a conversation of it altogether but after a few
minutes she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

  Mary Ann!  Mary Ann! said the voice.  Fetch me my gloves
this moment!  Then came a little pattering of feet on the
stairs.  Alice knew it was the Rabbit coming to look for her, and
she trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she
was now about a thousand times as large as the Rabbit, and had no
reason to be afraid of it.

  Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it
but, as the door opened inwards, and Alices elbow was pressed
hard against it, that attempt proved a failure.  Alice heard it
say to itself Then Ill go round and get in at the window.

  THAT you wont thought Alice, and, after waiting till she
fancied she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly
spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air.  She did not
get hold of anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall,
and a crash of broken glass, from which she concluded that it was
just possible it had fallen into a cucumberframe, or something
of the sort.

  Next came an angry voicethe RabbitsPat! Pat!  Where are
you?  And then a voice she had never heard before, Sure then
Im here!  Digging for apples, yer honour!

  Digging for apples, indeed! said the Rabbit angrily.  Here!
Come and help me out of THIS!  Sounds of more broken glass.

  Now tell me, Pat, whats that in the window?

  Sure, its an arm, yer honour!  He pronounced it arrum.

  An arm, you goose!   Who ever saw one that size?  Why, it
fills the whole window!

  Sure, it does, yer honour:  but its an arm for all that.

  Well, its got no business there, at any rate:  go and take it
away!

  There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear
whispers now and then such as, Sure, I dont like it, yer
honour, at all, at all!  Do as I tell you, you coward! and at
last she spread out her hand again, and made another snatch in
the air.  This time there were TWO little shrieks, and more
sounds of broken glass.  What a number of cucumberframes there
must be! thought Alice.  I wonder what theyll do next!  As for
pulling me out of the window, I only wish they COULD!  Im sure I
dont want to stay in here any longer!

  She waited for some time without hearing anything more:  at
last came a rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a
good many voice all talking together:  she made out the words:
Wheres the other ladder?Why, I hadnt to bring but one
Bills got the otherBill! fetch it here, lad!Here, put em up
at this cornerNo, tie em together firstthey dont reach half
high enough yetOh! theyll do well enough dont be particular
Here, Bill! catch hold of this ropeWill the roof bear?Mind
that loose slateOh, its coming down!  Heads below! a loud
crashNow, who did that?It was Bill, I fancyWhos to go
down the chimney?Nay, I shant! YOU do it!That I wont,
then!Bills to go downHere, Bill! the master says youre to
go down the chimney!

  Oh! So Bills got to come down the chimney, has he? said
Alice to herself.  Shy, they seem to put everything upon Bill!
I wouldnt be in Bills place for a good deal:  this fireplace is
narrow, to be sure but I THINK I can kick a little!

  She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and
waited till she heard a little animal she couldnt guess of what
sort it was scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close
above her:  then, saying to herself This is Bill, she gave one
sharp kick, and waited to see what would happen next.

  The first thing she heard was a general chorus of There goes
Bill! then the Rabbits voice alongCatch him, you by the
hedge! then silence, and then another confusion of voicesHold
up his headBrandy nowDont choke himHow was it, old fellow?
What happened to you?  Tell us all about it!

  Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, Thats Bill,
thought Alice, Well, I hardly knowNo more, thank ye Im
better nowbut Im a deal too flustered to tell youall I know
is, something comes at me like a Jackinthebox, and up I goes
like a skyrocket!

  So you did, old fellow! said the others.

  We must burn the house down! said the Rabbits voice and
Alice called out as loud as she could, If you do.  Ill set
Dinah at you!

  There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to
herself, I wonder what they WILL do next!  If they had any
sense, theyd take the roof off.  After a minute or two, they
began moving about again, and Alice heard the Rabbit say, A
barrowful will do, to begin with.

  A barrowful of WHAT? thought Alice but she had not long to
doubt, for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came
rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face.
Ill put a stop to this, she said to herself, and shouted out,
Youd better not do that again! which produced another dead
silence.

  Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all
turning into little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright
idea came into her head.  If I eat one of these cakes, she
thought, its sure to make SOME change in my size and as it
cant possibly make me larger, it must make me smaller, I
suppose.

  So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find
that she began shrinking directly.  As soon as she was small
enough to get through the door, she ran out of the house, and
found quite a crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside.
The poor little Lizard, Bill, was in the middle, being held up by
two guineapigs, who were giving it something out of a bottle.
They all made a rush at Alice the moment she appeared but she
ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself safe in a
thick wood.

  The first thing Ive got to do, said Alice to herself, as she
wandered about in the wood, is to grow to my right size again
and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden.
I think that will be the best plan.

  It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and
simply arranged the only difficulty was, that she had not the
smallest idea how to set about it and while she was peering
about anxiously among the trees, a little sharp bark just over
her head made her look up in a great hurry.

  An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round
eyes, and feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her.
Poor little thing! said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried
hard to whistle to it but she was terribly frightened all the
time at the thought that it might be hungry, in which case it
would be very likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing.

  Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of
stick, and held it out to the puppy whereupon the puppy jumped
into the air off all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight,
and rushed at the stick, and made believe to worry it then Alice
dodged behind a great thistle, to keep herself from being run
over and the moment she appeared on the other side, the puppy
made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head over heels in
its hurry to get hold of it then Alice, thinking it was very
like having a game of play with a carthorse, and expecting every
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle
again then the puppy began a series of short charges at the
stick, running a very little way forwards each time and a long
way back, and barking hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat
down a good way off, panting, with its tongue hanging out of its
mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

  This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape
so she set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out
of breath, and till the puppys bark sounded quite faint in the
distance.

  And yet what a dear little puppy it was! said Alice, as she
leant against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself
with one of the leaves:  I should have liked teaching it tricks
very much, ifif Id only been the right size to do it!  Oh
dear!  Id nearly forgotten that Ive got to grow up again!  Let
me seehow IS it to be managed?  I suppose I ought to eat or
drink something or other but the great question is, what?

  The great question certainly was, what?  Alice looked all round
her at the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see
anything that looked like the right thing to eat or drink under
the circumstances.  There was a large mushroom growing near her,
about the same height as herself and when she had looked under
it, and on both sides of it, and behind it, it occurred to her
that she might as well look and see what was on the top of it.

  She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of
the mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large
caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded,
quietly smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice
of her or of anything else.



                            CHAPTER V

                    Advice from a Caterpillar


  The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some time in
silence:  at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its
mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.

  Who are YOU? said the Caterpillar.

  This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation.  Alice
replied, rather shyly, II hardly know, sir, just at present
at least I know who I WAS when I got up this morning, but I think
I must have been changed several times since then.

  What do you mean by that? said the Caterpillar sternly.
Explain yourself!

  I cant explain MYSELF, Im afraid, sir said Alice, because
Im not myself, you see.

  I dont see, said the Caterpillar.

  Im afraid I cant put it more clearly, Alice replied very
politely, for I cant understand it myself to begin with and
being so many different sizes in a day is very confusing.

  It isnt, said the Caterpillar.

  Well, perhaps you havent found it so yet, said Alice but
when you have to turn into a chrysalisyou will some day, you
knowand then after that into a butterfly, I should think youll
feel it a little queer, wont you?

  Not a bit, said the Caterpillar.

  Well, perhaps your feelings may be different, said Alice
all I know is, it would feel very queer to ME.

  You! said the Caterpillar contemptuously.  Who are YOU?

  Which brought them back again to the beginning of the
conversation.  Alice felt a little irritated at the Caterpillars
making such VERY short remarks, and she drew herself up and said,
very gravely, I think, you ought to tell me who YOU are, first.

  Why? said the Caterpillar.

  Here was another puzzling question and as Alice could not
think of any good reason, and as the Caterpillar seemed to be in
a VERY unpleasant state of mind, she turned away.

  Come back! the Caterpillar called after her.  Ive something
important to say!

  This sounded promising, certainly:  Alice turned and came back
again.

  Keep your temper, said the Caterpillar.

  Is that all? said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as
she could.

  No, said the Caterpillar.

  Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else
to do, and perhaps after all it might tell her something worth
hearing.  For some minutes it puffed away without speaking, but
at last it unfolded its arms, took the hookah out of its mouth
again, and said, So you think youre changed, do you?

  Im afraid I am, sir, said Alice I cant remember things as
I usedand I dont keep the same size for ten minutes together!

  Cant remember WHAT things? said the Caterpillar.

  Well, Ive tried to say "HOW DOTH THE LITTLE BUSY BEE," but it
all came different! Alice replied in a very melancholy voice.

  Repeat, "YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM," said the Caterpillar.

  Alice folded her hands, and began:

    You are old, Father William, the young man said,
      And your hair has become very white
    And yet you incessantly stand on your head
      Do you think, at your age, it is right?

    In my youth, Father William replied to his son,
      I feared it might injure the brain
    But, now that Im perfectly sure I have none,
      Why, I do it again and again.

    You are old, said the youth, as I mentioned before,
      And have grown most uncommonly fat
    Yet you turned a backsomersault in at the door
      Pray, what is the reason of that?

    In my youth, said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
      I kept all my limbs very supple
    By the use of this ointmentone shilling the box
      Allow me to sell you a couple?

    You are old, said the youth, and your jaws are too weak
      For anything tougher than suet
    Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak
      Pray how did you manage to do it?

    In my youth, said his father, I took to the law,
      And argued each case with my wife
    And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,
      Has lasted the rest of my life.

    You are old, said the youth, one would hardly suppose
      That your eye was as steady as ever
    Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose
      What made you so awfully clever?

    I have answered three questions, and that is enough,
      Said his father dont give yourself airs!
    Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
      Be off, or Ill kick you down stairs!


  That is not said right, said the Caterpillar.

  Not QUITE right, Im afraid, said Alice, timidly some of the
words have got altered.

  It is wrong from beginning to end, said the Caterpillar
decidedly, and there was silence for some minutes.

  The Caterpillar was the first to speak.

  What size do you want to be? it asked.

  Oh, Im not particular as to size, Alice hastily replied
only one doesnt like changing so often, you know.

  I DONT know, said the Caterpillar.

  Alice said nothing:  she had never been so much contradicted in
her life before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.

  Are you content now? said the Caterpillar.

  Well, I should like to be a LITTLE larger, sir, if you
wouldnt mind, said Alice:  three inches is such a wretched
height to be.

  It is a very good height indeed! said the Caterpillar
angrily, rearing itself upright as it spoke it was exactly three
inches high.

  But Im not used to it! pleaded poor Alice in a piteous tone.
And she thought of herself, I wish the creatures wouldnt be so
easily offended!

  Youll get used to it in time, said the Caterpillar and it
put the hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.

  This time Alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again.
In a minute or two the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its
mouth and yawned once or twice, and shook itself.  Then it got
down off the mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely
remarking as it went, One side will make you grow taller, and
the other side will make you grow shorter.

  One side of WHAT?  The other side of WHAT? thought Alice to
herself.

  Of the mushroom, said the Caterpillar, just as if she had
asked it aloud and in another moment it was out of sight.

  Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a
minute, trying to make out which were the two sides of it and as
it was perfectly round, she found this a very difficult question.
However, at last she stretched her arms round it as far as they
would go, and broke off a bit of the edge with each hand.

  And now which is which? she said to herself, and nibbled a
little of the righthand bit to try the effect:  the next moment
she felt a violent blow underneath her chin:  it had struck her
foot!

  She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but
she felt that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking
rapidly so she set to work at once to eat some of the other bit.
Her chin was pressed so closely against her foot, that there was
hardly room to open her mouth but she did it at last, and
managed to swallow a morsel of the lefthand bit.


                                               

                                            

                                               

  Come, my heads free at last! said Alice in a tone of
delight, which changed into alarm in another moment, when she
found that her shoulders were nowhere to be found:  all she could
see, when she looked down, was an immense length of neck, which
seemed to rise like a stalk out of a sea of green leaves that lay
far below her.

  What CAN all that green stuff be? said Alice.  And where
HAVE my shoulders got to?  And oh, my poor hands, how is it I
cant see you?  She was moving them about as she spoke, but no
result seemed to follow, except a little shaking among the
distant green leaves.

  As there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her
head, she tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted
to find that her neck would bend about easily in any direction,
like a serpent.  She had just succeeded in curving it down into a
graceful zigzag, and was going to dive in among the leaves, which
she found to be nothing but the tops of the trees under which she
had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made her draw back in a
hurry:  a large pigeon had flown into her face, and was beating
her violently with its wings.

  Serpent! screamed the Pigeon.

  Im NOT a serpent! said Alice indignantly.  Let me alone!

  Serpent, I say again! repeated the Pigeon, but in a more
subdued tone, and added with a kind of sob, Ive tried every
way, and nothing seems to suit them!

  I havent the least idea what youre talking about, said
Alice.

  Ive tried the roots of trees, and Ive tried banks, and Ive
tried hedges, the Pigeon went on, without attending to her but
those serpents!  Theres no pleasing them!

  Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no
use in saying anything more till the Pigeon had finished.

  As if it wasnt trouble enough hatching the eggs, said the
Pigeon but I must be on the lookout for serpents night and
day!  Why, I havent had a wink of sleep these three weeks!

  Im very sorry youve been annoyed, said Alice, who was
beginning to see its meaning.

  And just as Id taken the highest tree in the wood, continued
the Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, and just as I was
thinking I should be free of them at last, they must needs come
wriggling down from the sky!  Ugh, Serpent!

  But Im NOT a serpent, I tell you! said Alice.  Im aIm
a

  Well!  WHAT are you? said the Pigeon.  I can see youre
trying to invent something!

  IIm a little girl, said Alice, rather doubtfully, as she
remembered the number of changes she had gone through that day.

  A likely story indeed! said the Pigeon in a tone of the
deepest contempt.  Ive seen a good many little girls in my
time, but never ONE with such a neck as that!  No, no!  Youre a
serpent and theres no use denying it.  I suppose youll be
telling me next that you never tasted an egg!

  I HAVE tasted eggs, certainly, said Alice, who was a very
truthful child but little girls eat eggs quite as much as
serpents do, you know.

  I dont believe it, said the Pigeon but if they do, why
then theyre a kind of serpent, thats all I can say.

  This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent
for a minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the opportunity of
adding, Youre looking for eggs, I know THAT well enough and
what does it matter to me whether youre a little girl or a
serpent?

  It matters a good deal to ME, said Alice hastily but Im
not looking for eggs, as it happens and if I was, I shouldnt
want YOURS:  I dont like them raw.

  Well, be off, then! said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it
settled down again into its nest.  Alice crouched down among the
trees as well as she could, for her neck kept getting entangled
among the branches, and every now and then she had to stop and
untwist it.  After a while she remembered that she still held the
pieces of mushroom in her hands, and she set to work very
carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the other, and
growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had
succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.

  It was so long since she had been anything near the right size,
that it felt quite strange at first but she got used to it in a
few minutes, and began talking to herself, as usual.  Come,
theres half my plan done now!  How puzzling all these changes
are!  Im never sure what Im going to be, from one minute to
another!  However, Ive got back to my right size:  the next
thing is, to get into that beautiful gardenhow IS that to be
done, I wonder?  As she said this, she came suddenly upon an
open place, with a little house in it about four feet high.
Whoever lives there, thought Alice, itll never do to come
upon them THIS size:  why, I should frighten them out of their
wits!  So she began nibbling at the righthand bit again, and did
not venture to go near the house till she had brought herself
down to nine inches high.



                           CHAPTER VI

                         Pig and Pepper


  For a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and
wondering what to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came
running out of the woodshe considered him to be a footman
because he was in livery:  otherwise, judging by his face only,
she would have called him a fishand rapped loudly at the door
with his knuckles.  It was opened by another footman in livery,
with a round face, and large eyes like a frog and both footmen,
Alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled all over their
heads.  She felt very curious to know what it was all about, and
crept a little way out of the wood to listen.

  The FishFootman began by producing from under his arm a great
letter, nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to
the other, saying, in a solemn tone, For the Duchess.  An
invitation from the Queen to play croquet.  The FrogFootman
repeated, in the same solemn tone, only changing the order of the
words a little, From the Queen.  An invitation for the Duchess
to play croquet.

  Then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled
together.

  Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into
the wood for fear of their hearing her and when she next peeped
out the FishFootman was gone, and the other was sitting on the
ground near the door, staring stupidly up into the sky.

  Alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked.

  Theres no sort of use in knocking, said the Footman, and
that for two reasons.  First, because Im on the same side of the
door as you are secondly, because theyre making such a noise
inside, no one could possibly hear you.  And certainly there was
a most extraordinary noise going on withina constant howling
and sneezing, and every now and then a great crash, as if a dish
or kettle had been broken to pieces.

  Please, then, said Alice, how am I to get in?

  There might be some sense in your knocking, the Footman went
on without attending to her, if we had the door between us.  For
instance, if you were INSIDE, you might knock, and I could let
you out, you know.  He was looking up into the sky all the time
he was speaking, and this Alice thought decidedly uncivil.  But
perhaps he cant help it, she said to herself his eyes are so
VERY nearly at the top of his head.  But at any rate he might
answer questions.How am I to get in? she repeated, aloud.

  I shall sit here, the Footman remarked, till tomorrow

  At this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate
came skimming out, straight at the Footmans head:  it just
grazed his nose, and broke to pieces against one of the trees
behind him.

  or next day, maybe, the Footman continued in the same tone,
exactly as if nothing had happened.

  How am I to get in? asked Alice again, in a louder tone.

  ARE you to get in at all? said the Footman.  Thats the
first question, you know.

  It was, no doubt:  only Alice did not like to be told so.
Its really dreadful, she muttered to herself, the way all the
creatures argue.  Its enough to drive one crazy!

  The Footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for
repeating his remark, with variations.  I shall sit here, he
said, on and off, for days and days.

  But what am I to do? said Alice.

  Anything you like, said the Footman, and began whistling.

  Oh, theres no use in talking to him, said Alice desperately:
hes perfectly idiotic!  And she opened the door and went in.

  The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of
smoke from one end to the other:  the Duchess was sitting on a
threelegged stool in the middle, nursing a baby the cook was
leaning over the fire, stirring a large cauldron which seemed to
be full of soup.

  Theres certainly too much pepper in that soup! Alice said to
herself, as well as she could for sneezing.

  There was certainly too much of it in the air.  Even the
Duchess sneezed occasionally and as for the baby, it was
sneezing and howling alternately without a moments pause.  The
only things in the kitchen that did not sneeze, were the cook,
and a large cat which was sitting on the hearth and grinning from
ear to ear.

  Please would you tell me, said Alice, a little timidly, for
she was not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to
speak first, why your cat grins like that?

  Its a Cheshire cat, said the Duchess, and thats why.
Pig!

  She said the last word with such sudden violence that Alice
quite jumped but she saw in another moment that it was addressed
to the baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on
again:

  I didnt know that Cheshire cats always grinned in fact, I
didnt know that cats COULD grin.

  They all can, said the Duchess and most of em do.

  I dont know of any that do, Alice said very politely,
feeling quite pleased to have got into a conversation.

  You dont know much, said the Duchess and thats a fact.

  Alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought
it would be as well to introduce some other subject of
conversation.  While she was trying to fix on one, the cook took
the cauldron of soup off the fire, and at once set to work
throwing everything within her reach at the Duchess and the baby
the fireirons came first then followed a shower of saucepans,
plates, and dishes.  The Duchess took no notice of them even when
they hit her and the baby was howling so much already, that it
was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

  Oh, PLEASE mind what youre doing! cried Alice, jumping up
and down in an agony of terror.  Oh, there goes his PRECIOUS
nose as an unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very
nearly carried it off.

  If everybody minded their own business, the Duchess said in a
hoarse growl, the world would go round a deal faster than it
does.

  Which would NOT be an advantage, said Alice, who felt very
glad to get an opportunity of showing off a little of her
knowledge.  Just think of what work it would make with the day
and night!  You see the earth takes twentyfour hours to turn
round on its axis

  Talking of axes, said the Duchess, chop off her head!

  Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant
to take the hint but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and
seemed not to be listening, so she went on again:  Twentyfour
hours, I THINK or is it twelve?  I

  Oh, dont bother ME, said the Duchess I never could abide
figures!  And with that she began nursing her child again,
singing a sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a
violent shake at the end of every line:

        Speak roughly to your little boy,
          And beat him when he sneezes:
        He only does it to annoy,
          Because he knows it teases.

                    CHORUS.

    In which the cook and the baby joined:

                Wow! wow! wow!

  While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept
tossing the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing
howled so, that Alice could hardly hear the words:

        I speak severely to my boy,
          I beat him when he sneezes
        For he can thoroughly enjoy
          The pepper when he pleases!

                    CHORUS.

                Wow! wow! wow!

  Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like! the Duchess said
to Alice, flinging the baby at her as she spoke.  I must go and
get ready to play croquet with the Queen, and she hurried out of
the room.  The cook threw a fryingpan after her as she went out,
but it just missed her.

  Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer
shaped little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all
directions, just like a starfish, thought Alice.  The poor
little thing was snorting like a steamengine when she caught it,
and kept doubling itself up and straightening itself out again,
so that altogether, for the first minute or two, it was as much
as she could do to hold it.

  As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it,
which was to twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep
tight hold of its right ear and left foot, so as to prevent its
undoing itself, she carried it out into the open air.  IF I
dont take this child away with me, thought Alice, theyre sure
to kill it in a day or two:  wouldnt it be murder to leave it
behind?  She said the last words out loud, and the little thing
grunted in reply it had left off sneezing by this time.  Dont
grunt, said Alice thats not at all a proper way of expressing
yourself.

  The baby grunted again, and Alice looked very anxiously into
its face to see what was the matter with it.  There could be no
doubt that it had a VERY turnup nose, much more like a snout
than a real nose also its eyes were getting extremely small for
a baby:  altogether Alice did not like the look of the thing at
all.  But perhaps it was only sobbing, she thought, and looked
into its eyes again, to see if there were any tears.

  No, there were no tears.  If youre going to turn into a pig,
my dear, said Alice, seriously, Ill have nothing more to do
with you.  Mind now!  The poor little thing sobbed again or
grunted, it was impossible to say which, and they went on for
some while in silence.

  Alice was just beginning to think to herself, Now, what am I
to do with this creature when I get it home? when it grunted
again, so violently, that she looked down into its face in some
alarm.  This time there could be NO mistake about it:  it was
neither more nor less than a pig, and she felt that it would be
quite absurd for her to carry it further.

  So she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to
see it trot away quietly into the wood.  If it had grown up,
she said to herself, it would have made a dreadfully ugly child:
but it makes rather a handsome pig, I think.  And she began
thinking over other children she knew, who might do very well as
pigs, and was just saying to herself, if one only knew the right
way to change them when she was a little startled by seeing
the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of a tree a few yards off.

  The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice.  It looked good
natured, she thought:  still it had VERY long claws and a great
many teeth, so she felt that it ought to be treated with respect.

  Cheshire Puss, she began, rather timidly, as she did not at
all know whether it would like the name:  however, it only
grinned a little wider.  Come, its pleased so far, thought
Alice, and she went on.  Would you tell me, please, which way I
ought to go from here?

  That depends a good deal on where you want to get to, said
the Cat.

  I dont much care where said Alice.

  Then it doesnt matter which way you go, said the Cat.

  so long as I get SOMEWHERE, Alice added as an explanation.

  Oh, youre sure to do that, said the Cat, if you only walk
long enough.

  Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another
question.  What sort of people live about here?

  In THAT direction, the Cat said, waving its right paw round,
lives a Hatter:  and in THAT direction, waving the other paw,
lives a March Hare.  Visit either you like:  theyre both mad.

  But I dont want to go among mad people, Alice remarked.

  Oh, you cant help that, said the Cat:  were all mad here.
Im mad.  Youre mad.

  How do you know Im mad? said Alice.

  You must be, said the Cat, or you wouldnt have come here.

  Alice didnt think that proved it at all however, she went on
And how do you know that youre mad?

  To begin with, said the Cat, a dogs not mad.  You grant
that?

  I suppose so, said Alice.

  Well, then, the Cat went on, you see, a dog growls when its
angry, and wags its tail when its pleased.  Now I growl when Im
pleased, and wag my tail when Im angry.  Therefore Im mad.

  I call it purring, not growling, said Alice.

  Call it what you like, said the Cat.  Do you play croquet
with the Queen today?

  I should like it very much, said Alice, but I havent been
invited yet.

  Youll see me there, said the Cat, and vanished.

  Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used
to queer things happening.  While she was looking at the place
where it had been, it suddenly appeared again.

  Bythebye, what became of the baby? said the Cat.  Id
nearly forgotten to ask.

  It turned into a pig, Alice quietly said, just as if it had
come back in a natural way.

  I thought it would, said the Cat, and vanished again.

  Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it
did not appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the
direction in which the March Hare was said to live.  Ive seen
hatters before, she said to herself the March Hare will be
much the most interesting, and perhaps as this is May it wont be
raving madat least not so mad as it was in March.  As she said
this, she looked up, and there was the Cat again, sitting on a
branch of a tree.

  Did you say pig, or fig? said the Cat.

  I said pig, replied Alice and I wish you wouldnt keep
appearing and vanishing so suddenly:  you make one quite giddy.

  All right, said the Cat and this time it vanished quite
slowly, beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the
grin, which remained some time after the rest of it had gone.

  Well!  Ive often seen a cat without a grin, thought Alice
but a grin without a cat!  Its the most curious thing I ever
say in my life!

  She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the
house of the March Hare:  she thought it must be the right house,
because the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was
thatched with fur.  It was so large a house, that she did not
like to go nearer till she had nibbled some more of the lefthand
bit of mushroom, and raised herself to about two feet high:  even
then she walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself
Suppose it should be raving mad after all!  I almost wish Id
gone to see the Hatter instead!



                           CHAPTER VII

                         A Mad TeaParty


  There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house,
and the March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it:  a
Dormouse was sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other two
were using it as a cushion, resting their elbows on it, and the
talking over its head.  Very uncomfortable for the Dormouse,
thought Alice only, as its asleep, I suppose it doesnt mind.

  The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded
together at one corner of it:  No room!  No room! they cried
out when they saw Alice coming.  Theres PLENTY of room! said
Alice indignantly, and she sat down in a large armchair at one
end of the table.

  Have some wine, the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.

  Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it
but tea.  I dont see any wine, she remarked.

  There isnt any, said the March Hare.

  Then it wasnt very civil of you to offer it, said Alice
angrily.

  It wasnt very civil of you to sit down without being
invited, said the March Hare.

  I didnt know it was YOUR table, said Alice its laid for a
great many more than three.

  Your hair wants cutting, said the Hatter.  He had been
looking at Alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was
his first speech.

  You should learn not to make personal remarks, Alice said
with some severity its very rude.

  The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this but all
he SAID was, Why is a raven like a writingdesk?

  Come, we shall have some fun now! thought Alice.  Im glad
theyve begun asking riddles.I believe I can guess that, she
added aloud.

  Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?
said the March Hare.

  Exactly so, said Alice.

  Then you should say what you mean, the March Hare went on.

  I do, Alice hastily replied at leastat least I mean what
I saythats the same thing, you know.

  Not the same thing a bit! said the Hatter.  You might just
as well say that "I see what I eat" is the same thing as "I eat
what I see"!

  You might just as well say, added the March Hare, that "I
like what I get" is the same thing as "I get what I like"!

  You might just as well say, added the Dormouse, who seemed to
be talking in his sleep, that "I breathe when I sleep" is the
same thing as "I sleep when I breathe"!

  It IS the same thing with you, said the Hatter, and here the
conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute,
while Alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and
writingdesks, which wasnt much.

  The Hatter was the first to break the silence.  What day of
the month is it? he said, turning to Alice:  he had taken his
watch out of his pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking
it every now and then, and holding it to his ear.

  Alice considered a little, and then said The fourth.

  Two days wrong! sighed the Hatter.  I told you butter
wouldnt suit the works! he added looking angrily at the March
Hare.

  It was the BEST butter, the March Hare meekly replied.

  Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well, the Hatter
grumbled:  you shouldnt have put it in with the breadknife.

  The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily:  then
he dipped it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again:  but he
could think of nothing better to say than his first remark, It
was the BEST butter, you know.

  Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity.
What a funny watch! she remarked.  It tells the day of the
month, and doesnt tell what oclock it is!

  Why should it? muttered the Hatter.  Does YOUR watch tell
you what year it is?

  Of course not, Alice replied very readily:  but thats
because it stays the same year for such a long time together.

  Which is just the case with MINE, said the Hatter.

  Alice felt dreadfully puzzled.  The Hatters remark seemed to
have no sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English.
I dont quite understand you, she said, as politely as she
could.

  The Dormouse is asleep again, said the Hatter, and he poured
a little hot tea upon its nose.

  The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without
opening its eyes, Of course, of course just what I was going to
remark myself.

  Have you guessed the riddle yet? the Hatter said, turning to
Alice again.

  No, I give it up, Alice replied:  whats the answer?

  I havent the slightest idea, said the Hatter.

  Nor I, said the March Hare.

  Alice sighed wearily.  I think you might do something better
with the time, she said, than waste it in asking riddles that
have no answers.

  If you knew Time as well as I do, said the Hatter, you
wouldnt talk about wasting IT.  Its HIM.

  I dont know what you mean, said Alice.

  Of course you dont! the Hatter said, tossing his head
contemptuously.  I dare say you never even spoke to Time!

  Perhaps not, Alice cautiously replied:  but I know I have to
beat time when I learn music.

  Ah! that accounts for it, said the Hatter.  He wont stand
beating.  Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, hed do
almost anything you liked with the clock.  For instance, suppose
it were nine oclock in the morning, just time to begin lessons:
youd only have to whisper a hint to Time, and round goes the
clock in a twinkling!  Halfpast one, time for dinner!

  I only wish it was, the March Hare said to itself in a
whisper.

  That would be grand, certainly, said Alice thoughtfully:
but thenI shouldnt be hungry for it, you know.

  Not at first, perhaps, said the Hatter:  but you could keep
it to halfpast one as long as you liked.

  Is that the way YOU manage? Alice asked.

  The Hatter shook his head mournfully.  Not I! he replied.
We quarrelled last Marchjust before HE went mad, you know
pointing with his tea spoon at the March Hare, it was at the
great concert given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing

            "Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
            How I wonder what youre at!"

You know the song, perhaps?

  Ive heard something like it, said Alice.

  It goes on, you know, the Hatter continued, in this way:

            "Up above the world you fly,
            Like a teatray in the sky.
                    Twinkle, twinkle"

Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep
Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle and went on so long that
they had to pinch it to make it stop.

  Well, Id hardly finished the first verse, said the Hatter,
when the Queen jumped up and bawled out, "Hes murdering the
time!  Off with his head!"

  How dreadfully savage! exclaimed Alice.

  And ever since that, the Hatter went on in a mournful tone,
he wont do a thing I ask!  Its always six oclock now.

  A bright idea came into Alices head.  Is that the reason so
many teathings are put out here? she asked.

  Yes, thats it, said the Hatter with a sigh:  its always
teatime, and weve no time to wash the things between whiles.

  Then you keep moving round, I suppose? said Alice.

  Exactly so, said the Hatter:  as the things get used up.

  But what happens when you come to the beginning again? Alice
ventured to ask.

  Suppose we change the subject, the March Hare interrupted,
yawning.  Im getting tired of this.  I vote the young lady
tells us a story.

  Im afraid I dont know one, said Alice, rather alarmed at
the proposal.

  Then the Dormouse shall! they both cried.  Wake up,
Dormouse!  And they pinched it on both sides at once.

  The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes.  I wasnt asleep, he
said in a hoarse, feeble voice:  I heard every word you fellows
were saying.

  Tell us a story! said the March Hare.

  Yes, please do! pleaded Alice.

  And be quick about it, added the Hatter, or youll be asleep
again before its done.

  Once upon a time there were three little sisters, the
Dormouse began in a great hurry and their names were Elsie,
Lacie, and Tillie and they lived at the bottom of a well

  What did they live on? said Alice, who always took a great
interest in questions of eating and drinking.

  They lived on treacle, said the Dormouse, after thinking a
minute or two.

  They couldnt have done that, you know, Alice gently
remarked theyd have been ill.

  So they were, said the Dormouse VERY ill.

  Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways
of living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went
on:  But why did they live at the bottom of a well?

  Take some more tea, the March Hare said to Alice, very
earnestly.

  Ive had nothing yet, Alice replied in an offended tone, so
I cant take more.

  You mean you cant take LESS, said the Hatter:  its very
easy to take MORE than nothing.

  Nobody asked YOUR opinion, said Alice.

  Whos making personal remarks now? the Hatter asked
triumphantly.

  Alice did not quite know what to say to this:  so she helped
herself to some tea and breadandbutter, and then turned to the
Dormouse, and repeated her question.  Why did they live at the
bottom of a well?

  The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and
then said, It was a treaclewell.

  Theres no such thing!  Alice was beginning very angrily, but
the Hatter and the March Hare went Sh! sh! and the Dormouse
sulkily remarked, If you cant be civil, youd better finish the
story for yourself.

  No, please go on! Alice said very humbly I wont interrupt
again.  I dare say there may be ONE.

  One, indeed! said the Dormouse indignantly.  However, he
consented to go on.  And so these three little sistersthey
were learning to draw, you know

  What did they draw? said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.

  Treacle, said the Dormouse, without considering at all this
time.

  I want a clean cup, interrupted the Hatter:  lets all move
one place on.

  He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him:  the
March Hare moved into the Dormouses place, and Alice rather
unwillingly took the place of the March Hare.  The Hatter was the
only one who got any advantage from the change:  and Alice was a
good deal worse off than before, as the March Hare had just upset
the milkjug into his plate.

  Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began
very cautiously:  But I dont understand.  Where did they draw
the treacle from?

  You can draw water out of a waterwell, said the Hatter so
I should think you could draw treacle out of a treaclewelleh,
stupid?

  But they were IN the well, Alice said to the Dormouse, not
choosing to notice this last remark.

  Of course they were, said the Dormouse well in.

  This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let the Dormouse
go on for some time without interrupting it.

  They were learning to draw, the Dormouse went on, yawning and
rubbing its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy and they drew
all manner of thingseverything that begins with an M

  Why with an M? said Alice.

  Why not? said the March Hare.

  Alice was silent.

  The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going
off into a doze but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up
again with a little shriek, and went on:  that begins with an
M, such as mousetraps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness
you know you say things are "much of a muchness"did you ever
see such a thing as a drawing of a muchness?

  Really, now you ask me, said Alice, very much confused, I
dont think

  Then you shouldnt talk, said the Hatter.

  This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear:  she got
up in great disgust, and walked off the Dormouse fell asleep
instantly, and neither of the others took the least notice of her
going, though she looked back once or twice, half hoping that
they would call after her:  the last time she saw them, they were
trying to put the Dormouse into the teapot.

  At any rate Ill never go THERE again! said Alice as she
picked her way through the wood.  Its the stupidest teaparty I
ever was at in all my life!

  Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a
door leading right into it.  Thats very curious! she thought.
But everythings curious today.  I think I may as well go in at
once.  And in she went.

  Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the
little glass table.  Now, Ill manage better this time, she
said to herself, and began by taking the little golden key, and
unlocking the door that led into the garden.  Then she went to
work nibbling at the mushroom she had kept a piece of it in her
pocked till she was about a foot high:  then she walked down the
little passage:  and THENshe found herself at last in the
beautiful garden, among the bright flowerbeds and the cool
fountains.



                          CHAPTER VIII

                   The Queens CroquetGround


  A large rosetree stood near the entrance of the garden:  the
roses growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at
it, busily painting them red.  Alice thought this a very curious
thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up
to them she heard one of them say, Look out now, Five!  Dont go
splashing paint over me like that!

  I couldnt help it, said Five, in a sulky tone Seven jogged
my elbow.

  On which Seven looked up and said, Thats right, Five!  Always
lay the blame on others!

  YOUD better not talk! said Five.  I heard the Queen say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!

  What for? said the one who had spoken first.

  Thats none of YOUR business, Two! said Seven.

  Yes, it IS his business! said Five, and Ill tell himit
was for bringing the cook tuliproots instead of onions.

  Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun Well, of all
the unjust things when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as
she stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly:  the
others looked round also, and all of them bowed low.

  Would you tell me, said Alice, a little timidly, why you are
painting those roses?

  Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two.  Two began in a
low voice, Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to
have been a RED rosetree, and we put a white one in by mistake
and if the Queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads
cut off, you know.  So you see, Miss, were doing our best, afore
she comes, to  At this moment Five, who had been anxiously
looking across the garden, called out The Queen!  The Queen!
and the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon
their faces.  There was a sound of many footsteps, and Alice
looked round, eager to see the Queen.

  First came ten soldiers carrying clubs these were all shaped
like the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and
feet at the corners:  next the ten courtiers these were
ornamented all over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the
soldiers did.  After these came the royal children there were
ten of them, and the little dears came jumping merrily along hand
in hand, in couples:  they were all ornamented with hearts.  Next
came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among them Alice
recognised the White Rabbit:  it was talking in a hurried nervous
manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without
noticing her.  Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the
Kings crown on a crimson velvet cushion and, last of all this
grand procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.

  Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on
her face like the three gardeners, but she could not remember
every having heard of such a rule at processions and besides,
what would be the use of a procession, thought she, if people
had all to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldnt see
it?  So she stood still where she was, and waited.

  When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped
and looked at her, and the Queen said severely Who is this?
She said it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in
reply.

  Idiot! said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently and,
turning to Alice, she went on, Whats your name, child?

  My name is Alice, so please your Majesty, said Alice very
politely but she added, to herself, Why, theyre only a pack of
cards, after all.  I neednt be afraid of them!

  And who are THESE? said the Queen, pointing to the three
gardeners who were lying round the rosetree for, you see, as
they were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs
was the same as the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether
they were gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her
own children.

  How should I know? said Alice, surprised at her own courage.
Its no business of MINE.

  The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her
for a moment like a wild beast, screamed Off with her head!
Off

  Nonsense! said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the
Queen was silent.

  The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said
Consider, my dear:  she is only a child!

  The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave
Turn them over!

  The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

  Get up! said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the
three gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the
King, the Queen, the royal children, and everybody else.

  Leave off that! screamed the Queen.  You make me giddy.
And then, turning to the rosetree, she went on, What HAVE you
been doing here?

  May it please your Majesty, said Two, in a very humble tone,
going down on one knee as he spoke, we were trying

  I see! said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the
roses.  Off with their heads! and the procession moved on,
three of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate
gardeners, who ran to Alice for protection.

  You shant be beheaded! said Alice, and she put them into a
large flowerpot that stood near.  The three soldiers wandered
about for a minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly
marched off after the others.

  Are their heads off? shouted the Queen.

  Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty! the soldiers
shouted in reply.

  Thats right! shouted the Queen.  Can you play croquet?

  The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question
was evidently meant for her.

  Yes! shouted Alice.

  Come on, then! roared the Queen, and Alice joined the
procession, wondering very much what would happen next.

  Itsits a very fine day! said a timid voice at her side.
She was walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously
into her face.

  Very, said Alice:  wheres the Duchess?

  Hush!  Hush! said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone.  He
looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised
himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and
whispered Shes under sentence of execution.

  What for? said Alice.

  Did you say "What a pity!"? the Rabbit asked.

  No, I didnt, said Alice:  I dont think its at all a pity.
I said "What for?"

  She boxed the Queens ears the Rabbit began.  Alice gave a
little scream of laughter.  Oh, hush! the Rabbit whispered in a
frightened tone.  The Queen will hear you!  You see, she came
rather late, and the Queen said

  Get to your places! shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder,
and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up
against each other however, they got settled down in a minute or
two, and the game began.  Alice thought she had never seen such a
curious croquetground in her life it was all ridges and
furrows the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets live
flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to
stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

  The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her
flamingo:  she succeeded in getting its body tucked away,
comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down,
but generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened
out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it
WOULD twist itself round and look up in her face, with such a
puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out laughing:
and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again,
it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled
itself, and was in the act of crawling away:  besides all this,
there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she
wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubledup soldiers
were always getting up and walking off to other parts of the
ground, Alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very
difficult game indeed.

  The players all played at once without waiting for turns,
quarrelling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs and in
a very short time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went
stamping about, and shouting Off with his head! or Off with
her head! about once in a minute.

  Alice began to feel very uneasy:  to be sure, she had not as
yet had any dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might
happen any minute, and then, thought she, what would become of
me?  Theyre dreadfully fond of beheading people here the great
wonder is, that theres any one left alive!

  She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering
whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a
curious appearance in the air:  it puzzled her very much at
first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to
be a grin, and she said to herself Its the Cheshire Cat:  now I
shall have somebody to talk to.

  How are you getting on? said the Cat, as soon as there was
mouth enough for it to speak with.

  Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded.  Its no
use speaking to it, she thought, till its ears have come, or at
least one of them.  In another minute the whole head appeared,
and then Alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the
game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her.  The
Cat seemed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and
no more of it appeared.

  I dont think they play at all fairly, Alice began, in rather
a complaining tone, and they all quarrel so dreadfully one cant
hear oneself speakand they dont seem to have any rules in
particular at least, if there are, nobody attends to themand
youve no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive
for instance, theres the arch Ive got to go through next
walking about at the other end of the groundand I should have
croqueted the Queens hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it
saw mine coming!

  How do you like the Queen? said the Cat in a low voice.

  Not at all, said Alice:  shes so extremely  Just then
she noticed that the Queen was close behind her, listening:  so
she went on, likely to win, that its hardly worth while
finishing the game.

  The Queen smiled and passed on.

  Who ARE you talking to? said the King, going up to Alice, and
looking at the Cats head with great curiosity.

  Its a friend of minea Cheshire Cat, said Alice:  allow me
to introduce it.

  I dont like the look of it at all, said the King:  however,
it may kiss my hand if it likes.

  Id rather not, the Cat remarked.

  Dont be impertinent, said the King, and dont look at me
like that!  He got behind Alice as he spoke.

  A cat may look at a king, said Alice.  Ive read that in
some book, but I dont remember where.

  Well, it must be removed, said the King very decidedly, and
he called the Queen, who was passing at the moment, My dear!  I
wish you would have this cat removed!

  The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great
or small.  Off with his head! she said, without even looking
round.

  Ill fetch the executioner myself, said the King eagerly, and
he hurried off.

  Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game
was going on, as she heard the Queens voice in the distance,
screaming with passion.  She had already heard her sentence three
of the players to be executed for having missed their turns, and
she did not like the look of things at all, as the game was in
such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or
not.  So she went in search of her hedgehog.

  The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog,
which seemed to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one
of them with the other:  the only difficulty was, that her
flamingo was gone across to the other side of the garden, where
Alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up
into a tree.

  By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back,
the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight:
but it doesnt matter much, thought Alice, as all the arches
are gone from this side of the ground.  So she tucked it away
under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back for
a little more conversation with her friend.

  When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to
find quite a large crowd collected round it:  there was a dispute
going on between the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who
were all talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent,
and looked very uncomfortable.

  The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to
settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her,
though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed
to make out exactly what they said.

  The executioners argument was, that you couldnt cut off a
head unless there was a body to cut it off from:  that he had
never had to do such a thing before, and he wasnt going to begin
at HIS time of life.

  The Kings argument was, that anything that had a head could be
beheaded, and that you werent to talk nonsense.

  The Queens argument was, that if something wasnt done about
it in less than no time shed have everybody executed, all round.
It was this last remark that had made the whole party look so
grave and anxious.

  Alice could think of nothing else to say but It belongs to the
Duchess:  youd better ask HER about it.

  Shes in prison, the Queen said to the executioner:  fetch
her here.  And the executioner went off like an arrow.

   The Cats head began fading away the moment he was gone, and,
by the time he had come back with the Dutchess, it had entirely
disappeared so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and
down looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.



                           CHAPTER IX

                     The Mock Turtles Story


  You cant think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old
thing! said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately
into Alices, and they walked off together.

  Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and
thought to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had
made her so savage when they met in the kitchen.

  When IM a Duchess, she said to herself, not in a very
hopeful tone though, I wont have any pepper in my kitchen AT
ALL.  Soup does very well withoutMaybe its always pepper that
makes people hottempered, she went on, very much pleased at
having found out a new kind of rule, and vinegar that makes them
sourand camomile that makes them bitterandand barleysugar
and such things that make children sweettempered.  I only wish
people knew that:  then they wouldnt be so stingy about it, you
know

  She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a
little startled when she heard her voice close to her ear.
Youre thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you
forget to talk.  I cant tell you just now what the moral of that
is, but I shall remember it in a bit.

  Perhaps it hasnt one, Alice ventured to remark.

  Tut, tut, child! said the Duchess.  Everythings got a
moral, if only you can find it.  And she squeezed herself up
closer to Alices side as she spoke.

  Alice did not much like keeping so close to her:  first,
because the Duchess was VERY ugly and secondly, because she was
exactly the right height to rest her chin upon Alices shoulder,
and it was an uncomfortably sharp chin.  However, she did not
like to be rude, so she bore it as well as she could.

  The games going on rather better now, she said, by way of
keeping up the conversation a little.

  Tis so, said the Duchess:  and the moral of that is"Oh,
tis love, tis love, that makes the world go round!"

  Somebody said, Alice whispered, that its done by everybody
minding their own business!

  Ah, well!  It means much the same thing, said the Duchess,
digging her sharp little chin into Alices shoulder as she added,
and the moral of THAT is"Take care of the sense, and the
sounds will take care of themselves."

  How fond she is of finding morals in things! Alice thought to
herself.

  I dare say youre wondering why I dont put my arm round your
waist, the Duchess said after a pause:  the reason is, that Im
doubtful about the temper of your flamingo.  Shall I try the
experiment?

  HE might bite, Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all
anxious to have the experiment tried.

  Very true, said the Duchess:  flamingoes and mustard both
bite.  And the moral of that is"Birds of a feather flock
together."

  Only mustard isnt a bird, Alice remarked.

  Right, as usual, said the Duchess:  what a clear way you
have of putting things!

  Its a mineral, I THINK, said Alice.

  Of course it is, said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree
to everything that Alice said theres a large mustardmine near
here.  And the moral of that is"The more there is of mine, the
less there is of yours."

  Oh, I know! exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this
last remark, its a vegetable.  It doesnt look like one, but it
is.

  I quite agree with you, said the Duchess and the moral of
that is"Be what you would seem to be"or if youd like it put
more simply"Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than
what it might appear to others that what you were or might have
been was not otherwise than what you had been would have appeared
to them to be otherwise."

  I think I should understand that better, Alice said very
politely, if I had it written down:  but I cant quite follow it
as you say it.

  Thats nothing to what I could say if I chose, the Duchess
replied, in a pleased tone.

  Pray dont trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,
said Alice.

  Oh, dont talk about trouble! said the Duchess.  I make you
a present of everything Ive said as yet.

  A cheap sort of present! thought Alice.  Im glad they dont
give birthday presents like that!  But she did not venture to
say it out loud.

  Thinking again? the Duchess asked, with another dig of her
sharp little chin.

  Ive a right to think, said Alice sharply, for she was
beginning to feel a little worried.

  Just about as much right, said the Duchess, as pigs have to
fly and the m

  But here, to Alices great surprise, the Duchesss voice died
away, even in the middle of her favourite word moral, and the
arm that was linked into hers began to tremble.  Alice looked up,
and there stood the Queen in front of them, with her arms folded,
frowning like a thunderstorm.

  A fine day, your Majesty! the Duchess began in a low, weak
voice.

  Now, I give you fair warning, shouted the Queen, stamping on
the ground as she spoke either you or your head must be off,
and that in about half no time!  Take your choice!

  The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.

  Lets go on with the game, the Queen said to Alice and Alice
was too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her
back to the croquetground.

  The other guests had taken advantage of the Queens absence,
and were resting in the shade:  however, the moment they saw her,
they hurried back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a
moments delay would cost them their lives.

  All the time they were playing the Queen never left off
quarrelling with the other players, and shouting Off with his
head! or Off with her head!  Those whom she sentenced were
taken into custody by the soldiers, who of course had to leave
off being arches to do this, so that by the end of half an hour
or so there were no arches left, and all the players, except the
King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody and under sentence of
execution.

  Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to
Alice, Have you seen the Mock Turtle yet?

  No, said Alice.  I dont even know what a Mock Turtle is.

  Its the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from, said the Queen.

  I never saw one, or heard of one, said Alice.

  Come on, then, said the Queen, and he shall tell you his
history,

  As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low
voice, to the company generally, You are all pardoned.  Come,
THATS a good thing! she said to herself, for she had felt quite
unhappy at the number of executions the Queen had ordered.

  They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the
sun.  IF you dont know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.
Up, lazy thing! said the Queen, and take this young lady to
see the Mock Turtle, and to hear his history.  I must go back and
see after some executions I have ordered and she walked off,
leaving Alice alone with the Gryphon.  Alice did not quite like
the look of the creature, but on the whole she thought it would
be quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that savage
Queen:  so she waited.

  The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes:  then it watched the
Queen till she was out of sight:  then it chuckled.  What fun!
said the Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice.

  What IS the fun? said Alice.

  Why, SHE, said the Gryphon.  Its all her fancy, that:  they
never executes nobody, you know.  Come on!

  Everybody says "come on!" here, thought Alice, as she went
slowly after it:  I never was so ordered about in all my life,
never!

  They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the
distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and,
as they came nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart
would break.  She pitied him deeply.  What is his sorrow? she
asked the Gryphon, and the Gryphon answered, very nearly in the
same words as before, Its all his fancy, that:  he hasnt got
no sorrow, you know.  Come on!

  So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with
large eyes full of tears, but said nothing.

  This here young lady, said the Gryphon, she wants for to
know your history, she do.

  Ill tell it her, said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow
tone:  sit down, both of you, and dont speak a word till Ive
finished.

  So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes.  Alice
thought to herself, I dont see how he can EVEN finish, if he
doesnt begin.  But she waited patiently.

  Once, said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, I was
a real Turtle.

  These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only
by an occasional exclamation of Hjckrrh! from the Gryphon, and
the constant heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle.  Alice was very
nearly getting up and saying, Thank you, sir, for your
interesting story, but she could not help thinking there MUST be
more to come, so she sat still and said nothing.

  When we were little, the Mock Turtle went on at last, more
calmly, though still sobbing a little now and then, we went to
school in the sea.  The master was an old Turtlewe used to call
him Tortoise

  Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasnt one? Alice asked.

  We called him Tortoise because he taught us, said the Mock
Turtle angrily:  really you are very dull!

  You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple
question, added the Gryphon and then they both sat silent and
looked at poor Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth.  At
last the Gryphon said to the Mock Turtle, Drive on, old fellow!
Dont be all day about it! and he went on in these words:

  Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you maynt believe
it

  I never said I didnt! interrupted Alice.

  You did, said the Mock Turtle.

  Hold your tongue! added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak
again.  The Mock Turtle went on.

  We had the best of educationsin fact, we went to school
every day

  IVE been to a dayschool, too, said Alice you neednt be
so proud as all that.

  With extras? asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.

  Yes, said Alice, we learned French and music.

  And washing? said the Mock Turtle.

  Certainly not! said Alice indignantly.

  Ah! then yours wasnt a really good school, said the Mock
Turtle in a tone of great relief.  Now at OURS they had at the
end of the bill, "French, music, AND WASHINGextra."

  You couldnt have wanted it much, said Alice living at the
bottom of the sea.

  I couldnt afford to learn it. said the Mock Turtle with a
sigh.  I only took the regular course.

  What was that? inquired Alice.

  Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with, the Mock
Turtle replied and then the different branches of Arithmetic
Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.

  I never heard of "Uglification," Alice ventured to say.  What
is it?

  The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise.  What!  Never
heard of uglifying! it exclaimed.  You know what to beautify
is, I suppose?

  Yes, said Alice doubtfully:  it meanstomakeanything
prettier.

  Well, then, the Gryphon went on, if you dont know what to
uglify is, you ARE a simpleton.

  Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about
it, so she turned to the Mock Turtle, and said What else had you
to learn?

  Well, there was Mystery, the Mock Turtle replied, counting
off the subjects on his flappers, Mystery, ancient and modern,
with Seaography:  then Drawlingthe Drawlingmaster was an old
congereel, that used to come once a week:  HE taught us
Drawling, Stretching, and Fainting in Coils.

  What was THAT like? said Alice.

  Well, I cant show it you myself, the Mock Turtle said:  Im
too stiff.  And the Gryphon never learnt it.

  Hadnt time, said the Gryphon:  I went to the Classics
master, though.  He was an old crab, HE was.

  I never went to him, the Mock Turtle said with a sigh:  he
taught Laughing and Grief, they used to say.

  So he did, so he did, said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn
and both creatures hid their faces in their paws.

  And how many hours a day did you do lessons? said Alice, in a
hurry to change the subject.

  Ten hours the first day, said the Mock Turtle: nine the
next, and so on.

  What a curious plan! exclaimed Alice.

  Thats the reason theyre called lessons, the Gryphon
remarked:  because they lessen from day to day.

  This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a
little before she made her next remark.  Then the eleventh day
must have been a holiday?

  Of course it was, said the Mock Turtle.

  And how did you manage on the twelfth? Alice went on eagerly.

  Thats enough about lessons, the Gryphon interrupted in a
very decided tone:  tell her something about the games now.



                            RMEFPQW S

                      PMA SMXBPSE AMKNDHXVY


  PMQ HMWQ GHNFBS PDIRSW VYSFSK, YWR RCYR PMQ SQNY IZ URA UFEFHSW
QNWHBV MHP SKQP.  RA SWZEQN KF QVURQ, LAC GDHKR ZM PHQYQ, VMF ZUW
Q UUDMFY HC PYW XHLB RMIYKR MHB SIHRQ.  LEHQ EL UG RS UEN K XMRA
UD MHB PREUYP, BKUC GRS PDEZMIA:  LWR MG PSZ BW YHWE VUEVDDF MHO
LAR GNARMUDP IHU UD PMQ SQNE.  YF BELZ BRS UIDQ FMCPSA ESWMSKESW
MHB SIHRQ, LAR, DMGM PQYEP NHWLUDI KWYR UHV RMYSEV, RS RYCF UW
KFKUW:

  XWO UYK WUP MKLA SDGKR UORM NARKC PRS PSK U UESKCF,
LEDK LFMDQYWR HSEREFX EIO RYES RASKE SSKD UCFWHNIRQC GU Y XULBPQW
LFMDQ SKPLA ZM LEK O UWRQ FQBPKR LMM QRSDQKR RSEPASP UELGMXA,
LAR VKUR WU, WKSSE XH XWM NLA UESK WU DKQY ROQF K NASDIMPUNX
PMUDF K XULBPQC ENLRCUVSA HV!

  WU, UDRKKR, LEDK LFMDY.  RUEP BHWZ MU L NKWNK HV HZ?

  ROE, XKUC GRS PDEZMIW, AIO GUEPF ZHWU HCFU Y VURA LFUWP FRS
PSELMIES

  ZCU XUDSP! NCHKC GRS UIDQ FMCPSA.  PSLFB, PHNFBSP, LEBUUW,
LAR VW ZC FRSW, DRSW AIOSK NBQYESN KXV PMK HASXAGUPR IOZ MZ
PMY RYK

  PMQF PKRANEXVQ ZYESP XHHQ GMHQ, UDPQWSHFPQC GRS PDEZMIW.

  XWN LKGLARQ ZCMDY

  QYRM DOPM L FMXBPSE EL E FENFCSE! NCHKC GRS PDEZMIW.

  UZ WMHNPS, PMQ HMWQ GHNFBS PKUN:  KKGLARQ ZCMDS, PQP ZM
FECPRAEP

  RMLAPK XULBPQEP, LAR CQPHDK HR LQUY HCRSE, WMCFUDHAC GRS
PDEZMIW.

  PMAR, XWI AWUC, ZRS UIDQ FMCPSA RYCF UW, XWM FREWY PMY

  PMA SMXBPSEB! VMIMFKR PMK PWEHRUW, DOPM Q LIOWR UDZM PMQ YHD.

  EL ULW HMF ZM PSY LX EIO NQW

  XRHU LUPQC PRSH! BNCQYHQC GRS PDEZMIW.

  FMCW E LIUSELENFG MC FRS PSQ! NDHKR PMQ HMWQ GHNFBY,
NQHSDHDF DOVNXA QLIOZ.

  LQDQ ZM FLWR KFKUA, LWR PMQFL EXV PMA PHDBP GUFIES, LEDK PMY
UIDQ FMCPSA, LHWVARXA RCHZGHDF MHB SIHRQ LAC GRS ZCM WESQFHNSP,
ROI MKN SQAR HOHTUDF KXMMF VUEQ UQC GMHDFL EXV PMHV GMHQ, LEZ
WIDW KFKUD LSEE XKNXA LAC KOHQPXA, LAN VWZEQN KF QVURQ.

  MG UOBP SQ K LSEE ZESZBK WLARQ, LEDK LFMDQ PHUDKXA.

  YWNFW KIO VUEQ ZM PSQ Y VUZBSA UZ MG? LEDK PMQ HMWQ GHNFBY.

  SKWE UORM UDRKKR, LEDK LFMDY.

  WMHQ, SAPB PCQ ZRS GUEPF ZDIHNS! PKUC GRS UIDQ FMCPSA ZM PMY
PDEZMIW.  DQ RLA WI DOPMIOF BMXBPSEX, EIO ADWY.  ROMDR PUEXV
VHDF?

  IM, XWH LUDP, VKUC GRS PDEZMID.  USK ZUDPMZPQC FRS YWCRB.

  XH PMQK SQFKR LUXQHAFK WLADMDF WHNAN KWR WHNAN KVURQ, KSSEA WWY
LAC GRSC FESKNUDZ IR USE ZMSP ROAR PMQK FEBVKR ZMM WXUPS, LAW
NYGDDF PMKHN PHWSHYNB PI UENQ GRS GMHQ, ROUVQ PRS UIDQ FMCPSA
LEDF PMHV, SKWE BXWYXA LAR VKNXA:


"DOXV XWO NLFE Y VUZBSA ULBPSE?" LEDK Y NMHGMDF ZM E LALUV.
"PMSESP E FHWZHHVQ RXUPS SQMHWR HL, LAR ISP PCQYKDDF UW OQ
 FQUV.
PSS RWY QYPKNSQ ZRS XULBPQEP LAC GRS FMCPSAL EXV KNLKWNY!
PMQK ENY RKUGMDF UW PMS PMHDFSADOXV XWM NIUQ YWR HIUD PMY
NKWNY?

DOXV XWO, NUWZ QIO, DOXV XWO, NUWZ QIO, DOXV XWO HIHC FRS
NKWNY?
DOXV XWO, NUWZ QIO, DOXV XWO, NUWZ QIO, YWCF XWO HIHC FRS
NKWNY?


"XWM NLA ESLFXA UESK WU WUGMUW MID RASDIMPUNV UZ CUVX LY
ROAR PMQK FQEQ HL HF LAC GREWY HL, DOPM PMA SMXBPSEX, HMF ZM
                                                      PSY!"
LMZ BRS LRKUS NSHVUKR "ZMU ZEN, ZMU ZEN!" LAK IKLQ Y XUIY
                                                       ELEYWNY
LEDK RS PMLAEQC GRS ROMGUDI VUDNVQ, XMF RS YWNFR WMZ HIUD PMY
   NKWNY.
    YWNFR WMZ, WMNFR WMZ, YWNFR WMZ, WMNFR WMZ, YWNFR WMZ HIUD
        PMK RLARQ.
    YWNFR WMZ, WMNFR WMZ, YWNFR WMZ, WMNFR WMZ, WMNFR WMZ HIUD
        PMK RLARQ.

"ROQF UQZBSEV HP MWY ULC DK PI?" MHV BRLFA ZDHARR CSHVUKR.
"PMSEK HL EWUPMSE PRHWQ, KIO ADWY, HFUW PMY HPMSE VHRK.
PMA PHNPMSE UZZ LWHH QDFFLWR PMA RQYESD HB PU ZNEWNY
PMAR FMCW WUF TLFQ, SASIXKR LRKUX, LMF WMHQ LAK DIHC FRS NKWNY.

    DOXV XWO, NUWZ QIO, DOXV XWO, NUWZ QIO, DOXV XWO HIHC FRS
         NKWNY?
    DOXV XWO, NUWZ QIO, DOXV XWO, NUWZ QIO, YWCF XWO HIHC FRS
         NKWNY?"



  PMLAE KIO, MGL E SKWE UDPQESBPUDI KLARQ ZM NYMQR, PKUW
LFMDA, PYSVUDF SKWE FVKN PMQF MG NYX HSKN EF BELF:  QWR D KH XW
VUEQ PMQF NMDHIOB VUWF KXMMF PMY RMHGMDF!

  IM, EL ZM PMY RMHGMDF, LEDK PMQ HMWQ GHNFBQ, PRSXZIOSK
PSAR PMQH, UZ WMHNPS?

  KQB, VKUN KVURQ, DGY HZFAR PSAR PMQH QF KDWL PRY
RMQREQR ISEPSFU UEBPUVX.

  D KUWG QWUY ZRSES KDWL UQQ XS, PKUC GRS UIDQ FMCPSA, LMZ
UG XWILS PYSC FRSH BW ZZFAR, UZ WMHNPS XWI AWUY ZUEZ BRSEWY
VUEQ.

  M VASHKSK XH, LFMDS ESHVUKR PMIOPIFZNFXA.  PMQK UESK PMKHW
FQUVV HC FRSHD UIMFRPLAC GRSEWQ YXV IXSE NCOULB.

  XWHNY RWHDF QLIOZ BRS NCOULB, LEDK PMQ HMWQ GHNFBY:
NCOULB YWNFN KXV NYPR UZG UC FRS PSQ.  LMF PMQK UESK PMKHC PKUXB
UD PMKHC HIOPML EWR PMS EQYXHD UP RSEQ PRS UIDQ FMCPSA
KYDWKR LAR VMOP MHV QKSP.PQXV RSN EXMMF PMS EQYXHA LWR LFX
PMQF, RS LEDK ZM PMK PWEHRUW.

  PMS EQYXHD UB, VKUC GRS PDEZMIC, FUEZ BRSX YIOVN ZI DOPM
PMA SMXBPSEB PM ZRS NKWNS.  PM ZRSK ZMZ PMWHDW IOZ BH XQY.  XH
PMQK UEC GU ZLFF L XUDF NYE.  XM ZRSK ZMZ PMKHC PKUXB ULBP UD
PMKHC HIOPMB.  VM ZRSQ WIOVNCF PKZ BRSU IMF KFKUC.  FUEPB LFX.

  PMLAE KIO, LEDK LFMDK, HPB SKWE UDPQESBPUDI.  D RASKD ERAY
XH UORM QLIOF Q ROMGUDT VAPHWY.

  M DLA PQXV XWO UHWQ PUEC FUEG, MZ AIO VUEQ, LEDK PMY
PDEZMIW.  RW XIO ADWY ROK OPB NQXVKR Y NMHGMDF?

  U DKSSE PMIOPIF QXMMF MG, LEDK LFMDY.  ROE?

  MG WISP PMQ SWZPB LAR VMISP. PMK PWEHRUW ESFSHKK GSEX
XHSAUCXA.

  LFMDY REL PMHWIOPIXA FHOZSAW.  VHYB PRS XMMZL EWR PRHYB! VRS
ESHSQFKR UD Y NUWRKDHDF ZMRA.

  ROX, YUEF QES XWHN PRHYV RUWY RMGR? PKUC GRS PDEZMID.  U
HQLA, ROQF UQEQB PRSH BH XMHWA?

  LFMDA SWZEQW VWYA LZ BRSU, QWR WMRLDKSEKR L FMGFBQ SAPHWS PRS
FKSK RSN ERLRYC.  PRSEWK RUWY RMGM SFLDQUDI, D SQVUKSY.

  XMMZL EWR PRHYL HWRSE PMS PQY, PMK PWEHRUW RYCF UW UD K NYSZ
XIMDQ, YES WIRA DOPM Y NMHGMDF.  WUY XIO ADWY.

  LAR DUEF QES PMQK UQRK UZ? LFMDQ YVEKR UD Q FUWY HZ PESQF
NMDHHXMGX.

  XHSAL EWR YSXB, UZ WMHNPS, PMK PWEHRUW ESFSHKR CQFRSW
HUFEGMARFBK:  YWA PRDHHT WMNFR IKLQ PUXW KIO PMQF.

  UG DK SQAR PMY RMHGMDF, LEDK LFMDY, RMIPS PMIOPIPB RYES
BPUVS NNADUDF UW PMS PUWI, DR IKLS PKUC GM ZRS ZHEHIHPS, "EQSH
LQDQ, FSQYPS:  RY WICF NYCF XWO NMGM OB!"

  PMQK RYES MXVUPKC GI MKLS RHU DOPM PMQH, PMQ HMWQ GHNFBY
LEDK:  WU DOPS GUPR YWNFK IU YWAROSEY RMGMIMF E FHWZHHVY.

  YWNFRWG MP CQYXVE? XKUN KVURQ UD Q FUWY HZ PESQF LHEHDHPS.

  UZ WMHNPS WUP, BKUC GRS UIDQ FMCPSA:  ROK, OU L GUPR NQHQ
ZM HQ, LAC GUXC IS RY REL ZIUDF K HIHNRAK, O PRIOVN LEX "YMGO
ROQF ZHEHIHPS?"

  WICF XWO UQYR "FHNZHPS"? LEDK LFMDY.

  H UQYW DUEG M LEQ, ZRS UIDQ FMCPSA ESFSHKK DA LW UZLARRKW
ZMRA.  LAC GRS PDEZMIA LWVKR WMHQ, SAPB RSEN XHHQ UZ XWHN
KNSKCFHNSP.

  M DIOVN PQXV XWO UK YKGARFMESBLKPUDDUDF PNIU PMHV UICWUDZ,
LEDK LFMDQ Y VUZBSA GMUHNVQ:  XMF MGL RI OPS ZIUDT VQNQ GW
KQBPSENKQ, XQRLNPS O DEL K NUGPAESCF HSEPUW PMAR.

  YSFSKUA LXV PMQF, LEDK PMQ HMWQ GHNFBY.

  WU, WU!  PMQ YKGARFMESL PHDBP, LEDK PMK PWEHRUW UD LA
HUFEGMARZ BUWY:  SSZFLALGMUWB PYES PMNU E RCQYNGNF GMHQ.

  XH LFMDQ SKPLA PQXVUDP FRSU MSE KNSKCFHNSP PNIU PMQ PHUY RRSW
PRA PHDBP LEC ZRS ROMGS EQLVMP.  BRS NYL E VUZBSA RADSIOL EXMMF
MG HOBP QF GUEPZ, BRS ZCM WESQFHNSP ZIP BM WXUPS ZM RSW, HRA UW
QYRM VHRK, LAW IHSRAC GRSHD QKSP LAC IIOPMB VI XSEX YDKQ, SMF PRY
FKUDKR WMHNKFQ YB VRS RYCF UW.  RSN SHVPQRAEP RYES HSNPQRFBX
AMHKZ BUVX BRS ZIZ BM ZRS FECP QLIOP MSE ESHSQFUDZ KIO ENY HVN,
ULPMSE DOXVUKC, MM ZRS NQPQEHUVFLN, EWR PMY RHWRV LFB NIUUDZ
KDZLSEARF, QWR PMAR PMQ HMWQ GHNFBK RESN Y XUDF SCQYPM, LAR VKUW
PMQFB SSEQ WHNHIHL.

  MGL EXV QLIOF QB RHNHIHL EL MG NQC LS, PKUC GRS PDEZMIW.

  MG LFB NQUK RUGPAESCF! PMQ HMWQ GHNFBS ESHQYPQW
PMIOPIFZNFXA.  H VMINFN VDVQ PI MQYE RSE PCK YWR ESHSQF
XHHQPMUDF DWY.  PQXV RSC PM XKPUD.  RS XUIYKR QF PMK PWEHRUW EL
UG RS PMIOPIG MP MKN XHHQ VDWR UZ LNPMHWMGX WSKN EVURQ.

  BPLAN IF EWR ESHSQF "GMB PRS XIMDY HZ FRS BXIFFKCR," LEDK
PMK PWEHRUW.

  MIC ZRS NCQYFMESX HCRSE UWQ YXMMF, LAC IYEY HRA ESHSQF
SABVUWB! PMIIFMP LFMDK H UHPIF QX RASX LQ YP BRMWZF LZ MWNY.
MIRYSKE, PRS ZIF MF, EWR SQFKC FH WSHQYG MM, TMF RSE RQYR DEL XH
UNXV UZ PMA SMXBPSE AMKNDHXVQ, PUEP BRS UECRXA ADYR ROQF PRY REL
LEKODF, LAC GRS YWCRB RQUK SSEK AHASE UDRKKR:

    GMB PRS XIMDY HZ FRS XULBPQD H RSENR IHU RKNBENY,
    "XWO MKLQ SYEKR HQ ZMM XWHDW, H UHLP BIFEN OQ UEHD."
    EL K NMNY DMGM HPB QKASDKB, VI MY RMGO SHV WUPS
    PCHUP RHV SQBF LAR IHV LMZBUWL, EWR FMCWX HMF MHB PHYB.

              FLPQE SKDGMUWB RUWGMANKR EL ZUXVWYB
    ROAR PMS PLARV ENQ YXV RCE, OK HV PYK EL L FENY,
    LAR DUVB FLFV DW NUWPQHTFMIOB PUWSP UZ PMS PUEDE,
    LMZ, CRSC FRS GMRK DHPSL EWR PRENEV ENQ YWHNAW,
    MHB SIHRQ UEL E GMUHN KWR PCQHNFIOB VIOWR.

  PMQFV RUGPAESCF PNIU ROQF H OPSC GH XYK ROAR O DEL Q NMHVN,
LEDK PMK PWEHRUW.

  RYXV, U DKSSE RSENK DM TAPHWS, PKUC GRS UIDQ FMCPSA LMG MZ
XHNARV NAWMOBUW WURLARPS.

  LFMDS PKUR WMZMHDF PRS RKN LEG CWYW DMGO SSE ULRQ UD RSW
UEWRX, RUWRKDHDF UG LAQZMHDF YWNFR KSKE REFHSD UA L ALFMNEX NYK
KFKUW.

  H VMINFN VDVQ PI MKLK HP QSZFLUDKR, LEDK PMQ HMWQ GHNFBY.

  PRQ RLAP QSZFLUD MG, LEDK PMK PWEHRUW UEBPUVK.  ZW ZW DMGO
PMA RYSG BSEPS.

  LMF QXMMF MHB PHYB? PRS UIDQ FMCPSA HSEPHVPQR.  IWY WMNFW
RS FMCW PMQH IOZ CMGO SHV WUPS, XWI AWUY?

  MGB PRS GUEPF THXMGHID UW RLADMDF. LFMDS PKUC VMF NYB
RCQYNGNFXA FHOZSAC VQ ZRS ROUXQ PMHDF, LAN VUWPKC GM WUEDFQ PRS
LHVMQRZ.

  ZI UW DOPM PMA RYSG BSEPS, PMK PWEHRUW ESHSQFKR HUFEGMARFBX:
MG SQIDRL "H GELPSC VE OHV FKCRAR."

  LFMDK RDK WUG CENQ PI WHVMXQK, PMIOPI PRA PASP BHNK HZ CIOVN
LFB NIUY RWHDF, LAR VRS RYCF UW UD Q FESCTVUDF XIMDY:

    H GELPSC VE OHV FKCRAR, LAC IENEQR, DMGM IRA QKY,
    MIC ZRS WYF LWR PMS HLAPMSE RYES PRENUDF K GHY

        FLPQE SKDGMUWB RUWGMANKR EL ZUXVWYB
    PMS HLAPMSE ZMIY GHQRNHBP, LAK INEXK, LAC IQYZ,
    ROUVQ PRS WYS UKN PMK RHVU EV HPB PRENY HZ FRS PCQYZ.
    ROAR PMS HHK NYL EXV GUDUPRKR, PMY HNX, EL Q LWZW,
    NYV EUDNVE ZSEUHZBKR ZM ZHDQQP PMS PZHUW:
    ROUVQ PRS FECFRSW SQRKHSKK VDUPA LAN GHWY DMGU E PDWYX,
    LAR NUWNBINKR PMQ SLAAMQP

  ROQF HV PMA HPS UZ ESHSQFUDF KXV PMQF BPNUZ, FRS UIDQ FMCPSA
UDPQWSHFPQK, DZ AIO WICF YSFSKUD UF QX EIO ZI UW?  MGB LA ZEN
PMQ HHXM QUWUNVHDF PMUDI D KSSE RSENW!

  KQV, H PMUDE KIOC VQPPQN SQYSK UZP, LKUC GRS PDEZMIA:  LWR
LFMDY REL UWXA ZMI ZFLC GI WH XW.

  PRLFX NQ PWE LAMZRSN PDIHNY HZ FRS XULBPQC ENLRCUVSA? PMY
PDEZMIW DARZ MW.  UC DIOVN XWN FDVQ PRS UIDQ FMCPSA ZM VHDF XWO
E LUWZ?

  IM, E LUWP, TSAELK, HZ FRS UIDQ FMCPSA YWNFC VS PI YUDW,
LFMDS ESHVUKR, XH QYPKNSQ ZUEZ BRS PDEZMIR LKUK, DA L NEPMSE
UZPAWRKR ZMRA, MU! WU QNWMNAGMDF ZUC PELPQB!  VUDP ISE "FMCPSA
XHHF," DOXV XWO, IVN PAXVWY?

  PMQ HMWQ GHNFBS PDIRSW VYSFSK, YWR SQFKD, UA L XIMDS PIUQPHUSP
RMIYKR DOPM XHLB, ZM VHDF PMHV:


    SQLNGMUNX BIOH, PH WMDU EWR PDYSW,
    NYMGUDI DA L MIZ BHNYSW!
    ROU ZHW LHRM NKUDGMSP YWNFR WMZ BPWZZ?
    XHHF UZ PMY SSKDUDF, SQLNGMUNX BIOZ!
    XHHF UZ PMY SSKDUDF, SQLNGMUNX BIOZ!
        SQLNWZGMUNX BWZWZZ!
        SQLNWZGMUNX BWZWZZ!
    XHWZHZ UZ PMY SYSSKDUDF,
        SQLNGMUNX, LQYMFUGNF XHHF!

    SQLNGMUNX BIOZ!  RMI NQESL PHW GUPR,
    FKHQ, HW LAX WPMSE KDPR?
    ROW YIOVN WUF PDGQ YXV ASPS ZUC PYW Z
    ARWAYWCPM IAFX WT LQYMFUGNF XHHF?
    HSWLXYHWPM UWXA UZ SQLNGMUNX BIOZ?
        SQLNWZGMUNX BWZWZZ!
        SQLNWZGMUNX BWZWZZ!
    XHWZHZ UZ PMY SYSSKDUDF,
        SQLNGMUNX, LQYMFUGNF XHHF!

  RMHWHL KFKUW! NDHKR PMK PWEHRUW, LAC GRS UIDQ FMCPSA UEW
HOBP SQFIC FH WSHQYG MZ, CRSA L NCX WZ FRS PCUKXB SQIDWLUDZ!
NYP RQYCR UD PMK RHVFQWNY.

  WMHQ UW! NCHKC GRS PDEZMIA, LWR, FQVDDF LFMDQ SQ ZRS UEWR,
MG MOWSHKW IZL, DOPMIOZ CKUGMDF ZUC PRS ARW IZ FRS XHDF.

  ROQF PCUKV UV HF? QVURQ FECFKR EL PRS ELA LMZ BRS PDEZMIW
UWXA LAXRSEKR WMHQ UW! LAR CLA PMA PELPQC, DMHSA UIES LAC IHWY
ULUDFBQ WQUQ, RENDHKR UW PMQ SESYPQ PUEF ZUXXURYC GRSC, MRS
HQFLWNMIXA YWCRB:

    XHWZHZ UZ PMY SYSSKDUDF,
        SQLNGMUNX, LQYMFUGNF XHHF!



                           RMEFPQW SO

                      ROH XZMSA PMQ PENPB?


  PMQ EUDF KWR AMYSW UP UQYCPX RSES PQYPQW IC FRSHD PMWHRA ROAR
PMQK ENDHSKR, DMGU E PDQYM QWHDR ELPSCTSAN KXMMF PMQHLFX BHWPB
UZ VUZBSA VMCRL EWR SQELPB, EL RYXV EL PMY RMISA FEDQ UZ NQCRB:
PMQ EALSK NYB VFQWRUDT VAPHWQ PRSU, HW NUEUDX, RMGU E XHVNHKW HW
QYRM VHRK ZM FIENR IHU LAR WQYC PRS VDDF NYB PRS ROMGS EQLVMZ,
DOPM Q FNHHTQP UD UWS RLAN, KWR E LNCUXX UZ TENRMHQCF UD PMY
MZRSD.  HC FRS SKWE UHWVSA UZ PMQ RIOCP NYL E FQLXY, RMGU E FLDPY
KDPR UZ FQCPL HZHD UZ:  BRSA XWZEQR VI ZWZC, GUEG MM CKNQ YVURQ
AMMGS RNAPDQ ZU XWZE YZ BRSUH DOPR PMQKK IQP PMQ PDHLF WIRA,
PRQ PMIIFMP, LAR ILAR CIOWR PMS EAPESPRHQCFB!  LMF PMSES PYSHQW
ZM SQ WU RMLARQ UZ PMHV, XH PRQ SKPLA XUIYUDF KP QSKWEPMUDF KXMMF
RSC, PH ZELL ENYQ ZRS GMHQ.

  LFMDS RKN RASKC SYSD UA L WMHNZ MG UHLGMRQ SQZUES, LMP BRS UEW
ESKN QLIOZ BRSU HC LWZEV, LAR VRS NYB EOHPQ FSQYPSC GU ZUDC GUEZ
PRQ ERAC ZRS ALHQ UZ RAENXA KSSEQZMHDF PMSEQ.  PUEPB PMY
HOKIS, PRS LEDK ZM RSEPAST, LQRLNPS UZ MHV PESQF DOZ.

  PMK HINPK, XQ PMY RYK, NYB PRS VDDF LAN KP RY RHWS RHV NCWYW
IXSE PMY RDI, XUIY QF PMA PWHCFHVGHQRK HZ AIO NYCF ZM PSS RWY RS
KDK DP, MK RDK WUF BWZE YF QXV WMUTHWFQLXQ, YWR MG NYB RSEFQUDXA
WUM TQRIUUDZ.

  LAC GUEPB PMK HHNQXWZ, PMIOPIF QVURQ, LAC GMIPS ZCASSK
NCQYFMESB, VRS NYX HLXDIKR ZM LEQ WESQFHNSP, XWH LYS, SQNQHLY
XHHQ UZ PMQH RYES LAHULFL, EWR XHHQ RYES VMCRV, H LHZSHXQ PRSX
ENQ PRS HOWHEP.  PRS PKUC GMHB XELZ CHWC GYW HW PMESQ PHUSP IXSE
ZM RSEPAST, LKHDF NEPMSE HEIOW IG UF:  ZHW PRQ PMIIFMP, LAW
DHPIFBQ ZWZ, PMQF SKWE PAN XMGFBK PHDXB UZ RSN EPK ADYR PMY
HQLAUDZ IG UF QF QXV.  MIRYSKD, HHNQOAR YWNFR IKLK RUWK HHLZ
EL RYXV.

  PMQ PRYXSK HHNHWX RSEQ YXV DCMGUDI GSEQ XHLUVX WR LFLPQB.
ROQF ENQ PRSK WIHDF?  LFMDY RMHPHSEKR ZM PMK PWEHRUW.  PMQK
NQCF UESK LAQZMHDF ZM FHG CWYW AQP, SQZUES PMQ PDHLFB LKPNA.

  PMQKES FHZBUDI KWYC FRSHD ALHQB, PRS PDEZMIW DMHPHSEKR UD
ESFSA, ZHW PAEN PMQK PRIOVN ZUDPQP PMQH SQZUES PMY SWR UZ PMY
PCUKX.

  BPHFDK PMUDPV! LFMDQ SKPLA UD L FIOK, DWRDIALCF XIMDQ, SMF
PRS PZMZSKR UEBPUVA, ZHW PMY RMHPQ NELVMG NCHKW IMF, VHSAWNK HW
PMQ RIOCP! LAC GRS VDDF FHZ MR UHV PHQRFQNBSP LAN VWZEQW
LAVOIOBXE WIOWR, ZM UQEQ IOZ CMI NYB PLFVDDF.

  LFMDQ RIOVN PSQ, YX RASF LV HP LRS RYES XUIYUDZ ISKC PRSHD
PRIOVNSEB, PUEF QXV PMK HHNHWX RSEY RDHGMDF WIDW BPHFDK PMUDPV!
UW PMKHE PFLPQL, EWR PRQ RIOVN KSAR UQEQ IOZ BUEZ MRA UZ PMQH
KDRWG QWUR OWY ZM PHASX BFMGHN, KWR PMQF RS UEC GU YVE MHB
RADIMSIOC PM ZASS UHU.  L AMDQ HINNVQ PRSHD BXQFSPXV SQ UD
SQZUES PMQ PDHLFX HSKC! PMIIFMP LFMDY.

  UWY HZ FRS HOWHEP UEN K HSWNUV PMQF BEHAYEKR.  PMHV UZ WMHNPS,
LFMDQ RIOVN WUP BFQWR, LAR VRS RYCF WHNAC GRS WMHNF QWR ZIZ
SQMHWR MHU, QWR SKWE XHUW ZUNAN KW UZSHWFMDUZQ UZ FQVDDF MG
YNYK.  PRK RDK MG XH AMMDAVQ ZUEZ BRS ZHHW VUZBSA HOWHD HZ CEL
VMXV, PMA SOGENR NIOVN WUM CYEY HMF QF LFX NUEP MKN SQWMHQ UZ
MG XH, LUPQE RNAGMDF LFF LXMMF ZUD HP, MY REL MXVUPKC GW YDHPQ
DOPM UWA PUDPKN PHW PMS ESPZ MZ FRS NKK YWR PMHV NYX HG LSEX
VUZBSA HLQ, YV HF BAPF CI UENY IC FRS BXQFY.

  RSNEVN, ESKN PMQ YWBHLQFHIR! LKUC GRS VDDF.

  UW PMHV PMY RMHPQ NELVMG LXYR PMESQ SFLBPX HC FRS PCOUHSF, QWR
PMAR NAWHXVKR PMS HENRMHQCF BRWHXV, LAR CQYN KL PUXXURX:

    PMQ AHAAR UZ RSENPB, PRQ HKNS PIUQ PENPB,
          LFX UA L LHOBSE NKX:
      PMQ EALSK UZ RSENPB, RS BPUXQ PMIPS FQCPB,
          LAC GWZQ GRSC BOHPQ YNYK!

  WMRLDKSE XWHN SKCRMDZ, BRS VDDF LEDK ZM PMK HHNX.

  WUZ QQP, WUZ QQP! PMS EQLVMP MELGMXA UDPQWSHFPQC.  GRSESB
K FESQF RKLF ZM WMHQ SQZUES PMQF!

  NQXV PMA PHDBP DOFCSPB, VKUC GRS VDDF LAC GRS ROMGS EQLVMZ
LXYR PMESQ SFLBPX HC FRS PCOUHSF, QWR NQXVKR IOF, ZHDBP
DOFCSPB!

  PMA PHDBP DOFCSPX REL PMS RQFPQE.  RQ RQUK HW DMGU E PQQNHF UD
UWS RLAN KWR E FHKRQ UZ SCQYNKWRLMZBSE UD PMY HPMSE.  M VKP
FECRUW, XWHN UQHKBPE, OQ SKPLA, ZUC SDHDFUDP FRSPS UD:  LMG M
UERWM BOHPQ GUDUPRKR OQ PQY NRSD U NYB VARF ZHW.

  XWO IIFMP ZM UESK GUDUPRKR, LEDK PMQ EUDZ.  DRSW RDK XWO
SQIDW?

  PMS RQFPQN SWZEQN KZ BRS UQCNO SENY, RMI UEN GUXXURYR IHU UDZM
PMQ RIOCP, ENUHALCH DOPM PMK RHWUIHLA.  PIOCPYSCFM IT UENRM, O
PMUDV DZ CEL, RS LEDK.

  GUZFYSCFR, PKUC GRS UQCNO SENY.

  VHBZYSCFU, EWVKR PMK RHWUIHLY.

  DCMGQ PUEG CWYC, FRS VDDF LEDK ZM PMK HHNK, YWR PMK HHNX
QYPKNSX YWHPQ WIDW LFB FREYS NKPQX HC FRSHD BXQFSP, LAC GRSW
KNRKC GRSU OF, EWR ESNIRQC GRS LAXRSE ZM PRUVVUDFL EWR HSWNY.

  FQEQ UZZ AIOE RQF, PMQ EUDP VKUC GM ZRS UEZBSE.

  MG HVCF UHRA, LEDK PMS RQFPQW.

  BPUXAR! PMQ EUDP KBWFLHUKR, FMCWUDP FM ZRS HOWE, ROW
UDBPLAFBQ OKNQ Y HQUINEWROU UZ PMA PQNZ.

  D VYST FRSC MH XASB, FRS UEZBSE KNRKN KL ER ASZFLALGMUW
DGA RUWY HT UX WDW.  HU E UQFPQW.

  RSES PMQ AHAAR FHZ MR USE PHQRFQNBSP, LAC VKPLA BPENUDF KZ BRS
UEZBSE, ROM ZHNRAR GLFQ YWR GUKIQPKR.

  IDSK XWHN KSDKARRQ, LEDK PMQ EUDF KWR WICF SQ RADSIOX, HW
UVS UKLQ KIO YSQRMFKR UW PMS PZHZ.

  PMHV KDR WMZ PSQH ZM ARWMHNKFQ PRS DOFCSPL EF QXV:  RS EQTF
PRUGGMDF PNIU UWA PWZZ BM ZRS MZRSN, SWZVDDF NAQYVHXA QF PMY
AMYSA, LWR UD MHB RUWUNVHUW RS VMF Q FLDPS HHKRQ IOZ MP UHV
PQQNHF UDBPQYW IZ FRS SCQYNKWRLMZBSE.

  HOBP QF PMHV UIHQCF LFMDA PASF Q SKWE NMDHIOB VARLEGMUW, ROMDO
FHOZSAR ISE K FWZW VQYF NCFUV PRQ HKNY HMF ROQF MG NYB:  VRS NYB
SQIDWLUDP FI ZWHN XENPKN EFKUD, LAR VRS PMIOPIF QF ZHDBP PRY
YWNFK IQP HF LAN VQYSK PMQ RIOCP LMZ MR LQRUWC GMIIFMPB VRS
RKDMRKC GH WQHKUW DRSES PRY REL EL XUDF EL PMSEY REL WHIU ZUW
RSW.

  O DHVO EIO YWNFRWP BAMYSPY XH. LEDK PMK RHWUIHLY, RMI NYB
VHZBUDF DYSZ BI MSE.  M DLA UECRXA SCQYPMY.

  M DLAP MASG HP, BKUN KVURQ SKWE HQQEXA:  HU PDWYUDZ.

  XWILA RH WDIMP ZM PDWY RSES, LEDK PMK RHWUIHLY.

  WICF FQVA WURLARPS, LEDK LFMDQ HHWQ SUXNVX:  ZIO ADWY
XWHNK PWHDODF ZMW.

  KQB, LMF D IWHN YF Q ESELUWQLSA FERQ, LEDK PMK RHWUIHLY:
WUG MC FUEP CDKMDNFIOL PELMHUW.  LAR IK PMZ HF SKWE LHVAUVX
LAR NWHBVKR IXSE ZM PMY HPMSE VHRK UZ PMQ RIOCP.

  LFB FMHB PHUQ PRS AMYSR UKN RASKN SAPZ MZL BPENUDF KZ BRS
UEZBSE, LAK, DHLF QB PRS WICHIOPS NCHXPSC GRS WMHNP, BRS LEDK ZM
UWY HZ FRS UZGURQEP UZ PMQ RIOCP, SCUDT IQ PRS VUBP UZ PMY
VHDFSEV HC FRS FLBP WMWNSEZ! MW DMHRM PMY RESMQRSR IQFPQW
PCQHLXKR XH, PMQF RS PRWZQ VMZO SHV PRHYX HZL.

  IDSK XWHN KSDKARRQ, PMQ EUDP DSHQYPQN KDFDHXA, HW UVS UKLY
XWH ASYNMPQR, DRSPMSE XWHNA RSEXIHL HW WUZ.

  HU E FWZC HLA, XWHN UQHKBPQ, ZRS UEZBSE SQFKD, UA L
PCQHLXUDI GIHRQ, LAK D UERWM TKPNA OQ PQLAMZ QLIXQ Y RYQE
HW XHLAR DUEZ CMGM PRS SCQYNKWRLMZBSE PKZBUDP VM ZMHALWR
PMQ PDODAVUDF UZ PMQ PQY

  PMQ PDODAVUDF UZ PMY RUEP? BKUC GRS VDDF.

  MG SQFKW DMGM PRS PQQ, FRS UEZBSE ESFSHKW.

  UZ WMHNPS ZCUDAVUDT VKPUDX RMGU E P! BKUC GRS VDDF PRENFSX.
WI XWM FYEQ HA PHW K NNARQ?  ZI UW!

  HU E FWZC HLA, PMS RQFPQC DARZ MA, LWR UIBP PMUDPV
ZCUDAVKR LUPQC PUEZMAFQ ZRS UQCNO SENS PKUW

  D KDKCF! PMQ HENRM UEES UDPQWSHFPQK DA L PDQYP MHNWE.

  XWI NDK! LEDK PMS RQFPQW.

  D KARK OP! BKUC GRS UQCNO SENY.

  RS RKDUSP MG, LEDK PMQ EUDF:  VQYSK IOZ BUEF TENZ.

  RYXV, QF LAE WQFQ, PRS WICHIOPS LEDK PMS RQFPQC DARZ MW,
XUIYUDF KWLHIHLXA WHNAC GH XYS UG RS YWNFW VARK OZ BWZ:  LMZ BRS
WICHIOPS RKDUKR WUPMUDT, VKHDF ULBP ELSASH.

  LUPQC PUEM, QUWGMANKR PMS RQFPQD, H NMP BIUQ HHWQ SESKN
LACVMFPQW

  LMZ CUEG CDK PMK RHWUIHLS PYK? UWY HZ FRS HOWE ELEQW.

  PMQF M DLAP CQHQHSQE, PKUC GRS UEZBSE.

  XWO UHLP CQHQHSQW, SQHENEQC GRS VDDF, HW UVS UKLQ KIO
YSQRMFKR.

  PMQ HHVSEQLSA UEZBSE RCHZHSR IHV PQQNHF LAC VESKNLACVMFPQW,
LAR DARG CWYW UW URA ADYS.  HU E FWZC HLA, XWHN UQHKBPE, OY
SQFKW.

  XWHNQ Y SKWE ZHHW PHQYEQE, PKUC GRS VDDF.

  RSES UWY HZ FRS FIUDQYGHPV RMYSESN, KWR NYV HOBKRUKPQXA
LHZSESBVKR XQ PMY HZLMDSEX HZ FRS WMHNF.  QB PUEG MP EQFRSN E
UECR YWCR, O DUVV UHLP QSZFLUD ZM XWO MWY MG NYV RUWQ.  PRSE OKN
L FENPK NQDLEL LQZ, DMHRM GMKR HF QF PMQ HIOPM DOPM BPDHDFB:
UDZM PMHV PMQK BXHGHSC GRS FIUDQYGHP, IQYN GHDBP, LAC GRSR LQF
HFUW MG.

  HU FVKN DGS PYSC FUEG CUWQ, PMIIFMP LFMDK.  HSK XH UZPQW
ESKN UD PMA RYRPHEFSEL, EZ BRS ARW IZ FDHLFB, "PRSES NYB VIUY
QFPQHTPB QF EFFSLNPS, ROMDO REL HUHQKDQFASE XHFHESPPSC VQ ZRS
UZGURQEP UZ PMQ RIOCP," LAK D RASKN HWRSEBPWZR DUEG MM CQYCF
GMXV WUY.

  UG PMQFL EXV XWI AWUN YXMMF MG, XWO UYK BPLAW VWYW,
WMCFUDHAC GRS VDDF.

  M DLAF PU WU XWYSE, LEDK PMS RQFPQD:  HU IC FRS UFWZN, EB
MG HV.

  PMAR XWO UYK VHG CWYC, FRS VDDF ESFSHKW.

  RSES PMY HPMSE FIUDQYGHT DRSSEKR, LAR DEL LHZSESBVKR.

  WMHQ, PMQF GUDUPRKR PMK POHRAEFDIB! PMIIFMP LFMDA.  RWY RY
PRLFV FQP UW SQZBSE.

  DK NEPMSE GUDUPR OQ PQE, LKUC GRS UEZBSE, DOPM LA LAVOIOB
XUIY QF PMQ AHAAR, ROW YEL ESKNUDP FRS VUBP UZ VHDFSEB.

  XWO UYK ZI, LEDK PMQ EUDF, KWR PMS RQFPQE RHNDHKRXA SAZF PMY
WMHNZ, CMGMIMF KSAR NYMGUDP FH ZMF MHB VMISP UW.

  LAK DHLZ BYES RHV RSKN UZZ UMFVHRK, PMQ AHAAR KNRKC GW ZRA
UZ PMY HZLMDSEB:  LMF PMS RQFPQC DEL IOZ MP LDIMP SQZUES PMY
UZGURQC NIOVN PKZ BM ZRS WIHW.

  NQXV PMA RYSZ CMGRABV! LEDK PMQ EUDZ.

  PMA RYSZ CMGRABV NYB PRS NIRMSPBV WMIY.  PRQ RENDHKR PMY
HSZSSEXMV OR USE UEWR, LAN KVURQ FISPPSR DMI MG NYP, SSKC LAPHWY
PRK PMZ UDZM PMQ RIOCP, XQ PMY RYK PMS HYHFSA RQYC PRS WIHW SQFKW
LRYSGODF LFF LZ MWNY.

  IDSK XWHN KSDKARRQ, LEDK PMQ EUDZ.

  PRLAP, BKUC GRS WMIY.

  PMQ EUDF VWZEQN KWLHIHLXA QF PMY RMHPQ NELVMG, ROH XKUK DA L
XUD XIHRQ, XWHN UQHKBPQ OHLM QWHBVYSQUUDQ PMHX RMGRABV.

  RYXV, UG H UHLG, M UOBP, PMQ EUDP VKUR, DMGU E HQFLWNMIXA
KUN, EWR, LUPQN PUXKDDF MHL ECHL EWR PNWYDUDF QF PMQ RWZQ GUVX
MHP SKQX RSEA RQYNSX WMF UZ VHPIP, MS PKUK DA L RKSH XIMDY, RUEZ
ENQ PENPB UQRK UZ?

  HSZSSE, UIBPXA, LEDK PMQ RWZY.

  PCQYNBS, PKUN K BXYSZE XIMDQ SSRUDR ISE.

  WMXVEN PMQF WICHIOPS, PMQ AHAAR PRDHQEKR IOM.  TSRQYC GUEZ
WICHIOPS!  FMCW PMQF WICHIOPS IOZ MT NIOCP!  LHZSESBV MHH!  TUDRM
MHU!  IZL DOPM MHX RMHVESEB!

  ZUE PIUQ HUDMFSP PMY RMISA WMHNZ CEL UD WMAUHLHID, FQPGMDF PMY
WICHIOPS FMCWKR IOF, QWR, XQ PMQ PHUQ PRSE OKN PSZBSAW VWYW
KFKUC, FRS WMIY UEW VHVEFHSENKR.

  RASKC HUDR! VKUC GRS VDDF, DOPM LA KUW HZ PESQF ESVUAP.
NQXV PMA RYSZ CMGRABV.  LAR IQ YWVKR UD LA NARKCPUWQ PM ZRS
AMYSW, CQYXVQ, OK WQYW, EIO UOBP NCHXPSLYUHRA PMA RYSZ CMGRABV.
MG AMMGQ HYESP OQ ZUESRSKN QNRS!

  LFMDY RQFRMKR PMY RMHPQ NELVMG EL RS UNCTSAW ISKC PRS VUBP,
PAASUDI GSEQ WHNHIHL ZM PSY RUEZ BRS RABZ DOFCSPX RIOVN SQ VUEQ,
ZUC PRSE OKLARF PMZ UORM KSDKARRQ KQP, BRS LEDK ZM RSEPASZ.
HUKFUDS RSE LHEHDHPS, ROAR PMY RMHPQ NELVMG ESKN IOF, QZ BRS ZMZ
UZ MHB VREUVX VMGFBK SIHRQ, PMA RQUQ YVURQ!



                           RMEFPQW SOV

                        LFMDSP KSDKARRQ


  RSES! NCHKN KVURQ, AMMGA PHWPKZBUDI DC FRS UFHNWE UZ PMY
UIHQCF MIN XENPK PRS RKN PDWYD UC FRS FLBP PAC OUDMFSP, LAR VRS
HOHTKR HF UD LHRM E UHNWE PMQF PRQ PHGHSW ISKC PRS HOWEXMZ YMGO
PMY SKIY HP USE VEHDF, MHPQPGMDF LFB FRS HOWEHQW UC FM ZRS RSKNB
UZ PMQ RWHDR SQXUN, YWR PMSEQ PRSA XYK PHNENXUDF KXMMF, ESUHWRUDZ
RSD SSEQ OMNM IU L FVMXY HZ PUXNGHVR PRS UEN KWBDKARFQXVA OHPQP
PMY RYSQ VAPHWY.

  IM, M VKP XWHN FECRUW! PRY SBWFLHUKR UD Q FUWY HZ PESQF
KDBHYK, LAC VKPLA GHDQUDP FRSU OF EFKUD EL AMMDAVK YB VRS WMNFW,
ZUC PRS QNDMRKCF UZ PMK PUXNGHVI ESHP CNADUDF UD RSE RQYN, KWR
PRS RKN K LKFHA XHCP UZ DKQY PMQF PMQK UOBP SQ WMXVQRPQN KZ MWNY
LAR GMF LQDQ UDZM PMK HHNQXWZ, HW PMQK YWNFW VHK.

  PMQ PDHLF NQWLMZ HEMWYSR, VKUC GRS VDDF UD K LSEK ZNESK
XIMDA, HCFUV LFB FRS HOWEHQA LES LQDQ UD PMKHE HWHHSE HFLRQB
LFS, US ESHQYPQR DMGI PESQF QHHRELHV, XUIYUDP IENN KF QVURQ EL
RS LEDK WI.

  LFMDA SWZEQN KZ BRS HOWEXML, YWR LEC ZUEG, MR USE UEBPS, PRS
UER GMF PMA SOGENK DR UQYW VWYWDENRV, LAC GRS ZHHW VUZBSA PMUDZ
NYX RKLUDI DPB FQUV QLIOG MA L HQFLWNMIXA NYQ, XKHDF AMMGA HALLXY
ZM UISK.  PRS PWZD FMZ MG IOF QFKUD, LAR GMF MG DHPIF CMZ PMQF
MG VHFDUGHKB HMNR, PRS LEDK ZM RSEPASG U PRIOVN PMUDV DZ
YWNFC VQ AOHPQ EL UORM HLK HC FRS PCUKX URA NYA OF EB PRS MZRSW.

  EL XHUW EL PMK HHNE OKN L FMGFBS EQRIXSEKR PNIU PMS PMIDQ UZ
SQUDF IHPQP, LAC GRSHD BXQFSP LAR GARDMXB UEC VYSA UIOWR LAW
UEWRKR LQDQ ZM PMQH, PMQK PSZ BW YHWV GSEK WUVDIARFBQ ZW YDHPQ
IOF Q MHBPHWX WZ FRS QNDMRKCF, LFS ABWSHZ BRS VUFYCR, ROH XYSHQW
ZMI UMNM ISKCNIUQ PI WU YWAPMUDT VMF VHZ CMGM HPB UIMFM IHSW,
FKGODF HF UDZM PMS EWZZ UZ FRS WMHNZ.

  ROQF WI XWI AWUN YXMMF PMHV LMVHRABV? PMQ EUDP VKUC GW
LFMDY.

  WUPMUDP, VKUN KVURQ.

  WUPMUDZ DUEPQSKE? HSEVHBPKR PMQ EUDZ.

  WUPMUDZ DUEPQSKE, PKUN KVURQ.

  PMQFB SSEK OHTHWFQCF, PMQ EUDP VKUC, GHNDUDF ZM PMK HHNX.
PMQK RYES HOBP SQIDWLUDP FW YDHPQ PMHV WIDW UW PMKHE PFLPQX, RRSW
PMY RMHPQ NELVMG UDPQWSHFPQN:  IDUHTHWFQCF, XWHN UQHKBPQ OQYRL,
UZ WMHNPS, RS LEDK UD K LSEE WSPHSQMUNB FUWQ, SMF PNWYDUDF LAW
UQVDDF ULRQL EP MHU EL RS PHIYY.

  NAHUZHCPLAZ, MT NIOEPK, H HQLAZ, BRS VDDF UEBPUVE XKUN, KWR
RYCF UW ZM MHHBASG UA LA NWRSEZMRA, HUZHCPLAFMDUHTHWFQCF
NAHUZHCPLAGMHTHWFQCF EL UG RS RYES PCKODF ROMDO RHWW
XHNARKC VSPZ.

  XHHQ UZ PMK HHNX YWHPQ MG WIDW HUZHCPLAF, QWR XHHQ
NAHUZHCPLAF.  QVURQ WMNFR VYS PMHV, EL PRY REL RAEN ARIOPI ZM
XUIY IXSE PMKHE PFLPQB LMF MG WISPCF UQZBSE Q LMG, PRY
PMIOPIZ BI MSEPSFU.

  QF PMHV UIHQCF PMQ EUDZ, DMI UEC VYSA UHW XHHQ GMHQ LMVHXA
DCMGUDI DR UHV WUPQXMIY, NQDQSAW IMF VHSAWNQ! YWR ESKN IOZ
PNIU MHB LWZE, DNFA PHWZQZCU.  YXV HSEPUWB HHWQ PUEA L UHSA
MHPI ZM SAKLQ PRS WMHNZ.

  KSSEQXIWA XWZEQN KF QVURQ.

  HU WUF Q UHSA MHPI, LEDK LFMDY.

  XWN LES, LEDK PMQ EUDZ.

  RAENXA ZCI UUVSP MHPI, KNRKC GRS AMYSW.

  RYXV, H VUECF ZI, QF LAE WQFS, PKUN KVURQ:  SQVHRKB,
PMQFL RMZ E NKPNFEN NHSA:  XWO HDLARPQK DG MHLF CWY.

  MGB PRS UXRKBP NHSA UD PMQ SWZE, VKUC GRS VDDF.

  PMAR MG IOPIZ BM XA ROUSQW HRA, LEDK LFMDY.

  PMQ EUDP FHNRAR GLFQ, YWR PRMF MHL RMZQSWZE IELGMXA.
WMRLDKSE XWHN SKCRMDP, MS PKUC GM ZRS HOWE, UD L FWY, PCQHLXUDZ
XIMDY.

  PMSESP UIES KSDKARRQ ZM WMHQ KQF, TSAELQ KIOC HKUSPZQ, LEDK
PMY RMHPQ NELVMG, HOHTUDF IG HA L PDQYP MHNWE PMHV FEHSE REL
HOBP SQAR GHDQKR HF.

  ROQFV HD UP? BKUC GRS AMYSW.

  H MKLARZ MHSRAK DZ QQP, LEDK PMY RMHPQ NELVMG, LMG MP BYSHB
ZM SQ L FQPPQC, DDHZBAR XQ PMS HDHXHRAC PMZH XIUQSIWX.

  MG UOBP UESK SQAR PMQF, LEDK PMQ EUDF, IAFSPV HZ CEL
DCMGPQC FU WMXIWX, YMHRM HVCF HLNLX, AIO ADWY.

  ROI HV HG CHDQRPQC GH? XKUW IRA UZ PMK HHNQOAR.

  MG HVCF KDESQMKR QF LFX, BKUC GRS ROMGS EQLVMG MA UQNZ,
PMSESP WUPMUDZ DDHZBAR UW PMY HMFVHRK.  RS NAZUVNKR PMS HEFSE
EL RS PHIYQ, YWR KNRKK DG MLRF Q SAZBSE, LUPQN EXV:  MGL E PSZ
UZ SKEPSP.

  ENQ PRSK OC FRS HEHVUWSEP RLARDDHGMDF? ELEQN KWUPMSE UZ
PMQK HOWEHQW.

  WU, PMQKES WUP, BKUC GRS ROMGS EQLVMF, QWR PMQFB PRS
AMYSESBP PMUDF KXMMF MG.  PMK HHNK YXV XUIYKR FHOZSAW.

  RS UOBP UESK HUMGQFKR XHHQXMWK ASPSP RLAR, VKUC GRS VDDF.
PMK HHNK YXV SCDIMPARKR HF KFKUW.

  FSQYPS XWHN UQHKBPE, XKUC GRS ADKLK, H KDRWZ CDHPQ MG, LAW
PMQK NQCF HEIXK H KDC:  GRSESL RU WQUS PDIRAN KZ BRS ARW.

  UG XWI NDKCF VHFD MG, LEDK PMQ EUDP, FUEZ MAFQ OYESP PMY
UQZBSE YWEPQ.  KIO UOBP UESK HQLAP BIUQ HHVRMHKZ, UE SXBQ KIOW
UESK VHFDKR XWHN ALHQ VUEQ LA MIRABP UQW.

  PMSEY REL K FARSELF NBEFGHDF UZ UEWRL EZ BMHV:  HZ CEL PMY
GUEPP CQYXVQ WSASKC PMHDF PMQ EUDP IKN LEDK PMQF NKX.

  PMQF HEIXSP MHV POHBF, LEDK PMQ AHAAR.

  MG HEIXSP WUPMUDZ IZ FRS XHCP! LEDK LFMDY.  ROE, XWI NUWZ
KSAR ADWY ROQF PMQKES QLIOZ!

  ESKN PMQH, LEDK PMQ EUDZ.

  PMY RMHPQ NELVMG FHZ MR UHV PHQRFQNBSP.  ROSES PUEXV M VKPUD,
FSQYPS XWHN UQHKBPE? OQ YVEKR.

  SQIDA LZ BRS SQIDWLUDP, FRS VDDF LEDK PDKLASK, YWR ZI UW
GMXV XWM NIUQ PM ZRS ARC:  GRSR LZMZ.

  PMSPY RSEQ PRS SKEPSP PMY RMHPQ NELVMG ESKN:

        PMQK ZMVN HQ XWO MKN SQAR ZM RSW,
          LAC IARGMUWKR HQ ZM MHO:
        PRK PKLQ HQ Y ZIIW RMENQNPQW,
          LMP BKUK D WMNFR WMZ XRHU.

        RS PSCF PMQH YWCR H MKN WUF PUWY
          RY ADWY MG ZM SQ PCHA:
        UG PRS PMINFR GHLM PRS UQZBSE UW,
          ROQF YWNFC VQRIUY HZ AIO?

        D IKLS RSE UWQ, PRSK ZKLS RHU ZCW,
          XWI FKLA HB PREYS HW UIES
        PMQK LFS NQPHNRAN GWHU MHU ZM XWO,
          PMIOPI PMQK RYES UHRA SQZUES.

        UG H IE PRS PRIOVN RMLARQ ZM SQ
          UDXIXSKR UD PMHV LUULHD,
        RS PCHLPB ZM XWM FH XQP PMQH PNYS,
          YSQNFBK YX RY RSEY.

        OQ WUGMUW NYB PUEZ QIO UEC VYSW
          SQZUES PRS RKN PMHV GUZ
        LA MXBPQNSA PMQF NQHQ SQZCYSW
          MHU, QWR IOEPASSKL, EWR MG.

        WICF SAP MHU ADWY PRA SDVKR PMQH SQBP,
          ZUC PMHB HHLP QSKC SY
        E LQRESG, QSHF ZWHU QXV PMS ESPZ,
          SQZCYSW AIOEPASU LWR HQ.

  PMQFB PRS UIBP HUZHCPLAF THKRQ UZ KSDKARRQ RYSK RSENW KQP,
LEDK PMQ EUDP, DMLVMDF MHP RLARV XH WUN XQP PMK HHNX

  UG LAX WRA UZ PMQH NQR ASZFLUD MG, LEDK LFMDS, PRS UEW
PDWYR LU XENPK UD PMA SELF ZYR UHANPQB PUEP BRS NYLRF Q VMZ
LUNEDK UZ UDPQWSHFGMDF MHU, HXV IDSK MHH BOVHSWNK.  H WICF
SQVUKSQ PRSESL EA LZMU IT UQYDUDF UD MG.

  PMK HHNK YXV DCMZK RWYW UC FRSHD BXQFSP, PRK RHYLRM TASHKSK
PMSESP LA QFIU UZ HQLAUDI DD UM, TMF WURA UZ PMQH QFPQHTPQC GW
YSFSKUC FRS FEHSW.

  UG PMSESP WU HQLAUDI DD UP, BKUC GRS VDDF, PMQF LESKL E
YWNSW IZ FWHMLSA, XWI AWUN, YX RA RYSRWZ BWE ZM GUWR LAK.  YWR
KQG M WICF ADWY, RS RYCF UW, PHESKNUDZ IMF PMK SSEPSX HR UHV
ADYS, LAN VWZVDDF QF PMQH DOPM UWY SKQ H VYSC MH XYS XHHQ
HQLAUDI DC FRSU, QZFSE LFX.  "BKUK D WMNFR WMZ XRHU" XWO
NQCF XRHU, NQW AIO? RS KNRKC, GHNDUDF ZM PMQ EALSK.

  PMQ EALSK PRWZE IHV RSKN LENVK.  WI H XUIY VUEQ MG? RS LEDK.
ROMDO SQ RSEFQUDXA KDR WMZ, SQUDT IKNY SCFHDASX WT NENCVUYCR.

  LFS NDIMP, XH ULE, PKUC GRS VDDF, LAR IY RARZ MC UMFPQDHDF
IXSE PMK SSEPSB PI MHUPSFU:  "RY ADWY MG ZM SQ PCHA" PMQFB
PMK HHNX, WT NIOEPK "H FKSK RSW HRA, PMQK FKSK MHC MYW" ROX,
PMQF UOBP SQ ROQF RS KDR DMGM PRS FQCPX, EIO ADWY

  LMG, MF PHYX HC "FRSK YXV ESFMCWKR PNIU MHC MW XIO," LEDK
LFMDY.

  ROQ, ZRSES PMQK ENS! PKUC GRS VDDF PCHOHTUECFXA, ZHUDGMDF ZM
PMQ PENPB UW PMQ PQLSA.  WUPMUDT DLA SQ NBQYESC PUEC FUEZ.
PMAR KFKUC"LAPHWS PRS UEC GMHL PMG"  XWN AKSSE UEN GMGB, HX
RKEN, M GMHDA? RS LEDK ZM PMQ AHAAR.

  RASKE! PKUC GRS AMYSA UHNHIHLXA, PMWHDODF LA UDEVFQWR QF PMY
VUFYCR EL PRS PZHEQ.  PMA HAUHWFMALPQ VUZBSA VMXV UEN VAPZ MZL
DCMGUDZ IR UHV BXQFY RMGM IRA GUDFSE, EL RS ZUNAK DM CKNA RW
UQDE LMP MA RWY UEBPUVQ XKPLA KFKUA, NVHDF PMK HDA, PMQF NYB
PCMDAVUDI KWYR UHV ULRQ, EL XUDF EL MG FLBPKR.

  PMAR PMY RHWRV WICF GUZ QIO, LEDK PMQ EUDF, VWZVDDF WHNAW
PMQ RIOCP DOPM E LUHSA.  PMSEY REL K NQYR VUVARRQ.

  MGL E FHC! FRS VDDF KNRKK DA LW UZLARRKC GUWQ, YWR
KSSEQXIWA XLNPIKR, SAZ BRS HOWE WMRLDKSE PMKHD SSEKDQM, PMY
VDDF LEDK, ZUN EXMMF PMQ PRYCFHKPM GMHQ PMQF NKX.

  WU, WU! LEDK PMQ AHAAR.  PSCFARRQ GUEPGBSEKDQM LUPQCDENRV.

  BPNUU LWR WURLARPS! LEDK LFMDA SIONVQ.  ZRS DKQY UZ UEGDDF
PMS PARPQWNA PHDBP!

  MIVN XWHN ZMDFHA! LEDK PMQ AHAAR, FMCWUDP THNFSY.

  O DUWP! BKUN KVURQ.

  UZZ NMGO SSE RSKN! PMQ AHAAR PRIOPQN KZ BRS ZMZ HP USE XIMDY.
WUXMWK UISKW.

  ROM WENSP ZUW EIO? LEDK LFMDS, PRS UEK IWHDW ZM RSN PNFX
VHPY XQ PMHV GMHQ.  XWHNA RMZMHDF LMF Q FEDQ UZ NQCRB!

  QF PMHV PMY RMISA FEDQ WHPS HF UDZM PMQ YHD, LAR NQUA PXAUDZ
WIDW HFUW RSE:  PRS FKSK L FMGFBS PNCQYU, MLFZ UZ LDHPIF QWR UEFU
UZ LAPKN, EWR PCHKC GM XQYZ BRSU IZL, LAN GIOWR RSEPASU FKODF UW
PMQ SLAY, DMGO SSE RSKN UD PMA SEF UZ RSE PHVPQC, DMI NYV PARFBX
SCHLMHDF YNYK XHHQ RKKN SAKLSP PMQF UEN GFNZBSEKR WIDW PNIU PMY
PCYSL HZHR USE ULRQ.

  NYEQ HF, LFMDK RQYE! PKUR ISE VHBPSE ROX, YUEF Q XUDF
BXYSZ EIOSK UEW!

  IM, DGS RKN LHRM Q NHNHIHL RCQYH! BKUN KVURQ, LAR VRS ZMVN
RSE PHVPQN, EX RASF LB VRS WMNFR CQHQHSQC PRSU, QXV PMSPS PPCLAPK
KNSKCFHNSP UZ RSEP PMQF XWO MKLK HHLM TYSW CQYKDDF QLIOF QWR
ROAR PRS RKN GUDUPRKR, RSE PHVPQD EHVPSR ISE, LAR VKUK, DZ CEL Y
NMDHIOV RESQU, RKEN, RQCPKUAFQ:  XMF WUD CNA UD ZM XWHN PQK UPB
PKZBUDF VQFS.  PU YVURQ ZIF MF EWR NEW UZL, PMUDVDDF ROUVS PRS
NEA, LX RASX BRS UHPIZ, CUEF Q YWWRSEUNV NESQU MG UEC VYSW.

  LMP MSE VHBPSE LEP BGMXV HOBP EL PRA SAPP MSE, SALAUDP ISE
RSKN UW RSE RLAR, DQFRMUDP FRS PSZBUDP VNA, LAC GMHDAUDZ IZ
VUZBSA LFMDQ YWR LFS USE YWWRSEUNF LKGARFMESB, PUVX BRS ZMM XKPLA
RCQYUHDF LUPQN E ULPRHIA, LWR PMHV NYP RSE RCQYO:

  GUEPP, BRS RCQYHQW IU FMGFBQ YVURQ RSEPASU, LWR UWRQ KFKUC FRS
GMWA UEWRX RSEQ RFLPHKR HFUW RSD ERAQ, YWR PMQ SDHPIP QKFSE QKSP
RYES XUIYUDF IG HCFI MSEBVRS WMNFR IQYC PRS SKWE ZMRAX HP USE
XIMDQ, YWR PSQ PUEM BHASE VUZBSA ZMBV UZ RSE RQYC GI YYST SQNY
PMY RLARKDHDF UEHD PMQF YWNFN KXNYKV PQP UDZM RSE SKQLEWR
BPUVF LB VRS VUBPARKR, HW PSQHKR ZM VUBPAR, PMY RMISA FSQNY
ENIOWR RSC SQRQUQ YVUSK PMS PPCLAPK NCQYFMESX HP USE VUZBSA
VHBPSEV RESQU.

  PMA SUWZ VNEBV NHBPSAN KP MSE PAQP EL PMY RMHPQ NELVMG MOWSHKW
XQPMA PDHPIPQRAC IIOPS PHFLPRKR MHX RYK PMWHIFM PRS
RADIMSIODHDF ZHUXPRQ RIOVN RSEN PMS EQFFBY HZ FRS PQQNHFL EB
PMQ HENRM UEES LAR IHV PNHKWRB VUEESC GRSHD RASKESWRUDT IQYX,
LAC GRS PRDHXV XIMDY HZ FRS AMYSW UCRSEUDZ IZL RSN HAUHWFMALPQ
FISPPB ZM YSQRMFHIWUWNQ HHWQ PRS GHTVQLX YEL LRYSGODF UW PMY
NIRMSPBV ADYS, ROUVS HFLPQL EWR KDPRSP NCELRSN KWHNAK DZMWNY
UIES PMS PREHKY IZ FRS PDEZMIC, FRS BEHAYEUDZ IZ FRS VUFYCRB
BXQFSHARDMF, LWR PMQ RMIVDDF UZ PMS PHFHESPPSK IOHRAEFDIB,
GUXVKR PMQ YHD, UHSYN IZ RMGM PRS KDBPLAP BMXX HZ FRS UHPSNELXY
UIDQ FMCPSA.

  XH PRS PQF UW, DOPM NBHXKR QKSP, LAR ILFT LASHKSKR ISEPSFU UD
YWWRSEFLWR, PMIOPI PRQ ERAR XRS UEC VMF ZM HZAR PMQH KFKUA, LWR
LFX NIOVN RMLAPK ZM NIXV ESLFMGQZRS PDELX RIOVN SQ UWXA
NHBPVUDF UD PMY RUDN, KWR PMS HWZS NHGFSUDP FM ZRS NYGDDF UZ PMY
ESKRBPRS NEZBVUDF PQQNHFX RIOVN RMLAPK ZM GMDAVUDF PRYSZ
SQXVL, EWR PMQ AHAARB VREUVB NDHSP ZM PMK SIHRQ UZ PMS PRSHRSEW
XMKYWR PMS PRAYPY HZ FRS LQXQ, PMS PREHKY IZ FRS PDEZMIA, LWR
LFB FOE MZRSC EHASE WUHVSP, YWNFR NUEDFS PRS ADYR ZM PMY
WMAUHLKR NBQUIOW HZ FRS LMXE ULCHKYCRROUVQ PRS XUDODF UZ PMY
NQZBSA UD PMK RHVFQWNY RIOVN FQEQ PMS HFLRQ UZ PMQ HMWQ GHNFBSP
RSKLE XMXB.

  FLBPXA, PRS HMDFMESC GI MSEPSFU MIC ZMHB VQUA SMGFBS PHVPQW HZ
RSEP YWNFK, DC FRS LUPQCPHUQ, SS RSEPSFU K FWHDW YWUQA LWR MIY
PRY RIOVN EQSH, PMWHIFU EXV RSW SHGSE KQENB, PRS VHHTSA LAW
XUGDDF RSENZ MP USE RMUVRIWZN:  KWR MIR XRS YWNFK IQFRSN EXMMF
RSW HPMSE VUZBSA RMUVRCAR, LAC IYEQ PRSHD QKSP SCDIMP LAR KKFSE
DOPM UQWA E LPCLAPK FQSA, HSEREFP SSKW DMGM PRS RCQYU IZ
YWWRSEFLWR UZ XUDF KFU:  YWR MIR XRS YWNFN GYSX NMGU EXV PMKHW
VHHTSA XHWSWYL, EWR GUWR E FSAELHNK HA LXV PMKHE PHUFSK HWXB,
ESHQCTSEUDP ISE WYW NMHVNVUPA, LAC GRS UEZSE XOUHQC RYKB.

                             PMY SWR
	EL XWN FDVK HZ


	RCQUQFHV HSEPUWYQ


NIEQ PSDUHW	VUGDDF UD LQDUPRHQCF.

NIEQ PNKRSEMDE	IHV SCMZRSN, EA NLHEHSE UZ MHV RIUUDHIRL.


QUHKRL	
	  XUCRL EZBARKDDF UW PMQ SLAHVRSW VIAY.
UKAMSP	


SA SQLN	Q NIOCPHKN EZBARKDDF HFUW PNKRSEMDY.

RMENSAX	RESBPSAC PU ZESRKDHDQ.


UXDGSE		
		
UKAMSP UKAMSP RK XMEX:  	  XHRL UZ VHW SWYFLWR RK XMEX.
		
HWFLWRW		


KNQU	
	  PSDSLAPB ZM UXDGSE.
RKWLHV	


ZMMNRPZMRA	Q NXUDW.

VHW HVUSKC HENPQBZ	K LMDEN.


WMDHW	
	  PRSHRSCRB.
VHXSHOB	


DOXVUKU	Q WMNAPCA ZASXUD OA FIXY RMGU EINESX.

	E FSEXHW CSHESPSCFUDP IQOAR. OEHQW:

WHLEVUWR	NKIFMPSE ZM PMQ SLAHVRSW VIAY.

RQVUK	NLNPIPQC PU ZESRKDHDQ.

HRQSQ	Y PRSHRSCRSPB.

LNRCQK	Q NIOCFWE RYWNO.

	XUCRP, HKFSP, LAN KZBARNKCFB, R.
	ZUESBPSE:
	L FHWW:
	GUEPF BHWW:
	PSWMWR XUCR:
	GUEPF TKFY:
	PSWMWR FEPK:


BRARY	HVUSKEP MIHLK RIAA PESRKDHDQB RIOCP LAC GRS
	ZUESBP UZ ENRKW.




	EL XWN FDVK HZ


QNG M



BRARK H	HWRMENW IZ UVUSKEP MIHLY.


	ARPQW HNSLAWI LAN KNKO

HWFLWRU	YV H ESHQCTSE, KNQU, MG NYL HZHC FMHL PELMHUW
	SQAMQYPMKR HQ XQ DOXV LMF TWZN E PMIOLEWR NCWYRL,
	LAN, KB PMIH LYKSPM, QUEDPKR OQ SCMZRSW, HR UHV
	LXSPVHDF, ZM SCYSC IY RASF: LWR PMSEQ SKPUDB HX
	LERWSPB. HQ XWHPMSE UKAMSP RS EQSHL EP BRMWZF, LWR
	ESZHCP PHQYEV ZIVNARXA UZ MHP HWHGUF: ZHW OQ FECP,
	RS EQSHB HS EHLGMNQXVK YP MIUY, HC, PH XHSYE UIES
	HEHZSEXA, BPYKB HS RSEQ YP MIUA HDASHF ZHW NQXV XWO
	PMQF EQSHUDP ZHW K FARFBQHLA UZ OQ VMCPM, PUEZ
	KDZLSEL RMZ PNIU PMS PFQXVUDZ IU LW US? OHV MIEPSP
	ENQ SESC VQPPQN PHW, SQVHRKB PUEZ BRSK YES ULHD
	DOPM PMKHN PYSKDDF, PMQK ENQ PLNPIZ BRSHD UQALPK,
	LAC GM ZUEP QWR DHRKEP RKENXA MHESC: VMF H, MHV
	SCMZRSD, PKUW LMZMHDF NARKE RHU LMF PWHCZU PHW PMY
	ROMDO SHV LAHULFX HR UHV NIDFMHXVL EES EL UORM
	XMNAC GI MHU EL M. VSPDKSP PMHV WUPMUDP FUEP MS PW
	FSARGMUNXVK ZDGSP HQ, PMS PIUQPMHDF PMQF ALFMES FKSK
	HQ MHB RIOCFARLARQ PSQHB PM ZYEA PWHO BS: RA SQPB
	HQ PAKR DOPM MHP RUDRV, LQEP HQ PMS HFLRQ UZ Y
	SCMZRSN, EWR, EL UORM EL UD MHU BHKB, HUDSP OQ
	PKCFUVMGX YMGM UK QNINQGMUW. PMHV HV MG, KNQU, PMQF
	PDHKSKB HQ YWR PMS PGHDHZ MT UA ZQFRSC, DMHRM O
	PMUDV DX RMGMHC UQ, SKPUDB PI UMFUDK YFKUDBP PMHV
	PSDSMGINK: H DOXV WU XUDFSE ARNIES MG, PMIOPI KQG M
	ADWY WU DOPS ESHQWK MIC ZU YXIDK MG.

KNQU	XWWRSE WMHQB HQ OELPQW, EIOC SWHPMSE.

HWFLWRI	ZU YFECP, KNQU, LAC GMIH LUEBF RSEN MIR OY RUVX
	PRYEQ HA HZ.

	ARPQW HVUSKW

UXDGSE	WUR, XHD! ROQF UQEQ XWO MSEY?

HWFLWRU	WMZMHDF: U KU CMZ FQIFMP ZM UQEQ LAQ ZMHDF.

UXDGSE	ROQF UQW EIO PMAR, VHW?

HWFLWRI	UENWE, VHD, H QU RSSFUDZ KIO ZM UQC PUEZ CMHRM ZIW
	UQRK, E FWZN HWDHWPMQ XWHPMSE UZ XWHNX, RMGM HNVARSPB.

UXDGSE	UQWSE, XHD, SQ SQZBSE QHFSWXKR, LAC VA RLNPIF QROUVY.

HWFLWRH	XUEXV D VYSZ EIOE RIZL EWR QYP MHLEV DOPM PMQH?
	ROQF HEIWDILF ZHCPHIR UKLK H PHARZ, BUEG M PRIOVN
	WMHQ ZM LHRM HSANWE?

UXDGSE	ADWY XWO NRSES XWHN ENS, PHD?

HWFLWRW	Z, VHD, SSEX YASS USEK HW AIOW HCNUECR.

UXDGSE	ADWY XWM LAPHWY RMIH, BHD?

HWFLWRU	YQ, XQPPQC PUER UHU U KC TAPHWQ EWURX HQ. D VWUY
	XWN LES OQ ASRKBP SCMZRSN EWR, UD PMK PARFBY
	WMWRMGHIW UT LXUIW, XWH LMINFR VI YWUC OQ. PRS
	WMHNPQXE UZ ALGMUWL EXVWYX EIO OQ SQZBSE, UD PMQF
	XWN LES PMA PHDBPXMCW LMZ BRS LEHQ PCKNMGHIW
	FQEQL RMZ YNYK OQ LXWZR, DSEQ PRSES ZCARZQ SCMZRSEP
	SQZCOVF MV: H UESK EL UORM UZ OQ ULPMSE UD HQ EL
	XWN LXLKHG, M WMAUSPX, EIOC NIUUDT VAPHWQ HK HB
	RAENSE ZM MHP EKSSEARRQ.

UXDGSE	ROQF, XMX!

HWFLWRM	WIUQ, RIUY, SVNSE SCMZRSW, EIO ENQ PWZ XWNAI DC FMHB.

UXDGSE	DOBF PMIO FLE OLARV UW HQ, GDXVKUW?

HWFLWRI	H QU WU GDXVKUD U QU PMQ KIODFSPP BUW UZ VHW
	WHNXLAW VQ SWXP RY REL OQ ULPMSE, LAR IK HB PREMDY
	K LUVFLUD PMQF LEEX LHRM L UQFRSC SKPMZ GDXVKURL.
	RYCP PMIO WUM CQ XWHPMSE, O DIOVN WUZ BYEQ PMHP RLAW
	PNIU PMQ ZREUYZ BUVB FMHX HPMSE UER GNFSAW IMF PMX
	ZMDFHA ZUE PYKUDP VM: ZMIO MELP CKUSAW IC FOEPSFU.

KNQU	XRYSM CELPQEP, SQ FEGMARF: ZHW XWHN ULPMSEB
	ESHQCTNEWNQ, SQ YF QWBHWW.

UXDGSE	SAM CK PI, H LEX.

HWFLWRI	H DOXV WUZ, BUVV U FSQYPS: XWH LUEXV RSEN HQ. OQ
	ULPMSE RMENPKW KIO UD MHX RUVB FI ZDGQ HK PWZW
	KRMNQFHIW: AIO UESK PCKURAC IA SDVQ Y HSELLAZ,
	MXBRHNUDF KWR MHKDDF PNIU HQ LFV FARFBQHLAVUEQ
	AMLFMGHKB. PRS PHHDMG UZ OQ ULPMSE PDWYB VPCUWI DW
	HQ, LAK D DOXV WU XUDFSE ARNIES MG: PMSEAPHWQ YXVWY
	HQ LHRM YSSEDMPSL EB HYK SQWMHQ K FARFBQHLA, HW
	IDSK HQ PMS HWZN EXVMZPQWE OQ ULPMSE SAZF HQ XQ
	PQBPQUARZ CMGM PUEG M DOXV ZI LMQ OA ZHWFMRAB.

UXDGSE	LAR DUEZ CUVZ BMII NM? XKP, ROAR PMQF HV PHARZ?
	RYXV, VHD, PQP XWO HD: U DOXV WUF BUWT VQ PWHMLSAW
	DOPM XWO AIO PRLFS UKLS PIUS HENZ MZ AIOC DUVV: U
	HEYK XWN, FQYSK HQ.

HWFLWRI	H DOXV WU UNCPRSW HZLARW KIO PMLA SQWMHQB HA PHW OQ ZIIW.

UXDGSE	PKZ QIO DOPM MHO, QIO UXW VIZ.

KNQU	HV UXW VIZ OQ ESNYCR? UIBP PCHA, H MKLA SHXM CX
	PQQPM HW AIOE PSEGDRQ. ZIC VY RMGM UX WVN UQBPSE!
	RS YWNFR WMZ UESK PHIYS PMNU E YWCR.

	YSAHCF HWFLWRU YWR KNQU

UXDGSE	HV MG KSAR XH? SQIDW AIO ZM PDWY HFUW HQ? O DUVX
	HREXMD XWHN NEDARABV, LAW KQP IDSK WU PMIOLEWR
	NCWYRL RAMGRSE. RUXFL, RKWLHV!

	ARPQC RARDUB

RKWLHV	NQXVX EIOC DHWPRHG?

UXDGSE	NYL RMZ RMENSAB, PRS NIEQX RESBPSAE, RSEQ PH XHSYE DOPM HQ?

RKWLHV	XH FSQYPS XWO, MK HP RSEQ YZ BRS WIHW LAK DHTHWFMRAB
	QNRQBV ZM XWO.

UXDGSE	NQXV MHU HW.

	YSMG RKWLHV

	ZCUVX LQ Y ZIIW NYK YWR ZMUIWSWY PMY RESBPVUDF HV.

	ARPQC NUENSSP

RMENSAV	PWZC IHWWHC ZW XIOC DHWPRHG.

UXDGSE	ZIIW UIRLHKHN RMENSAX, RUEPB PMA RYR RARX QF PMY
	RAD NIOCP?

RMENSAB	PRSESL RU WYRL EZ BRS WMHNP, BHD, LMZ BRS UXR WYRB:
	PMQF HV, PMY HVN NIEQ HV LQDUPRKR XQ MHX EIODFSE
	SCMZRSC PRS RAD RIAQ YWR PMESY HN PION SIXUDF VHWRV
	UESK FHZ BRSHBASSKV HCFI XUXNAFQWE YSUVY RMGO SHU,
	ROHXA SLARV LAR CKSARHAP SWCMDM PRS RAD RIAY
	PMSEAPHWS RK PDGSP PMQH ZIIW SAKLQ PW YLARKW.

UXDGSE	NQW AIO PQXV UG WHLEVUWR, PMK RIASP NKIFMPSE, SQ
	LQDUPRKR DOPM RSN PQFRSW?

RMENSAX	H, WU ZUC PRS NIEQV RLNPIPQE, RSE WMHLUD, XH XUSKB
	RSC, SKHDF KSSE PNIU PMKHC NNENVSP SCKR ZMPKPMSE,
	PMQF PRY RIOVN UESK ZUXVWYKR RSE SVOSA, HW UESK KDKR
	ZM BPYK SQMHWR RSE. PRS HV QF PMQ RIOCP, LAR WW
	SABV SQXUSKW IP USE NANBQ PUER UHV WYW RLNPIPQN EWR
	RASKC PYW FLKDSP XUSKN KB PRSK WW.

UXDGSE	ROSEY RUVB FRS UXW VIAA SDGY?

RMENSAB	PRSE XYK RS HV LFESKNK OC FRS ZUESBP UZ ENRKA, LWR
	Q ULAQ OSEWE HQW DMGO SHU LAC GRSES PMQK VUSK VUEQ
	PMY HVN WHVMR UWZW IP ADFFLWR: PMQK LEQ OLAX ZIODF
	PKCFSAHQA UXUDQ ZM MHH QSKWE NKK, YWR UFYSZ BRS GMHQ
	NQESSABVXA, EL PMQK KDK DC FRS ZIVNAR YWNSW.

UXDGSE	ROQF, XWO NESBPSA ZMUIWSWY SQZUES PMA RYR NIEQ?

RMENSAB	HENWE, WI H, VHD LAK D NQHQ ZM QNAMKUCF XWO NMGU E
	UQZBSE. U KI TDGAR, VHE, PQRESFBQ ZI OWRSEBPLAW
	PMQF XWHN XWNAPKC SWHPMSE HWFLWRI MQFU E KDPHHXMGHIW
	ZM WMHQ UD KDVPOHPSN KFKUDBP HQ ZM PCK Y ULXV.
	ZMUIWSWY, VHD, H DCSPFBA PHW OQ NCKRMG LAR IQ PUEZ
	SPNQHSB HY RMGMIMF XHHQ SCIYAR VUCT PRLFF LQBOHP MHU
	RYXV. XWHN SCMZRSD HB LMF XWNAF KWR PQWRSE LAW,
	ZUW EION SIXK, H YWNFC VA SUYPM ZM ZUUV MHU, QV H
	UOBP, ZUC HX WDW MIWUHN, UG RS WMHQ UD: PMSEAPHWY,
	IOZ MT UA XIXQ PW XIO, M DQUS RMGRSC PU YQBNLUDZ QIO
	DOPMLF, PMQF KHPMSE XWO UDIMP BPYK MHU TWHU MHV
	UDPQWRHQCF HW SCWZE VMNI RHVPDQNY RASF LP RS PUEXV
	NHD UCFI, HC FUEG MG ML E PMUDZ IP UHV WYR LQYCNO
	LAN KBFIZQPRSN EFKUDBP OQ DOXV.

UXDGSE	RMENSAV, H PMLAQ GRSA PHW PMA XIXQ PI UY, RMHRM
	PMIO PRLFF ZUDK D DOXV UIBP VDWRXA ESAMMGK. H UEW
	OQPSFU WUGMRQ UZ OQ SCMZRSEP FHEHHXS RSEKHA LWR
	UESK XQ NARKERLAC IQYRL FLXMHNKR ZM KDBVNLRK MHU TWHO
	MG, LMP MK HP ESPUXMFK. HXV PQXV PMYS, RMENSAB:
	MG HV PMS PFMLVHWRABP XWNAP ZASXUY WZ LNEWNA, PNFX
	UZ QUVMGMUW, LA ARGDIOP SUOFLZMW HP ASKWE UQRL
	ZIIW FECPL, E PSNCQP LAK GUVFLWUHL WMCFDHSKN EFKUDBP
	HQ MHL RQFHNLF SCMZRSC: PRSESZUES HLQ POE
	KDBRESGMUW H MKN EL VUAP PMIO KDRVM TESYE MHL RQRY
	EL MHL PUDPKN. EWR PMIO RYCP SQBP XUIY ZMF ZHW UG
	PMIO WIBP MHU QWA BXDIMP KDVPNERQ HW UG RS WI WUZ
	UHPIGMXA PDQNS RHUPSFU UW PMYS, RS DOXV HEQNGMPS
	KFKURLZ BRSQ SE ZIHXHR, ACFNET FRSQ SE XIUY
	PCQYRMSEIOV RKSMDQ YWR RASKN SQYSK PMYS GMXV RS
	UEPM FQAR PMA XUGQ SE XIUK HWRHDQRM CQYRL HW MZRSW
	ZUD, H ELLHES PMYS, LAN KBUHXZ CMGM PQYEP H VHSYE
	MG, PMSEK HL RMZ UWS PW XIODF LAR VI XUVFLWUHL PMHV
	NKA XDGUDI. D PHQYQ VMF SCMZRSNSX WP UHU LMZ
	PRIOVN U KALZMUHPY MHC MM ZRSQ YP RK HV, H UOBP
	LXHLU EWR RYSH LAC GMIO UHLF BWZE GLFQ YWR YWWRSE.

RMENSAV	H QU RSENGMXA FVKN M DQUS RMGRSC PW XIO. UG RS WMHQ
	ZMUIWSWY, UVV FDGS RHU MHP HYKHQCF: UG KSSE RS ZI
	LFUWQ YFKUD, UVF AKSSE DCSPFBA PHW HEOGQ HHWQ: YWR
	XH ZIK VYSZ EIOC DHWPRHG!

UXDGSE	ULESRYXV, ZIIW RMENSAB.

	YSMG RMENSAB

	WUY ZUVV U BPHD PMHV FKHQBPSE: H MHZK H PRLFX BYS
	LA ARW IP UHU ZUC HE XIOX, AQP D VWUD WMZ ROX,
	UEPQL RMZMHDF UIES PMLA RS. KQP MSP PKCFSA, RASKW
	BRMIUXKR LAW KQP SAENRAN, GNFX UU AMXSA RKGDRQ, UZ
	LFX BHWPB ARRMLAGMDFXA SQXUSKN, KWR UDRKKR XH UORM
	UD PMS RQYCP UZ PMY RHWVN, LAR KPHQRUKXVX WT UX WDW
	HSHZSA, ROM XSPG QWUR OHU, PMQF U KU QBFIZQPRSW
	UHPHDHPSC: VMF MG PRLFF AMZ SQ XH XUDF PMHV
	DCSPFBSE PRLFB NSAEN LFF: AMZMHDF ESUQUDB LMF PMQF
	D VUDNVQ PRS XMQ ZMHPMSE ROMDU RWY UVV FU YXMMF.

	YSMG




	EL XWN FDVK HZ


QNG M



BRARK HU	VYNC LAPHWQ PRS NIEQP HLFQNY.


	ARPQC NASUK LAR CHXLFUDW

RQVUK	U HEYK PMYS, WHLEVUWR, XRYSM CQ WWO, SQ HQWSX.

WHLEVUWR	RKEN RQVUK, U PRWY UIES UHCPM PUED U QU UHBPESBV UZ
	LAR DIOVN XWO AQP O DSEQ HSEDHSE? NASABV XWM NIOVN
	PQQNM UQ PU ZHWPKF Q LQDUPRKR ULPMSE, XWO UHLF CMZ
	SAENC US RWY ZM ESHQCTSE LAK QBZNEHWKDALWE FSQYLHES.

RQVUE	USEKHD U PSQ PMIN FIXSPM CA RMZ DOPM PMA PNFX NKHPIZ
	PMQF U VIXQ PRSK. HT UA OWNSA, PMQ XLAHVRSN GQFRSW,
	UEC VLAHVRSC GOE NANBQ, PRS NIEQ OQ ULPMSE, XH PMIO
	UERVM TYSR LGMXV DOPM HQ, M DIOVN UESK FQIFMP OQ
	XUSK ZM FQEQ PMA ZQFRSN PHW UHRA: XH YWNFRVZ BMIO,
	UG PMQ PNHPM UZ PMA XIXQ PI UY RSES PH WDIMPYHHLXA
	PQHTSEKR EL UHRA HV ZM PMYS.

WHLEVUWR	RYXV, O DUVF UHWPKZ BRS WMWRMGHIW UT UK QBPQFQ, PW
	ESHIMDK HW AIOEP.

RQVUY	KIO ADWY OQ ULPMSE UEPM WU RMUVC VMF U, DHW WURA HV
	VUEQ ZM UESK: LAC, GNHXA, ROAR RS KDSP, PMIO PRLFZ
	SQ MHP RKHN, PHW ROQF RS UEPM FQEQA LNYA ZWHC MOE
	ULPMSE HSNPHWRQ, O DUVS NARRKC PRSQ YFKUD UD
	LUPAQMHIC LQ OUDS RUWIOD, H DOXV LAR DRSD U SCQYY
	PMQF UYPM, SAM CQ PHNC UUWBPSE: PMSEAPHWQ, HX
	XRYSP CHXQ, HK WQYW SHXQ, SQ HSEWE.

WHLEVUWR	PNIU RSWNAPHWPM O DUVB, NWO, LAW VKSHVS PZHCPB. XQP
	HQ PSY RUEZ BMHDA XWO IZ LLFVUDF UD XUSK?

RQVUQ	UENWE, H GDHPMYS, WI, ZM UQEQ PHHWZ CMGUEX: LMF
	XUSK WU UQD UD FWZR KENRABP WUC WU ZHNPMSE UD PHHWZ
	RAMGRSC PUEW DMGR PLUQPX WU L FHES LXHLM PMIO UYKBP
	UD MIWUHN WMHQ UZU LFKUD.

WHLEVUWR	ROQF PRLFX LY HHN PHHWZ, BRSW?

RQVUL	FQP HL VHF QWR UIDQ PMK PWZR IIOPSDOPA ZUCPNAA PWHO
	RSC DRSAS, PMQF RSD PUGPB UQE OARRQZUCPM SQ SSPZMRYR KAMLFXA.

WHLEVUWR	O DIOVN RY WMNFW VH XU, ZHW RSC SARAPMGL EES
	UHPIGMXA UHPHFLRQN, KWR PMQ SIOCFUGNF LXUDR DIULA
	WIPM UIBP UHBPYEK HR USE IDZFB PW YIUAR.

RQVUQ	FHV PCHA ZUC PMIPS PMQF PRQ HYESP ULHD PRS PNQCNY
	UQEQP RUWSPF, QWR PMHXQ PUEP BRS UQEQP RUWSPP BRS
	UQEQB SSEK OXVULXIHNKRXA.

WHLEVUWR	ALA, WWY PMIO ZISPF ZWHU THWFMRAX HZLMDQ PW
	ALFMESL: PHWFMRA ESDIRL UD IDZFX HZ FRS YWNSW,
	WUG MC FRS VURAQUARPB UZ ALFMES.

	ARPQC PIORMBPUWY

RQVUL	AW? YRSW LQFHNS RQFM UKNQ Y ULHD NCQYFMES, UQE XRS
	WUM TA ZHWFMRA ULXV UDZM PMA PHDQ? PMIIFU RQFHNY
	UEPM IDSKA NX RMG ZM UFIOF QF ZHWFMRA, UEPM WUZ
	ZUCPNAS PARG MC FMHL PWZB FM WMF UZZ FRS ENFIHQCF?

WHLEVUWR	UDRKKR, PMSEK HL PHWFMRA ZMI MENN GHW ALFMES, ROAR
	ZUCPNAQ HYESP ALFMESL RQFHNLF PMQ RMFPQWHZL UZ
	ALFMESX RMG.

RQVUE	FSEKNSKCFHNQ PMHV HL RMZ ZUCPNASP YWDE RAMGRSC, SMF
	ALFMESX RMI HSCNKHSKPM IOC WQFHNLF DOPB ZMI WNFX
	ZM ESELUW UZ LHRM ZIWVSPPSL EWR UEPM PSCF PMHV
	ALFMNEF UHW IOC DRSPBZMRA ZUN EXNYKB PRS NIFASPX HZ
	PMA PWZV UB PRS ROQPBPUWY HZ FRS DOPB. MID WWY,
	DOZ! CMHPMSE NYWRSE XWO?

ZMMNRPZMRA	UHBPESBV, XWO UHLM QIUQ YNYQ ZW XION PQFRSW.

RQVUY	NSEQ KIO UQRK PMQ HSPPSDFSE?

ZMMNRPZMRA	WU, XQ UHRA MIWUHN, LMG M NYB LDK ZM WMHQ ZUW EIO.

WHLEVUWR	ROSEA SQYCWKR XWM FUEZ MQFU, PWZX?

ZMMNRPZMRA	UZ Q NSEFQUD ADDIMP PMQF XRHWQ SE OHV MIWUHN PMQK
	RYES ZIIW FEWNYESP LAR VYWES XQ MHP RUWIOC PRS
	UOBPENR DEL ALIFMP: WUD OXV BPLAC GI HZ, BRS
	FEWNYESP RYES ALIFMP LAC GRS UOBPENR DEL ZIIW, LAW
	KQZ CEL WUZ BRS ADDIMP ZUEPYWCW.

RQVUE	UWY HEIXQ KIO PMQF, UD PMK PESQF RSEF UZ XWHN
	ADWYSAKIY?

WHLEVUWR	YK, UQWSA, WWY NAUOOZSA XWHN DOVRIU.

ZMMNRPZMRA	BPLAW KIO XMPM ZUCPU RWY: BPWHEQ XWHN RMUDL, EWR
	XRQYC SX ZIOC SQYCRB PUEG M QU Y EALSK.

RQVUQ	LX WHN SQENRV, UG RY UEC GRSC, MMIN LCP.

ZMMNRPZMRA	XQ OQ ADKLSEK, OG U UEK DZ, BRSD U RYES LMG MZ AIO
	XRQYC SQ ZUEZ BUEG ML RMZ, XWN LES WUF ZHWXRHWW: LW
	UIES NYB PMHV EDUPIP BRYENUDT VE OHV MIWUHN, ZUE RY
	RASKE RKN LAX WD HP US RKN, RS UER VYWCW MG YNYK
	SQZUES KSSE RS LEC ZMIPS FEWNYESP HW PMQF UOBPENW.

RQVUE	FDHPMYS, ROI HBP PMQF PMIO HQLASPZ?

ZMMNRPZMRA	UWQ PUEZ MVN PNKRSEMDE, KION PQFRSN, SIXSP.

RQVUQ	UA ZQFRSEP XUSK HV ARIOPI ZM MIWUHN MHH: QWUIFO!
	PHQYA DI UHWY HP UHU XWNFX LY RMHZSKR ZUC PYLQFHIW
	UWY HZ FRSPS NKEX.

ZMMNRPZMRA	PMQ HHWS HMGQ, ZUEF ZWZXB UQA WMZ PHQYY DHVASX YUEZ
	DOPS HQW RU ZWZVUPRXA.

RQVUQ	LQ OQ ZWHPM, PMIO LEKQBP PCHA ZUE PUDRQ PMA SMGFBY
	DOZ BUEF ZWZXB UESK NYB VUVARRQC, GRS VUZBSA ZUUXSEX
	PMQF DOPS HQR UKLQ HYESP K FESQF PRWY. RSES WMHQB
	UIRLHKHN SA SQLN.

WHLEVUWR	DOPM MHB HIOPM UNXV UZ RARX.

RQVUY	NMHRM RS DOXV FHZ MA NL, EP HDIYHRL PAKR PMKHW EIODF.

WHLEVUWR	PMAR PRLFX NQ SA RYRBRNEOBKR.

RQVUY	LXV PMQ SQPPQC DS PUEXV SQ PMQ HHWQ HENEQFQLXY.

	ARPQN SQ SQYO

	XMD UIOC, HUWVHAHN SQ SQYO: NUEPB PMA RYRB?

SA SQLN	ULHD HEUDRQBV, XWO MKLA SHXM CMNI PWZR VZHCP.

RQVUE	LZHCP! UZ ROQF WMXUHN?

SA SQLN	ROQF WMXUHN, UQNKU! MWY PRLFV U LAXRSE XWO?

WHLEVUWR	EL DOF QWR ZUCPNAY RUVX.

ZMMNRPZMRA	HW EL PMK RSPGMDUSP RKNCYS.

RQVUY	NASX BKUC: GUEZ CEL FLDK UW DOPM Q FWHRYX.

ZMMNRPZMRA	ALK, OG U EQSH WUM CE WLAY,

WHLEVUWR	PMIO XUPSBP PMX WVN BHASX.

SA SQLN	XWN LUQPY HQ, FLKDSP: O DIOVN UESK ZMVN XWO IZ PWZW
	DCSPFBUDZ, DMHRM XWO MKLA SHXZ BRS VHPIZ MZ.

WHLEVUWR	XWM FASF NB PRS UQWLSE UZ PMY RESBPVUDF.

SA SQLN	O DUVB FASX AIO PMQ SKPUDDUDF LAK, DG UF TSAELY
	XWHN FLWKPRHGX, EIO UQE XYS PMY SWR ZUC PRS SQBP HV
	KQZ BI WU YWR RSES, ROSEQ KIO ENQ, PRSK YES WMUHDF
	ZM HSNPHWU HZ.

RQVUY	NASB, FRS SQIDWLUDP, FUEG MV RQYN KWR LMDHKR.

SA SQLN	PMSEQ RIUSP LA UXC ILA LAR IHV PMESS PUWB,

RQVUK	U WMNFC IQFRM PMHV SQIDWLUDZ DMGU EW UVN FQSA.

SA SQLN	PMESS HWHHSW EIODF HQW, UP ABWASSACF PDWYPM LAR GESPSWNY.

WHLEVUWR	DOPM VMXVX HC FRSHD RADQB, LK HG QWUDW NAZM LFB UAR
	XQ PMSPS HESPSCFB.

SA SQLN	PMY SVNSPZ MZ FRS PMESY RESBPSAR DMGM RUENSSP, PMY
	NIEQX RESBPSAC DMHRM RMENSAV HA L UIHQCF PMESR OHU
	LAC VWHEQ PMESY HP UHV DHLB, PMQF PMSEK HB XMGFBY
	MIHS UZ VUPA UD MHH: BI MS PSESKC GRS PSWMWR, LAW
	XH PMQ PMHCR. XWWRSE PMQK VUQ PRS ZHHW UXC ILA,
	PMKHN PQFRSC, HYEUDP VMNR HMGUGNF WISA IXSE PMQH
	PMQF LFB FRS SQMIVNSEB PYES RHV FECP DOPM RYSHUDZ.

WHLEVUWR	LFEL!

ZMMNRPZMRA	LMZ CUEG MB PRS PHHWM, CUWVHAHC, PUEZ BRS FLKDSP
	UESK XUBP?

SA SQLN	ROQ, ZMHB PUEG M PHQYY IZ.

ZMMNRPZMRA	PMHL HQC UYK PDWY DOPSE SSKWE NKK: OG MB PRS GUEPZ
	GMHQ PMQF KSSE H MQYCR SCQYVDDF UZ DHLB NYB VZHCP
	ZUN SKNHKB.

RQVUY	UD H, H GWHUHPS PMYS.

WHLEVUWR	LMG MB PRSES LAK QXBA SUWPV ZM PSQ PMHB LWHEQC UHLMD
	UD MHB VDKSP? HV PMSEQ KQP LAMZRSC RMZSP HFUW
	DHLVESYEUDP? VUEXV RY PSQ PMHX RESBPVUDF, WMHLUD?

SA SQLN	XWO UHLG, MZ AIO BPYK RSES ZUE RSEK HB PRS FSQNY
	EFZHUDPQN GHW PMY RESBPVUDF, LAC GRSK YES ESKNQ ZW
	HSNPHWU HZ.

RQVUY	KUWRKE, PHNQ, PRSK YES WMUHDF: SAF ML RWY BPYK LAR VYS MG.

	UFIODHPR. ARPQC RIAA PESRKDHDQ, XUCRX, HNSLAWI,
	RMENSAL, EWR QFPQWRLAPB

NIEQ PNKRSEMDQ	DIUY HR: LUDRQ PMQ KIOPM DOXV WUM TY SCFESQFKR, MHB
	WYR FSEUV UW MHL PHWNYCRRABV.

WHLEVUWR	HV XWWRSE PMQ HLA?

SA SQLN	KSAR RS, UQNKO.

RQVUY	LFLP, RK HB PWZ XWNAZ! KQP RS XUIYB VMNRQBVUNXVX.

NIEQ PNKRSEMDE	IWY WUD, RLNPIPQN EWR WMHLUD! ENQ KIO NCSHP MMGRSW
	ZM PSQ PRS DCSPFBUDZ?

WHLEVUWR	YK, OQ VUKPS, PH ZSAELQ KIO IDSK HL SAKLY.

NIEQ PNKRSEMDE	KIO DOXV FQEQ VUZBSA RKVUPIG MD UG, M NQC FASX AIO
	PMSEK HB VMNM IWVV HC FRS UQD. UR FMGX WZ FRS
	RMLFSADFSEX EIOPM O DIOVN ULUD KDBVNLRK MHC, TMF RS
	DOXV WUM TY SCFESQFKR. PHQYQ GI MHU, FLKDSP PSK HZ
	XWM NLA UISK MHO.

RQVUQ	NLFS UHU MHPMSE, ZIIW UIRLHKHN SA SQLN.

NIEQ PNKRSEMDV	KH XI: HXV WUM TQ SX.

SA SQLN	UIRLHKHN PMQ RUEXVARPKC, PRS HEUDRQBVSP NQXV ZUW EIO.

HWFLWRI	H QFPQWR PMQH DOPM LFS NSPHSQM LAW VMFX.

WHLEVUWR	XWNAT ILA, UESK XWM NUEXVARPKR NUENSSP PMY RESBPSAW?

HWFLWRU	WU, ZKUE HDHWNSPP RK HB PRS PKRANEB NUEXVARPKD: H
	WMHQ LMG MA, LX HPMSEV RM, ZM ZWE DOPM MHC MRS
	BPESDFPM UZ OQ XWMFO.

RQVUY	KIODF PKCFSAUQW, AIOE PGHDHPB ENQ PWZ XMVN ZUW EIOW
	KQENX. EIO UESK PSAR NCHAS FWHUZ UZ PMHV UQRL
	BPESDFPM: UG XWH LYN XWHNPSFU DOPM XWHN QKSP HW
	ADYR XWHNPSFU DOPM XWHN HOKIHQCF, PMA PQYW HZ AIOW
	KNSKCFHNY RIOVN WMNAPSX AIO ZM Q UHWY SAMLF
	ARPQEHDHPS. RY HEYK XWN, UHW XWHN WYR LYEQ, PW
	QHSCQNQ KIOW HDW LEPAZQ LAK IDGY HSKC PMHL EZBQHTF.

WHLEVUWR	WI, XWNAP VHD XWHN ESFHFQGMUW PRLFF AMZ PMSEAPHWY
	SQ UHPHDHPSR: DY RUVB UYEK HZ MHN LHMG ZM PMK RIAY
	PMQF PMY RESBPVUDF UHPIF CMZ ZI ZUCDENW.

HWFLWRI	H SQPSQRO EIO, FHDUPR HQ WUZ CMGO EIOE RENW
	PMIOPIPB ROSEKHD U WMAUSPB HQ HMNI POHBFQ, ZI WARX
	XH ULHD LAR KBWASSACF FLKDSP LAQ ZMHDF. LMF BQP
	XWHN ULHD QKSP LAK IARFBY RHVRSV PW YMGM UQ PI UX
	PCUKX: NRSESUD UG M VA PIHSAC, GRSES HV LMZ MRA
	PRQUKR PMQF NYL RKSSE PDQNHIHL UG VDXVKR, LMZ MRA
	RKKN PMQF NYX RUVVUDF ZM SQ XH: H VUEXV WI OQ
	PNHKWRL RW YWHDF, ZUD H UESK WURA ZM FLHQCF HQ, PMY
	YWNSR WI HDUHNA, ZHW UD MG H MKLA RMZMHDF UWXA UD
	PMY RHWVN U GUVF NF E FSQNY, RMHRM UQQ XQ SQPPQW
	LHZSVUKR ROAR H MKLQ HKNK HP QHTZQ.

WHLEVUWR	PMA SMGFBS PPCARPFM PUEG M UESK, O DIOVN MG RYES DOPM XWO.

RQVUY	LWR UHRA, ZM QEY HMF RSEP.

WHLEVUWR	ULES XWO NASS: FNEE OQYSKD U SQ RKRQDGKR UD XWO!

RQVUY	KIOE RQYCPV RSPHDSP SQ DOPM XWO!

RMENSAB	RIUY, RRSES HV PMHV XWNAZ VLFFLCF PMQF HV XH
	RKVHWHHL ZM VUY RMGO SHV UIPMSE QYCPO?

HWFLWRH	WQYWK, VHC SMF MHX RUVS UQFM HD UF Q UIES UIRKBP YWDEUDZ.

NIEQ PNKRSEMDE	KIO PRLFB FWE LMZ MRA ULXV.

RMENSAL	RI, H NYWSLAZ QIOD PNERQ, XWH LUEXV WUP QCFESQF MHO
	ZM E LQRUWC, GUEP MKLS PI UDIMPUVE ZSELHKNKR MHO
	PNIU L UHDBP.

HWFLWRU	YW AIO HQLA ZM UIDQ HQ LUPQW, EIO PRIOVN WUP MKLY
	UIDQKR HQ SQZUES: LMM QIUQ KIOC DYKB.

WHLEVUWR	WUR OSENMSAB LQ POE PHYSW, KIODF UQW!

RQVUK	U YWNFK D RYES UDGDVHLXQ, PM WQFRM PMS PPCUWZ
	PAXVWY XQ PMA SKP.

	PMQK DCSPFBY

WHLEVUWR	H YBWASSACF XWNAT ILA!

RQVUK	UG U UEN K PMNARKCSUXG MC UUDY SKQ, M DLA PQXV ROW
	PRIOVN WIDW.

	PRIOM. QUENSSP HV PMWHDW

NIEQ PNKRSEMDA	DI UHWA, RI UHWY.

HWFLWRW	XSP, M VSPYSRM XWHN PDQNK: H QU WUZ QQP RYXV SCQYPMKR.

NIEQ PNKRSEMDE	IWY WIBP PMIO, RMENSAB?

SA SQLN	RS NQWLMZ PHQYQ, IA XHWW.

NIEQ PNKRSEMDQ	VQYE RHU YNYK. ROQF HV PMA WQUQ, KIODF UQW?

HWFLWRW	ZNSLAWI, OQ VUKPQ PRS XWNAPKBP XHW UP LHD WHNXLAW VQ SWXB.

NIEQ PNKRSEMDV	D YWNFC GMIO MKNBP SQAR XHC FH XIUQ HLA ASPS:
	PMY RHWVN SPPQQHC GOE ULPMSE MIWUHNQLSA,
	LMG M KDN GUDR IHU BPUVB UUDY SRAOQ:
	PMIO PRIOVNBP UESK SQZBSE FSQYPSC IY RMGM PMHV RYSW,
	UERVZ BMII NSPRQWRKR PNIU LAMZRSE RIOPS.
	LMF ZENQ PRSY RASB FMIN LCP K FLFFLCF XWMFO:
	O DIOVN PMIO UERVZ BUXC IY HU LWUPMSE ULPMSE.

	YSAHCF NIEQ PNKRSEMDQ, GNEUD, LAN VQ SQYO

RQVUY	NSEK H OQ ULPMSE, WMO, YIOVN D KM ZMHB?

HWFLWRI	H QU UIES HEIOC GM XS PHD WHNXLARV XHW,
	MHX EIODFSPP BUW LAR DIOVN WUM QUEDFQ PUEM QLFVUDF,
	ZM SQ KNHZPQR IKHC PU ZESRKDHDQ.

WHLEVUWR	OQ ULPMSE XUSKR VHD WHNXLAN KP RHV XHNF,
	LAN KXV PMY RHWVN NYX HT UA ZQFRSEP UHWR:
	UEK D SQZUES ADWYC FMHX EIODF UQR UHV XHW,
	H VMINFR IKLK PDGAR MHC MQYEP NAZM ARPCQYGMSP,
	SES RS PMINFC GMOP RKLK SARFMESW.

RQVUK	FARFBQ RIOVHW,
	SAF MV PM ZUEDA MHU QWR ARWMHNKFS RHU:
	OQ ULPMSEP EIOPI LAR KDLHIHL KDPHHXMGHIW
	BPMDEV HQ QF RSENP. BHD, XWO MKLY RASV NSPSESKW:
	UG XWI NI YYSZ EIOE HWHUHPSV HA FIXY
	LMG MHLFBK, YX EIO UESK YSRQKRKR LFS FWHUHPS,
	XWHN UHBPESBV PRLFX LS REFZE.

WHLEVUWR	PKCFSAUQW,

	IDGDDF MHU Q RMKUA UWHU MSE RADQ

	RYEN PMHV ZUC HY, HRA IOZ MP LOHPB DOPM ZUCPNAY,
	PMQF WMNFK IDGQ HHWQ, SMF PMQF RSE RLAN VQNEV HQLAB.
	PRLFX NK PM, WWO?

RQVUY	                  LA. ZENQ KIO RYXV, ULHD PKCFSAUQW.

HWFLWRM	WLA U DMZ LEK, O PMLAE KIO? OQ SQZBSE FECPB
	ENQ YXV PMWHDW WIDW, LAC GUEZ CMHRM RSES BPLARV HF
	HV LMF Q AMUDFQUD, Q USEA SUGASSPB LXUDQ.

WHLEVUWR	RS NQXVL HB LQNQ: IE ZDHRK PAXV DOPM OQ ZUCPNASP
	UVF LVE MHO CUEP MY RIOVN. KDW KIO NQXV, VHW?
	VHW, EIO UESK DCSPFBKR RYXV LAW ISKCPREWYW
	UIES PMLA XWHN ARQHHKB.

RQVUY	NUVX AIO ZI, WMO?

WHLEVUWR	UESK DOPM XWN. UENQ KIO RYXV.

	YSAHCF WHLEVUWR LAR NASUK

HWFLWRW	YUEF TELVHUW UEDFB PRSPS RYDIMPL HZHC UQ ZUWFIY?
	M DLAWUP BHSYE ZM RSW, EQP PRA HDPKR WMAUSEARRQ.
	H ZWZW HNSLAWI, PMIO ENZ MSKCPREWYW!
	HW RMENSAX HE PIUQPMHDF RYYESE UQBPSEB PRSY.

	ESARPQN SQ SQYO

SA SQLN	ZIIW VHD, H WI UD PNHKWRPRHG WMNAPSX AIO
	ZM SAKLQ PMHP HFLRQ. LFSQMG XWO MKLK RSPSESKW
	MHPI WMOBARNKGMUW, PCHA EFFSLNPS LAN VIXY,
	KQP BMNM HL RWY PMK RIASP WMWRMGHIW
	PMQF RS UHBRUWBPNHSP LFB FUEZ QIO UESK WIRA.
	PMK RIAK HP ROUHWIOX RUEP MK HV HWRYSW,
	UIES LHMGX EIO ZM WMWNKHSK PMLA M GH XHSYE UZ.

HWFLWRI	H PMLAE KIO, VHN: EWR, HEYK XWM, FASB UQ PMHB:
	ROMDM IZ FRS ZCW YEL NKIFMPSE UZ PMK RIAY
	PMQF RSES NYL EZ BRS DCSPFBUDZ?

SA SQLN	RAMGRSE RHV NKIFMPSE, UG RY HOKIQ SQ OLARAEP
	LMZ QQP UDRKKR PMA SSPPSD HP RHV NKIFMPSE
	PMY HPMSE HV NKIFMPSE ZM PMQ SLAHVIR NIEQ,
	LAR ISEK RQPKUWR XQ RSN HLHEHUDF IWNSA,
	ZM EQSH MHV RLNPIPQC NIUFEWA ROHXA SIXSP
	ENK RQYESC PUEC FRS ALFMNEX LUWW IP LHVPQEP.
	LMG M NQC FASX AIO PMQF UZ FLPQ PMHV NIEQ
	UEPM FQAR KDPHSAELHNK PKURLP MHV PKCFSA DUQRY,
	PDIOWRKR HFUW WU MZRSN EDPOUARZ
	LMZ BUEZ BRS HSHZSA HEKUPS RSN PHW RSD SHDFMSP
	LAR GMGE OSE ZUE RSE ZIIW ULPMSEB VYEY
	LAW, IC UA XUGS, RHV UQVURQ FKUDBP PMA SKNX
	DOXV LHWVARXA SCQYA GHWPM. VHN, PENQ KIO RYXV:
	RSESLUPQD, HA L SQZBSE YWNSC GUEC FMHB,
	H VUEXV RKVHES UIES XUSK LAK VWUNXKRPK UZ XWO.

HWFLWRI	H ESBP UORM XMNARKC FW XIO: ULES XWO NASX.

	YSMG SA SQLN

	PMHL UOBP U GWHC MRS BHIYK HCFM ZRS BHMZRSW
	PNIU ZQNECF NIEQ NAZM Q FEWLAM TWHPMSE:
	LMP MQYSKAFE WHXLFUDW!

	YSMG




	EL XWN FDVK HZ


QNG M



BRARK HOV	E NWZU HC FRS FEFLRQ.


	ARPQC NASUK LAR CHXLFUDW

RQVUY	NOE, WMHLUD! ROE, WHXLFUDR! NHFDK UESK HQCNA! WMZ Y NHWW?

WHLEVUWR	WUZ MRA ZM PMWHN YF Q WIZ.

RQVUL	AM, ZOE YWCRL EES ZMH ZESDMIOB PM XQ RELF QNYA OZHW
	NMEP PMWHR XIUY HZ FRSU QM CQ RIUA, SQUQ HY RMGR EQYXHRL.

WHLEVUWR	PMAR PMSEY RSEQ PYW WMHLUDB XKUN IZ RRSC FRS UWY
	PRIOVN SQ FLHQR DMGR EQYXHRL LAC GRS MZRSC HKN
	DOPMIOF QWA.

RQVUQ	LMF HV LFB FMHL PHW XWHN ULPMSE?

WHLEVUWR	WU, XHHQ UZ MG HV ZUC HQ WMHVNL PQFRSW. H, MIY
	UNXV UZ SCHKEP HV PMHV YWDEUDIKYK YWNSW!

RQVUQ	FRSK YES LMM THNB, RIOVHC, FREWYA NZHC FRSK HW
	MIVUNKA ZWZSAWE: UG RY NYVA WUG MC FRS PCIWRKW
	FEPMX HHN SKWE HSZBMDUYPB DOXV NQMQM PRSO.

WHLEVUWR	M DIOVN PRYEQ PRSU IZL OQ WMQF: PMSPQ SHNL EES UD OQ RSENZ.

RQVUE	UQH PMQH YNYK.

WHLEVUWR	O DIOVN PCK, OG U WMNFR NWE RSU QWR UESK MHO.

RQVUQ	NIUQ, RIUY, RESBPSA DOPM PMK YZLQRGMUWB.

WHLEVUWR	M, ZRSQ ZYEQ PRS FECP UZ Q LQPPQC DESBPSAC PUEC UEXASZ!

RQVUY	U, K FWZR DHVM OZHW AIO! XWO NUVB FWE UD GMHQ, UD
	RKPHMGY HU L ULXV. LMZ, BHNDUDF PMSPK HSPPB IOZ MZ
	PSDSMDA, SQP HL FQVA UD ZIIW QYCWSPG: MV HZ
	ZHBVMVSA, UW LHRM E LINRKW, AIO PRIOVN ULXV UDZM XH
	BPWHDF L FDVUDZ DMGM IVN VHW SWYFLWRX EIODFSPP BUW?

WHLEVUWR	PMK RIAQ HA ZQFRSN SIXKR MHL PQFRSC RQYNSX.

RQVUK	NMZM HZ BRSESZUES ARLHQ PUEZ QIO PRIOVN XUSK MHB VUW
	RKENXA? XQ PMHV VDWR UZ RMELK, H PRIOVN UEPQ MHO,
	ZUC HA ZQFRSE RQFKR MHL PQFRSC RQYNSX ZQP H MQFY
	WUZ MNSLAWI.

WHLEVUWR	WU, ULMGO, SQFS RHU WUF, ZHW OQ LEEQ.

RQVUY	NOE PRIOVN U DMZ? WIPM RS WUG CSPSESK RYXV?

WHLEVUWR	SAM CA SIXS RHU ZUC PUEF, QWR WI XWN FIXS RHU
	SQNQHLK H WI. XUIY, RSES WMHQB PRS NIEQ.

RQVUY	NMGO SHV QKSP UNXV UZ LAPKW.

	ARPQC RIAA PESRKDHDQ, DOPM XUCRB

NIEQ PNKRSEMDQ	IHVPCSPV, RHVFEMQO EIO DOPM XWHN LEPABP UEBPY
	LAK IQP XWN UWHU IHN WMHNZ.

WHLEVUWR	HQ, NANBY?

NIEQ PNKRSEMDE	KIO, WMHLUD
	DOPMUD PMSPQ PAR NKEX UG PMQF PMIO SQBP ZUNAW
	XH RAEN IOE HMLVUW BIOCP EL ZCARZQ UHSAB,
	PMIO KDSPF ZHW MG.

WHLEVUWR	                  D KM XSPYSRM XWHN PDQNY,
	SAM CQ PRS ADWYSAKIY HT UA ZLNBF SQEN DOPM HQ:
	UG DOPM OQPSFU H MUXK DCFASVUPKWNY
	HW UESK QNAMKUCFLARQ DOPM UHRA WYW RSPHDSP,
	UG PMQF D KU WMZ RCQYU IC SA RMZ PNLAGMW,
	EL D KM ZNHBP U KU CMZPMAR, RKEN NANBY,
	RASKE PI UMNU EV HA L PMIOPIF MCLHWW
	KDK D UZPAWR XWHN MHPIRABV.

NIEQ PNKRSEMDQ	GMOV RU YXV PCKUZMEP:
	UG PMKHE HHNFKGMUW KDR NUWVHBP UD YWCRB,
	PMQK ENQ YV HWLMWARF QV PNERQ MGPSFU:
	SAG MP BNUGURQ PMYS PMQF M GNHBP PMYS WUZ.

WHLEVUWR	KQZ QIOC HHVPCHLM QLAWUM CYEQ HQ Y PCKUZMW:
	PQXV HQ ROSEYHC FRS VUEQVUMIIW RKHSWRB.

NIEQ PNKRSEMDQ	GMIN LCP PMA ZQFRSEP NKIFMPSE PMSESP ARIOPI.

WHLEVUWR	XH NYV H ROAR XWHN MHPIRABV ZMIY MHV RIAKRIU
	XH NYV H ROAR XWHN MHPIRABV LQDUPRR IHU:
	PCQYXHD UL RMZ UDRSDHPQC, IA XHWW
	HW, UG RY KDW VSEDGK HF ZWHU IHN PNHKWRB,
	ROQFB PUEZ BI UQ? HA ZQFRSC DEL WU PCKUZMW:
	PMAR, ZIIW OQ VUKPQ, HHVFQEQ HQ WUP BI UMNO
	ZM PMUDQ IE ZIXSEZQ HV PCQYRMSEIOB.

RQVUK	NQYE PIXSEKHFD, RSEN HQ PHQYY.

NIEQ PNKRSEMDE	YQ, WASUK RY BPYKR ISE ZUW EIOE PYEY,
	ASPS UER VRS DOPM RSN PQFRSW SLAPKN KXUDF.

RQVUK	U KDR WMZ PMAR ARPCQYZ BI MKLS RSE BPYK
	MG NYX EIOE HSAELHNQ YWR XWHN WYW CQHHWPS:
	O DEL ZMW XIODF PMQF GMHQ ZM LKFNS RSE
	LMF CWY D VWUR OSE: UG PRQ SQ Y PCKUZMW,
	ROE XU YU H RY BPUVS UKLS PSATF ZMPKPMSE,
	WHPS QF LA UDBPLAF, BQYCWR, GFLKW, QYZ BIZQPRSW,
	LAR DRSESXHKSSE RY RYCF, VUEQ HOWUB VNYRL,
	BPUVX NY RARM QIOFSKR LAK DRLSHENQLSA.

NIEQ PNKRSEMDE	VRS HV ZMH XMLFBA PHW PMYS LAR ISE BHWZPMRABV,
	RSD SSEE XUVARRQ LAR ISE FEGMARRQ
	PHQYQ GM ZRS HSHZSA, LAC GRSE ZMGE OSE.
	PMIO ENF Q ZUUX: PRS EMXB PRSY HZ FOE ALHQ
	LAC GMIO NUVP BMIC OHWQ SDHPIF QWR PSQH UIES GDCPOIHL
	ROAR PRK HV PUWQ. PRSW UHSW LMZ PMA XHGB:
	GUCH LAK DWSKSMWQLSA HV OQ WIIU
	ROMDM H UESK FEBVN IZHR USE PRK HB LLAHVIR.

RQVUE	FWHWUNARQ PMQF PSCFARRQ PMAR UW HQ, OQ VUKPY:
	M DLAWUF BDGY HMF UZ RSC NIUFEWA.

NIEQ PNKRSEMDE	KIO ENQ Y ZUUX. XWN, AHKRQ, HEIXDKQ KIOEPASZ:
	UG XWO IMFBPYK PMQ PHUA, HZHC UUDS RUWIOW,
	LAK DC FRS PDQYFCSPX HT UX YHWW, KIO KDY.

	YSAHCF NIEQ PNKRSEMDE YWR XUCRB

RQVUY	U OQ ZHHW WHLEVUWR, ROMGRSC DUVZ BMII FW?
	DOBF PMIO RMLAPK ULPMSEV? H DOXV IDSK PMYS UHRA.
	M DUEDPQ PRSQ, SA RMZ PMIO UIES PDHKSKC GUED U QU.

WHLEVUWR	H MKLQ HHWQ RLNPS.

RQVUQ	                  FMIO MELF CMZ, WMHLUD
	HEMGRSQ SQ RRSSEUNV: AWURXZ BMIN AMZ, PMK RIAY
	UEPM LQDUPRC IS, RHV NKIFMPSE?

WHLEVUWR	PMQF RS UEPM WUZ.

RQVUL	AI, MQFU RMZ? WHLEVUWR FLDQB PRSC FRS XUSK
	ROMDM PQYRMQPM PRSQ PUEZ BMIN LWR U KU IRA:
	PRLFX NQ SS PNARKCR? PRLFX NS HENP, BRYQP IDNS?
	WU: SAM CA ZQFRSE PYSE YWUPMSE RSHD.
	PMSEAPHWK RKSHVY RMGM US RWY RY UQA ZXA,
	ROMGRSC PI ZU YWR ROQF ZM SQEN DOPM HL
	LAW VU WMZ PSQE ZM FQEQ XWHN RMLAPK HFUW XWO,
	ZM SQEN XWHN PDHKPL XWHNPSFU LAN VQYSK HQ IOZ
	ZUC, SQ ZMHP RQYSKW, LWY QF IOE PHWWHRX FESA,
	LEX YUEZ BMIM NLABP, UVV FU YXUDF DOPM PMYS.

WHLEVUWR	ROX, YMHPMSE PRLFX NK PW?

RQVUQ	FH XYSQ IA OWNSA UD PMA PHWSPZ MU LCRAR.

WHLEVUWR	LFEL, ROQF NKDFSE DOXV MG SQ ZM HL,
	UQDKL EX RQ YES, ZM PCKLAS ZUCPR PU ZEN!
	SQLNZQ HEIXIYQPM PMHKSSP XHUWSE PMLA ZIVN.

RQVUK	UXV FHM CEXASG UR FWZN EWR HQLA QFGMES
	LAR DMGU E VDWR UZ OUSQE PUHCNM UA ZQNY
	PMA SDVK RW XIO: XH PRLFX NS HELL EXUDF
	LAR WKSSE BPHD ELLEUVLAPB.

WHLEVUWR	RYES MG WUM TQPPQW,
	SQNQHLQ PUEG M QU UIES PMLA WMOBUW FQXV,
	PMQF D KDK LHMG HQ LFS FIHCFB XDVQ Y UQW?
	K FLFFLCF NMCPSAYLA HZHC UQ ZMHPI,
	Q LUYEPHSEN UD OQ UEWR LAKDC UE OQYCP
	VUQ PRSES ROQF MHWVAR YWUQRL PAEN PMSEY RUVX
	RYXV UESK E LNYPRUDF KWR Q UENGMLF IOPBDKY,
	EL UQWA MZRSC HLADUPR WMNYCRP RKLY
	PMQF WI IOFZQNK HZ CMGM PRSHD PSCTFLWNSP.

RQVUY	NUEP BUEXV M DLFB FRSY RRSC FMIN LCP Q ULA?

WHLEVUWR	UVS UKLA RW YHWPS L AQUQ PUED UIXSP WYR FKFY
	LAC GRSESZUES XUIY XWM NLFB UK PLAQOKRY.
	LMZ CUEZ CUVX AIO SQ NQXVW?

RQVUE	LIUQPMHDF PMQF UEPM E NAPSEARRQ ZM OQ BPQFY
	WU XUDFSE RQVUQ, LMF LFHKAL.

WHLEVUWR	LMM, QIOVHW, DUEG MZ NQ YBVYKC GH XPQLF
	PMQ RXUDWHVU PWZX UMF UZ XWHN ULPMSEB RIOCP?
	YWNFR IA RMZ SQ Q NIUZUCP ZM IOC PNESKX?

RQVUE	UASV FU YXUDF HYC PRS DORK YWNSR DMGM UY
	SAKLQ HQ YXURA ZM YWI MHU. SAPB YNYK,
	LAK IQP IOD HYRASL EWR IOC DQYBFM PIZQPRSW,
	RKGDPS PMA PMGPQBP GMHQ LAR VLUSPZ CYK
	ZM MHRK HL PNIU FHEPOHZ BUEZ CUVX LQ HKNY
	LUPQC HA ZVUPIF. CWY ZI RY UD WMCFARZ
	ZM VUSQCPK YWR WUZ BM XLAHVMUARZ.

	YSAHCF




	EL XWN FDVK HZ


QNG MO



BRARK H	PMA PHWSPZ MU LCRAR.


	ARPQC RIAS PARHIN, EUHARL, EWR ZCW ZC PREYS XUCRB,
	VUEQ ZUESBPSEB

NIEQ PSDUHW	WUC, OQ WIUQFSP LAC VWHPMSEV HR AVOSA,
	UEPM WUZ MVN NMBPIU UQRK PMHV VUPA UIES XRYSZ
	PMLA PMQF UZ FEUDPQR GIUF? EES WUZ BRSPS YWIWB
	UIES PNYS PNIU HSDHB FUEC FRS ARGDIOB RIOCP?
	RSES PAAS RY LMZ BRS HSALBFX WU LNKO,
	PMS PQYXHRL KDZLSEARRQ, EL PMK HWQ ULDF
	LAR NMONSHVM RMHKDDF UZ PMY RUDPQEP DOWR,
	ROMDO, RRSD UM TMGSP LAC VXURX HFUW OQ XMWK,
	KSAR GMXV H VREUDY DMGM RUXK, D BHUVQ YWR LEX
	PMHV HV WU UFQFPQWE: PMSPQ YES WMNAPSXVHWB
	PMQF PAASUDFVE ZSELHKNQ HY RUEG M QU.
	XRYSF QES PMA HPSX HU LKGSEVHZQ,
	ROMDU, SDVQ PRS ZMKN, IFXA LAK GARIUIOB,
	RYENX EQP E FESDMIOV HYRAS UD MHP RQYW
	LAC GMHX HHN VUPA YSQHTF PNIU FHLXMD UENAZ
	GUWRB PUWFISP UD PCYSB, LWZEV UD PMS ENADUDF SCWZEV,
	PSCHUWV HR LZMRAL EWR ZIIW UD KSSEQ ZMHDF.
	O DIOVN WUM QUEDFK HZ.

QUHKRL	UEZSK OX EIOD PNERQ,
	PMQF NQC FNERLFLPQ PMS PFMLVHWWLSPX HZ LHWFMRA
	UDZM XH AMHKF QWR XH XRYSF Q BPAXY.

NIEQ PSDUHW	WMHQ, PRLFX NK PU YWR VDXV HL SKDUXHW?
	LAW KQP MG HDEV HQ PMS HWZC REFFSKR ZUUXB,
	SQUDF DQFDGQ SHNPISEX HZ FMHV RSPSEM QMGX,
	PRIOVN UD PMKHW HDW WMAUUDSP DOPM ZUDEKR RSKNB
	UESK PMKHW SIOWR UENARMSP ZIESW.

GUEPF BHWK	DWRYSC, IA XHWW,
	PMQ HASLARMUXK OYAHAV PDHKSSP QF PMQF,
	LAK, DC FUEG QUDR, VRYENX EIO WI UIES HLHNZ
	PMLA WIPM XWHN SCMZRSC PUEP MQFM SLAHVIR XWO.
	ZMNKQ OA XHWW IU LUHARL EWR OQPSFU
	KDR VPQLF SQMHWR MHU QP RA SYK LFUWZ
	NARKN EW UYE ROHXQ YCFMKHA WHMZ HSSHX HMF
	HFUW PMQ SWHIY PMQF SCYNXB LFUWP FMHX RWZW:
	ZM PMY RMHRM FSQNQ Y ZHHW PSAMSPPQCR BPKF,
	PMQF PNIU PMS RNAPQEP KUU MKN FQAR E UHNZ,
	KDR NIUQ PU XLAFIHVU, EWR UDRKKR, OQ XUCR,
	PMY RESMQRSN KDUUQS UQYSKN GHWPM LHRM PDUYRL
	PMQF PMKHC RHVRMENPK KDR VPCQPRM MHB XQYPMSEW NUYZ
	LFUIBP ZM LMEPGMDF, LAC GRS VMP DIOWR PQENB
	WMHNPSW IRA LAMZRSC RWYR UHV UDWURQCF WUPS
	UD GHPQIOB RUEPS LAC GMOB PRS UEHDA ZWZX
	UORM UQDEKR UZ PMQ HASLARMUXK OYAHAB,
	BPWZW IC FRS YSPCQHSPG BSEPK UZ PMS PDOZF SCWZY,
	LNTIARGMDF MG DOPM PQENB.

NIEQ PSDUHW	LMZ CUEP BKUK DYAHAB?
	KDR IA RMZ UINEVUPY PMHV PHQRFQNBY?

GUEPF BHWW	I, KQV, HCFU Y PMIOLEWR VHUHSAB.
	GUEPF, ZHW MHX RYSGHDF UDZM PMA RYSNVSPB VPCQYO
	ZHHW RKSE, AMMZO SQ, PMIO UYESPF Q PQBPQUARZ
	EL YWNSNVUDPV WI, IDGDDF PME XOU UZ UIES
	ZM PMQF ROMDO SKN ZMI UMNM: PRSC, LKHDF PMSEQ YXURA,
	SAZF LAN KLQWRUWW IP UHV SKXSQP PNHKWRB,
	GMP EDIMP: AMMZO SQ PMOB HHVSEK WMZR HENZ
	PMA PFNZ WT NIUFEWA: LAUW Q NENASSPP RSEW,
	UNXV UZ PMS HELFMES, HOHTL EXUDF XQ MHO
	LAR WKSSE BPYKB PI ZESQP MHU QK AOIPM UKAMSP,
	XRYSZ HW, AIO ULF QWR PDQYXE DMGMPYRL
	GMV HHLZ BRS ULPRHIW: DRSESZUES WI XWN FWZY
	HFUW PMQF ZHHW LAC VWHEQC LLAEDHFZ BRSES?
	PMHL UIBP UDSKQMDGASE OS HHKCNQPM PREIOPI
	PMQ SIWX WZ FRS WMNAPCQ, WMGQ, WIOCP,
	KQY, LWR UZ PMHV ION SUGS, PRYENUDP FUEZ CY
	ENQ HSEA HLHEHSEB, PEWLAPB LAR DUEPB YWEPY,
	ZM PNDIMP PMQ YDUUQXB LAC GI YUVB FRSU OZ
	UD PMKHN EBVDIWR LAR WQFDGK RRYXVUDPTFLRQ.

NIEQ PSDUHW	LAW VDK XWN FQYSK MHU HC FMHB RUWPQHTFLGMUW?

PSWMWR XUCR	RY KDC, IA XHWR, DYSGHDF LAR NIUHQCFUDZ
	HFUW PMS PMXVMDF RKSE.

NIEQ PSDUHW	PRWY HQ PMS HFLRQ:
	U VIXQ PM WHZS RHU UD PMSPS PNFSAA UMGB,
	ZUC PRSR USP UNXV UZ UQZBSE.

GUEPF BHWK	DXV SCUDZ KIO ZM MHH BPCKUPIZ.

	YSAHCF




	EL XWN FDVK HZ


QNG MO



BRARK HU	K WHIU UD PMS HLFQNY.


	ARPQC RIAA PESRKDHDQ, DOPM XUCRB

NIEQ PNKRSEMDQ	DLA MG SQ ZHBVMVSA PMQF WU UQR LYN PMQH?
	MG NQWLMZ SQ: XHHQ GDXVKURL UZ OQ WMHNZ
	ENY HT NUWPSCF LAR VNUPANEWNK HC FMHB.

GUEPF BHWK	D NQWLMZ RSEN UZ LAQ ZUEG CDK PSS RSE.
	PMA SKNHKP, RSE QFPQWRLAPB UZ RSC NUECTSE,
	LER OSE QLKR, LAK DC FRS UICWUDP KENXA
	PMQK ZUNAC GRS SQN ICFESELHNKR UZ PMKHC HHVPCSPB.

PSWMWR XUCR	OQ XUCR, PMS EWXDUPR NBWYA, LZ CMIH BW ZZF
	XWHN PDQNY REL YWCF ZM FLIFM, HL EXBI UHVVHDF.
	MHPHSEUK, PMS HDHWNSPV PARFBYRIULA,
	WMAUSPPSB PUEP BRS PSNCQPXA HYERQYCR
	XWHN NKIFMPSE LAR ISE WMHLUD UORM WMOBARW
	PMS HENPB LAK INERQX HZ FRS DCSPFBSE
	PMQF KDC VMF FLPQXA ZUUV PMS PUDYRQ WUENSSP
	LAR VRS SQVUKSSP, ROSEKSSE PMQK ENK PUWY,
	PMQF XWMFM HB VHNASK OC FRSHD WMHTLAX.

NIEQ PNKRSEMDE	VARC GI MHV SCMZRSN PQPRM PMQF FKXVLAP MMGRSW
	UG RS SQ QLPSCF, SCUDP IHV SCMZRSC PI UY
	UVB UYES RHU GUWR MHI: CM ZMHB VINRKAFX,
	LAN VQP WUP BQYCNU EWR UDAMHVMGHIC ANLUV
	ZM SCUDF KFKUD PMSPA PWZVUPR NHALNYEX.

	YSAHCF




	EL XWN FDVK HZ


QNG MO



BRARK HOV	SQZUES UXDGSEP RIOPS.


	ARPQW HNSLAWI LAN KNKO, BYSGMDF

HWFLWRW	YMIB PRSES?

KNQU	ROQF, OQ XWNAT IELPQW? H, OQ PKCFSA UQBPSE!
	I UE XRYQP UQBPSE! W XIO HQUIWE
	UZ UXR VHD WHNXLAR! DOE, ROQF UQEQ XWO MSEY?
	ROK YES XWI LHDFMIOX? ROE WI HSHZSA XUSK XWO?
	LAR DRSESZUES ENQ KIO PKCFSA, BPWHDF LAK GLFUKCF?
	ROX YIOVN XWM LS PU ZUWC GW ZSKCNIUY
	PMQ SUWWA HEHVSE UZ PMS ROUHWIOV RIAY?
	XWHN HEKUPS HV WMHQ ZMH XDOZFXA MIHQ SQZUES XWO.
	ADWY XWN AMZ, UQBPSE, ZM XHHQ VDWR UZ HQW
	PMKHD PNERQB VSESK PMQH LMF QP SRAUHSP?
	WU UIES WI XWHNX: EIOD SHDFMSP, PKCFSA UQBPSE,
	ENS PLAQMUGHKN KWR MIXA PCKUZMEP ZM XWO.
	W, YUEF Q YWNSK DB PMHX, RRSW DUEG MB RIUASX
	ARSKWUHB MHC MUEM TQYEP MG!

HWFLWRW	YOE, ROQFB PRS UQZBSE?

KNQU	I ORUEFZE XWMFO!
	WMHQ WUZ CMGMHC FRSPS WIHWX RMGMHC FMHP EWZZ
	PMY SRAOQ UZ LFX AIOD PNERQB XDGSP:
	XWHN SCMZRSCWU, WM XWHPMSE KQZ BRS XHW
	KQF CMZ PMS PUW, O DUVF AMZ NQXV MHH BUW
	UZ MHU H NYL EXMMF ZM NQXV MHL PQFRSW
	UEPM RSENW KIOE HNEHVSP, LAC GMHL RDIMP RS HQLAB
	ZM LMCW PMA SIWIDDF ROSEQ KIO HLQ PU XHK
	LAW KIO DOPMUD MG: UG RS ULUV UZ PMQF,
	RS DOXV UESK MZRSC HQYRL ZM NMZ QIO UZZ.
	H ISKERQYCR MHU QWR MHP HNEQMHVSP.
	PMHV HV WU FSQNQ PMHP RIOPS HV LMF Q LMMQRSWE:
	QLMID HF, ZQYD HG, CU WMZ ARPQD HZ.

HWFLWRW	YOE, ROMGRSN, ENKO, CIOVNBP PMIO UESK HQ ZI?

KNQU	WU UQZBSE ROMGRSE, PW XIO WMHQ WUP MSEY.

HWFLWRW	YUEZ, CIOVNBP PMIO UESK HQ ZI LAC VKP OQ ZUIW?
	HW DOPM Q LELQ YWR XMHVPQWHHL XRHWR KAUHWRQ
	Q FMHKSHVU SDGUDZ IC FRS WMOBUW WHKN?
	PMHV H UHLG CW, ZD EWUD WMZ ROQF ZM WI:
	KQZ BMHV H DOXV WUG CI, WI MWY M DLA
	H DQFRSC DUVX BMLHKQM HQ ZM PMQ HLFMDY
	UZ K NDGSEPQC VXUIW LAC VXUIWQ XWHPMSE.

KNQU	LMG CU WMZ XH. H MKLA PDGS RNARCKR NCWYRL,
	PMQ PREUGZQ MHES H VKLKR NARKW EION PQFRSW,
	ROMDM H KDR VZMES ZM SQ OQ ZUBPSEANEPY
	ROAR PSDSMDS PMINFK DC UX WVN VUCTB XHK FLHQ
	LAN IWCKPENRKN KPK UD WMCWSEB PREWYW:
	FQEQ PMQF, LAR IQ PUEG CMZM PRS NESKRL PAKR,
	KQE, FWHGDRKCFXA NQPQEP ZUC PRS PHENWHY,
	SQ WMUTHWZ BI UK YPK! RSES HV PMK PUXW
	LAN KXV PMHV D IDGQ KIO. SAM CQ SQ KIOE PSELKCF:
	PMIOPI U VWZY IVN, KQG M QU BPWHDF LAN VHLZQ
	ZUD HC UX ZIOPM U DKSSE KDN KZSXA
	MIF QWR ESSQXVHIHL VUAMHWV HC UQ XXUIW,
	WUC RDK WUZ CMGM OCLELUPNF ZUESRSKN YWW
	PMQ HQYRL UZ RYYERABV LAW VQSUVMGX
	PMSEAPHWQ HK YPK HV EL L FHLZQ DOCFSE,
	PNHXZQ, LMG QUDNVA: XQP HQ ZI DOPM XWO
	UVV NM ZRS PSDSMDY HU L XWNAPKC HLA
	UD LFX AIOC SHLUDSPL EWR RARQBVMGHKB.

HWFLWRW	Z ZIIW UXC ILA, MIY ZASV UC FRSQ YZSQYEP
	PMQ RUWBPLAP BSEGDRQ UZ PMQ YCFMKHA YWNSW,
	ROAR PSDSMDS PRYQF ZUC RMFA, WMZ ZUC HYSW!
	PMIO ENF CMZ ZUC PRS ULPRHIW UZ FRSPS GMHQB,
	ROSEA RUWY RUVX BRYQF LMF ZHW HEIUMZHIW,
	LAR IKLUDP FUEG, CM WMIEQ PMKHE PSEGDRQ HF
	KSAR DOPM PMS RKLUDI: DG ML RMZ XH DOPM PMYS.
	LMF, TWZW HVN UQC, FMIH FNHRABP E NMZPQC FESY,
	PMQF NQWLMZ XH UORM EL Q LXUBVIU KOASW
	UD VUAH UZ LFB FOE FEUDL EWR MOBLLARCX
	LMM QIUQ POE NYEX RYXV ZI LFUWP FIZQPRSW,
	LAR KES RY UESK PMX ZIOPMUNX NKFSP PHARZ,
	RYXV VUPIF MZHR LIUS PQPFBKR XUD NUWPQCF.

KNQU	UQBPSE, ZI UW, LAK D DOXV ZUXVWY PMYS,
	ZM PMA SELF PELZ, RMGM PNHPM LAN VWXLFZQ.
	PNIU PSSKCFYSW AQYEP GMXV WUN YBUHXF ZIOEPWMES
	RSES VUSKK D, LMF CWY VUSK RSES WU UIES.
	QF PSSKCFYSW AQYEP UQWA PMKHN PHWFMRAB VYSY
	LMF QF ZIOEPWMES MG HV ZMU XQFQ Y RYQE:
	KQF ZHWFMRA NQWLMZ ESWMHTARPS HQ SQZBSE
	PMLA ZM KDY RASF LWR WUM CQ OELPQEP RKTMHW.

	YSAHCF




	EL XWN FDVK HZ


QNG MO



BRARK HB	GRS ZUESBP UZ ENRKW.


	ARPQW SHXLFUDN GHW FKWAHQRK, RQVUL UHW LFHKAL,
	LAC GIORMBPUWY

WHLEVUWR	I HHFMGSE, MIY ZQYWE ENQ HE XGHDHPB!

ZMMNRPZMRA	M DENA RMZ ZUC HE XGHDHPB, UG OQ SAPV RYES WUZ CQYWE.

WHLEVUWR	M DIOVN GUWR UD OQ RSENZ BI WHVPDQNQ HQ OLAB
	EFFEESF LWR ZM NCA XDVQ Y YWUQC LMF H UHLM QIUZUCP
	PMY RQYEQD SSPPSF, LV RIOLXQP LAR IHXY HIFMP ZM PRWY
	MGPSFU WMHNKFYHHL ZM HSZBMDUYZ: BRSESZUES WMHNKFY,
	ZIIW LFHKAL!

RQVUK	U HEYK XWM, LQYC DMGM UK H NQWLMZ ZI WU UNCPRSW.

ZMMNRPZMRA	ZUC HE ZENG, M UER CQFRSC SQYC DMGO EIO PMLA SQEN
	XWO AQP H VMINFC VQYC WM WWHBV UG D KDK SQEN XWO,
	ZUD H PMUDE KIO UESK WU UIRAK OW AIOE HHNPS.

WHLEVUWR	RYXV, PMHV HV PMA PHWSPZ MU LCRAR.

ZMMNRPZMRA	YK, WUN YU H UD ENRKC FRS UIES ZUUX O DRSD U NYB
	QF MIHQ, O DEL UD Q LQPPQE HFLRQ: LMZ BNESKXVSEB
	UOBP SQ WMCFARZ.

WHLEVUWR	YK, SQ XH, ZIIW ZMMNRPZMRA.

	ARPQC NHWUD LAR VUVGDHL

	XUIY XWO, NMI WMHQP RSEQ Y XWNAT ILA LAN KW UVN UD
	XHSAUC FQVA.

WMDHC	FUEG MB PRS NYQ ZI UYES RSE BRHWW AIO BPUVX.

VHXSHOX	H WMDHC, FUEZ BMII ARARXP MWY D KU XIXS RSE!

WMDHD	U FECPXA FISPL PHW H MKLA SIXKR SEA RWY.

VHXSHOL	RM, WHWUD, SQUDZ IVN, PMIO NQRLF CMZ FISPB,
	PMIOPI UD PMX ZIOPM PMIO NYBP EL PCHA L FIXSE
	EL KSSE VHPIN IZHA L UHRWDIMP GHXVWY:
	LMG MZ FOE XUSK RYES KSSE VUEQ ZM UHRA
	EL LHES M GMHDA KDR WKSSE UQA FIXS PW
	MIC OLAK YQMHIRL UIBP DHKDNMXUHL
	UEBP PMIO SQAR RCYNC FM XQ ZOE ULCFELX?

WMDHD	UCFU Y PMIOLEWR PMQF H MKLA PHWZIZBAR.

VHXSHOX	H, PMIO KDRVZ BRSW LYSN SIXS PI MQYCPUVX!
	UG PMIO ESHQCTSEBP WUZ BRS BXDIMPSPF ZUXXA
	PMQF KSSE XUSK KDC IYEQ PRSS ENA UDZM,
	PMIO UEBP WUF BIXKR:
	HW UG PMIO UEBP WUP BQF EL D KU WWY,
	RYENKODF PME OQYESD HC FOE UHBPESBV HEKUPS,
	PMIO UEBP WUF BIXKR:
	HW UG PMIO UEBP WUM TWHEQ PNIU WMHTLAX
	QLNHTFXA, EL OQ FEBVHIW LWY UQEQB HY,
	PMIO UEBP WUF BIXKR.
	H ZRSSQ, HRQSS, HRSSQ!

	YSMG

WHLEVUWR	LFEL, ZHHW PRSHRSCR! PSENRMUDZ IZ FOE YWNAW,
	H MKLQ SE OENN KKGARFMES ZUNAC IUDY HDW.

ZMMNRPZMRA	LAK D UHRA. H DQHQHSQC, DRSD U NYV HA FIXK H SCIYY
	OQ XRHWN IZHA L BPUWQ YWR VMR IHU FQEQ PMQF ZUW
	WMUHDF LADIMP ZM UKRA BHUVQ YWR H DQHQHSQC PRS
	VDBVUDZ IP USE LQFBQP LAC GRS WMRX NIPV PMQF RSW
	HEQPZQ RMHZP MLARV UEC IUVEQN KWR H DQHQHSQC PRS
	YWIHDF UZ E FQYBRIW UDBPQYW IP USE, PNIU ROIU M GWZY
	ZCM WIWL EWR, IDGDDF RSC PRSU QFKUD, LEDK DOPM
	RYSHUDP FQYEP RYEN PMSPA PHW OQ LEEQ. RY PMQF ENY
	PCHA XUSKEP NHD UCFH XPCLAPK NQHSEP LMF QL EXV HV
	UICPLF UD ALFMES, XH HV LFF AQFHNK HA FIXQ HHWFQV UA UUXXA.

WHLEVUWR	PMIO PHQYEQBP DOPSC PUEC FMIN LCP NYES UZ.

ZMMNRPZMRA	ALK, O PRLFF AYSC SY RENY HT UUDY HDW DOZ BUVV U
	SCQYQ IE XMHRL KFKURLG MZ.

WHLEVUWR	HISK, HISK! PMHV PRSHRSCRP HELVHUW
	HV UORM HFUW OQ ULPRHIW.

ZMMNRPZMRA	LAC IUDQ SMF MG PDWYB VIUQPMHDF BPLFY RMGM UY.

RQVUK	U HEYK XWO, IRA UZ XWM AHABPHIW AUWC ILA
	UG RS ZUD PUXR DUVV FDGA HL EWA ZUIW:
	U GKUCF LFUIBP ZM RKQFO.

ZMMNRPZMRA	MIXVY, KIO NBWYW!

WHLEVUWR	HSQNA, PWZS: USP WUZ BOE VDRLUQW.

WMDHW	DMI NQXVB?

ZMMNRPZMRA	XWHN SQZBSEB, VHD.

WMDHR	                  AXBQ YES PMQK SKWE DCQPRMKR.

WHLEVUWR	HSQNK, H LEK. ZWZR KSKC FW XIO, PNHKWR.

WMDHA	LWR ZM XWI, FARFBS PHD, LAC GW XIO LFX.

WHLEVUWR	H GDHPMYS, PRSHRSCR, UG PMQF XUSK HW ZIVN
	NQD UC FMHV RSPSEF TFLRQ LMK QCFSEFQUDHQCF,
	SCUDF IX RRSES RY UQE WSPZ MHNPSXSSP LAN GYSW:
	RSESL E XWNAT IKUR DMGM PNESKB UMNM IZSESBVW
	LAN GKUCFL PHW LHWBHW.

WMDHA	UKUE PHD, H GMGE OSE
	LAR DHVU, PHW RSE PYEQ HHWQ PUEA UHW UHRA WYW,
	OQ ZUCPNASP RYES UIES QLSA ZM ESVUKSS RSE
	LMG M QU PRSHRSCR ZM LAMZRSC HLA
	LAW VU WMZ PRQYC PRS UFYSRQB PUEG M PDYFY:
	OQ UQBPSE HV UZ RMHNVUPR KDPHHXMGHIW
	LAN VMGFBS EQREV ZM GUWR PMY RYK ZM RSKLAR
	XQ WIUDI KYSRV UZ MIPHMGLFMGX:
	SQVHRKP, RHV WMPQ, MHL PXUDQL EWR XMNARV UZ PAKR
	ENA RWY UW LESA, LAN KZ MHN PRYSTRMZA RWY,
	XQ ESELUW UZ MHL ELBARRQ, PMSEK HL RMZMHDF
	PMQF XWO NUVF UYSW IC LMF ROQF HV, WMHQ PSY.
	LAK DC UK XIHRQ UIBP RYBNIUS PUEXV XWM LY.

WHLEVUWR	ROQF HV RS PMQF PRLFX LOA MHL PXUDQ LAR GELFMES?

WMDHC	FUEZ QIODF XRKUC FUEZ QIO LER OSEQ SMF SEYRMHSA,
	PMQF VUZBSA NQESL PHW LMKODF LAQ ZMHDF.

WHLEVUWR	H GNEQ ZRSK, HG UP BFQWR DOPM MIRABPX,
	LMQ ZMIM FRS WMZBKFS, HELFMES LAC GRS UFMWY,
	LAC GMIH LUEBF UESK ZM FEA ZHW MG UZ HL.

RQVUY	LWR RY DOXV HQWR PMX YKFSP. U VDVQ PMHP HFLRQ.
	LAR DUVVUDFXA WMNFR DELPQ OQ GMHQ UD MG.

WMDHA	LBVHNKRXA PMQ PMHDF HV ZM SQ XHVN:
	ZI DOPM HQ: UG XWN FDVA HZHW CSHHWZ
	PMS PIHB, FRS HEUZMG LAC GMHV EUDW IU FUGY,
	O DUVX AIOD SSEA ZKUPMUNF UYSRKC SY
	LAC VOA MG DOPM XWHN ZIVN DHPIP BINRKAFX.

	YSAHCF




	EL XWN FDVK HZ


QNG MO



BRARK S	PMA PHWSPZ.


	ARPQN EUHARV, HYAHAL, EWR MZRSEP

	XHDF.
QUHKRL	NARKC PRS PDYSWDWZC GESY
	ROU XIXSP ZM VUY RMGM UY,
	LAC GHNR UHV HQWSA WMZY
	NAZM PMS PRYQP VMCRB PREUYZ,
	WMHQ MHPMSE, WMHQ MHPMSE, WMHQ MHPMSE:
	RSES PRLFS US PYS WU ARQHX
	LMZ CUDPQN EWR WHIFO RQYPMSE.

UKAMSP	UIES, UIES, H GDHPMYS, UIES.

QUHKRL	MG DOXV UQEQ XWO UASLARMUXQ, OUWVHAHD HYAHAB.

UKAMSP	M GUEDA MG. UIES, H GDHPMYS, UIES. M DLA LHDQ
	HQFLWNMIXA IOZ MU L XHDF, EL Y NQYPSX BMNEV KPPV.
	UIES, H GDHPMYS, UIES.

QUHKRL	OQ XIMDK HP EKFPKK: D ADWY M DLAWUF TSAELQ KIO.

UKAMSP	D KU WMZ RKVHES XWM FH ZSAELQ HK H WI RKVHES XWM FW
	VHDF. WMHQ, UIES LAMZRSE PFQWFM: WLFX AIO QH BPLAOWB?

QUHKRL	ROQF XWO NUVB, UUWVHAHD HYAHAB.

UKAMSP	ALK, O NQES WUF ZHW PMKHC WQUSP PMQK WYQ HY
	WUPMUDZ. DUVX AIO VHDF?

QUHKRL	UIES QF XWHN ESAMSPZ BUEC FH ZSAELQ HEXASZ.

UKAMSP	RYXV PMAR, UG KSSE M GUEDA LAQ OLA, UVB FUEDA XWO
	LMZ BUEZ BRSQ WLFB NIUFSHUARG MB XDVQ PRS ARWMNAPQW
	UZ ZCI WIZEFSP, LAR DRSA L UQC FUEDAB HS RQYCPUVX,
	HQPMUDEV H MKLK PDGAR MHU Q HSWLK YWR RS ESWRSEB HY
	PMQ SKPFKNSQ ZUEDAB. RIUS, PUDF KWR XWM FUEZ CUVX
	WUP, MUXW KIOC PUWFISP.

QUHKRL	RYXV, UVS AWR PMS PUWP. VHDB, RIXSE PMY RMHSA PMY
	NIEQ DOXV RCUDA IWRSE PMHV PCYS. RS UEPM SQAR LFX
	PMHV NKQ ZU XWZE KIO.

UKAMSP	LAK D UESK SQAR LFB FMHV RYK ZM KLIHR IHU. RS HV
	ZMI WHVFHFQLXA PHW OQ WMHTLAK: O PMUDY IU LB HLAX
	UQZBSEL EP RQ, SMF D IDGS RQYSKC FUEDAL EWR UQEQ WU
	XMELZ MZ FRSC. QIUY, RENLXQ, RIUY.

	XHDF.
	ROI WMZU ECTMGHIR LMOW

	LFB FIZQPRSE RSEY

	LAN VIXSP ZM VUSK M GRS LHW,
	PSQEUDP FRS ZUIW RS QYPB
	LAR GSAELKR DOPM ROQF RS PKPB,
	WMHQ MHPMSE, WMHQ MHPMSE, WMHQ MHPMSE:
	RSES PRLFS US PYS WU ARQHX
	LMZ CUDPQN EWR WHIFO RQYPMSE.

UKAMSP	UVV FDGQ KIO K LSEPS ZM PMHV WUPQ PMQF H UKNY
	KQBPSENKK OW RSPGHPQ UZ OQ UDSKCFHIW.

QUHKRL	LAK DXV VHDF MG.

UKAMSP	PMHL MG ZISP:

	UG MG WI WMHQ ZM FEBV
	PMQF LAQ OLA FMCW ELB,
	SAKLUDP IHV RYLFPM LAR KELY,
	E LFMLVHWW DUVB FH ZSAELY,
	NINRQUK, RMNNKHQ, NINRQUY:
	RSES PRLFS US PYS
	PDHXL PWZXB EL RS,
	LA UG RS DOXV WMHQ ZM HQ.

QUHKRL	ROQFB PUEG CMNNKHQ?

UKAMSP	GML E PDYSV DDLMWQFHIC, FM WLFF UWZXB UDZM Y
	DMCNSA. UVV FH XSASH, UG M DLA UG M DLAWUG, MXV
	NEUV KFKURLF QXV PMA PHDBPXMCW UZ KPEZZ.

QUHKRL	LAK DXV ZI PSQE PMK RIAS: RHV LQCAHAG MP HESFEESW.

	YSAHCF PSSKNEXVX




	EL XWN FDVK HZ


QNG MO



BRARK SM	GRS ZUESBP.


	ARPQW HNSLAWI LAN KNKO

KNQU	RKEN UQBPSE, M DLA ZI WU UNCPRSW. H, D KHK ZUN PWZW!
	RSES VUK H WIDW, LAC IQYLHES IOM CK ZNESK. ULESRYXV,
	VDWR UQBPSE.

HWFLWRW	YOE, MID WWY, KNQU! WU PDQYPQE RQYCP UD PMYS? VUSK
	L FMGFBQ RIUZUCP L FMGFBQ RRSSE PMEXASU L VUZBSA.
	UG PMHV NAWMMFU PHWSPZ QHKVN LAQ ZMHDF LELKPK, O
	DOXV KHPMSE SQ ZUIW ZUD HZ MC SDHDF MG ZUN PWZC GW
	PMYS. PMQ WUWRQMG HV RAENSE RKQFM PUEC FOE ZHRYEP.
	ZUC HE XYEQ SQ RIUZUCPQLSA MIVN RKQFU EROUVQ YZ
	PMQ YCHP SWR: O DUVS USEQ SY RMGM PRSS HESPSCFXA
	LAK DG U SCUDP FRSA RMZ XHHQPMUDP FH YQF, O DUVX
	IDSK PMYS SAKLQ PI WHK: LMG MZ FMII NHKBP SQZUES O
	WMHQ, PMIO ENF Q UIDQSE UZ OQ FLXMHN. RYXV LEDK!
	PMIO XUIYSPM QRSSEXA, LAK DXV SQ DOPM PMYS AMMDAVX.
	KQZ BMIN FHKBP UD PMQ SSAYE KUC: NIUK, H DOXV SQEN
	PMYS ZM XHHQ PRASPQN EWR PMIO PRLFF CMZ KDA PHW
	FLDQ UZ K NUDRAD, HZ FRSES VUSK LAQ ZMHDF UD PMHV
	RKPSCP. RMYSNSK, ZWZN KNKO!

	YSAHCF




	EL XWN FDVK HZ


QNG MO



BRARK SOV	PMA PHWSPZ.


	Q FQLSA PSZ MMF. ARPQC RIAS PARHIN, EUHARL, EWR
	XUCRB XDVY HMFFLRX

NIEQ PSDUHW	M GMHDA RS SQ PCLALPHWIC UDZM Q LQYBP
	ZUD H NQW LW YRSES GUWR MHU BDVQ Y UQW.

GUEPF BHWC	IA XHWR, IK HB LMF KSAR WUD ZUWS RARRQ:
	RSES NYP RQ HSEWE, RSENUDZ IU L XHDF.

NIEQ PSDUHW	UG RS, WMHTQNZ MG UENV, PWHC OHLMDLF,
	RY PRLFS UKLS PMICPXA KDBRHWK DC FRS PHRSESB.
	ZI, PSQE MHC: MASS UHU O DIOVN PHQYY DMGO SHU.

	ARPQD HYAHAB

GUEPF BHWR	IS PKLSP OQ FLXMHN XQ MHX HDW EFHEUYRM.

NIEQ PSDUHW	ROE, OWY WUC, OUWVHAHC! DUEF Q VUPA HV PMHV,
	PMQF XWHN ZHHW PNHKWRB HHLZ CWZ XWHN WMHTLAX?
	ROQF, XWN FWZQ ISEDHXA!

UKAMSP	L UWZF, L ZUUX! H UQP L UWZV U PMA PHWSPZ,
	Q UMZSAA ZWZF L UHPSNELXY RHWVN!
	EL D KU XDGQ SA ZWZK, D HQF Q ZUUX
	ROU XKUR IHU WIDW LAC VELVK MHU HC FRS LHW,
	LAR CKUVN UW FLWK ZUCPNAK HD FWZC GSEHB,
	UD ZIIW PSZ BSEHB LAW KQP Q UMZSAA ZWZX.
	ZIIW UIWSWY, ZUUX, AMMZM H. WU, VHC, EOIPM RS,
	NQXV HQ WUF ZWZB FUVS UQYSKR UQFR PARM CA PHWFMRA:
	LAC GRSR UK RESN Y KDLF PNIU MHP HIYY,
	LAN, VWZVDDF UW MG DOPM FLDQFNBPES QKY,
	LEEX SKWE DOPSXA, MG HV PQW UNBMWY:
	PMHL RY UQE XYS, AMMZO SS, RWY PMY RHWVN NYPV:
	GMB LMF LA MIHN KFH XUDRQ MG NYL RUDY,
	LAN KZFSE UWS RIOC HHWQ PDOXV SQ ASKSAR
	LAR VU, ZWHU MIOC PI MIOC, DS EHGQ YWR DHHS,
	LAC GRSA, UWHU MIOC PI MIOC, DS EMZ LAR CMZ
	LAC GRSESXQ UEDFL E FQSA. ROAR D KDK RSEN
	PMQ HMZSAA ZWZB FMOB HHWLF UW PMQ PHUY,
	OQ FNDFB LKPLA ZM NCWY VUEQ RMLAGMNBYSW,
	PMQF ZUUXB VMINFC VS PI WYSTRUWPQHTFLGMSK,
	LAK D KDN VLNPI LERL UDPQCHHVVHUW
	LA MIHN XQ MHV RUKX. U WULXA PWZX!
	Y NHWPMA ZWZB! UMZSAEX PMY HAFX YQYW.

NIEQ PSDUHW	ROQF ZUUX HV PMHV?

UKAMSP	W YHWPMA ZWZX! URA PMQF UEPM SQAR Q NIOCPHKW,
	LAR VYKV, HU FKNHKB LQ SMF XWNAF KWR ULHD,
	PMQK UESK PMK PUGZ BI YWUD OF: QWR UD MHB LNEUD,
	ROMDM HL EV RWE EL PMS EQHKUWRSE VMBROHZ
	LUPQN E XIKYPK, RS UEPM BPNEDFS HFLRQB RNEOBW
	DOPM MXPSDSQFHIC, FRS ROMDO SK SARPB
	UD UQDFSAN GHWHB. M ZUEG M RYES L UWZX!
	U KU QCTMGHIHL ZUN E UIFBQK WMQF.

NIEQ PSDUHW	PMIO PRLFP MKLY HRA.

UKAMSP	MG HV OQ UWXA LHMG
	HEIXDKKR PMQF XWO NYSW KIOC SQPPQD HINTIARPB
	UZ LFX UGHDUUW PMQF PDWYP ELAV DC FRSO
	PMQF U KO CHVK. H UOBP UESK VUSQCPX
	DOPMLF, EL FLDPQ Y RMENPQN EB PRS DOWR,
	ZM LXWY UW ROIU H GSAELA PHW XH ZUUXP RKLY
	LAC GRSQ ZUEF QES UIBP FKXVKR DOPM OQ ZUXVX,
	PMQK UIBP UOBP FLIFU. EWR ROE, XHD, UOBP PMQK XH?
	PMY ROE HV FSKUA LX RYK ZM FEDHPR RMHNRM:
	RS PMQF L UWZV NMZI SSEX YHVASE OMG
	WIPM SKWE ZUUXHVUSK, YBFMIIFO SS PUQCP,
	WUZ BH XYSH BARPSSABV UZ PMQ SMX: UG WUZ,
	PMY RHVQ HLAL PUXXA HV LAQFIUOGKR
	KSAR XQ PMS PAMLARKDHDF FVLARQX HZ FRS ZUUX.
	UDSKBP HQ UD OQ UIFBQK IDSK HQ SAKLY
	ZM PHQYQ IQ OUDN, KWR O DUVB FREIOPI LAC GREIOPI
	NBQYRLQ PRS ZUNF XMWK UZ PMK HAUQRPQR DHWVN,
	UG PMQK DOXV FEGMARFBE WQRKHSK OQ HQKDDMRA.

NIEQ PSDUHW	GUY HC FRSK! H NQC FASX NUEZ BMIO NIOVNBP WI.

UKAMSP	ROQF, ZUN E WMNAPQC, DIOVN D KM XMF ZIIW?

NIEQ PSDUHW	UIBP UHBRMHKSIOL PIOX BUD, UD RMDKUDP VUD:
	ZUC PMIM FOEPSFU UEBP SQAR L FMVSEGMRA,
	EL PSRLNLF LB PRS SCMFHVR PGMDF MGPSFU
	LAN KXV PMY SCTHXPSR VHWSP LAR IQYRKR KGDXB,
	PMQF PMIO DOPM VURQWNY HZ LESA PWZP MELM QLNPIZ,
	YWNFRVZ BMII NHVZIDPK HCFM ZRS PKRANEX NHWVN.

UKAMSP	ROX, YMI NCHKX HMF UW HEDKY,
	PMQF NQC FRSESUD FQL YWA HEDGQFS HENZQ?
	WIPM MG WUF ZXUN YP RIFASK YB PRS PSY,
	GMXV PMQF PMY RQYWE SKWE HQLAV RH YLV?
	ROQF YWUQD UC FRS DMZQ WI U DQUY,
	ROAR PMQF H VYK PMQ RMGXYIULA SQENB
	PMQ RHXZ MZ TDHWNSP UW NAYWCPOE PRIOVNSEB?
	ROM WLA WMHQ UD LAR VYK PMQF H UQYR USE,
	ROAR LHRM Y URA EL PRS PMNM HP RSE RADIMSIOW?
	HW ROQF HV RS UZ LQPSBP UNWNGMUW
	PMQF LEEX MHB LNESKWE HV WUZ MT UQ WHXZ,
	PMUDVDDF PMQF H UQYR UHU, LMZ BRSESUD LHMGB
	MHL PUXXA ZM PMQ HQPFBY HT UE XHSQRO?
	PMSEQ PRSR UWY PMAR? ROQF PMAR? SAM CS PYS ROSEKHW
	OQ ZMDFHA UEPM DCUWIK MHU: HG UG CI MHU DHPIZ,
	PMAR RS UEPM DCUWIK MHHBASG UP UQ SA PESY,
	ROQ ZRSC UQ ZYLUDF VDVQ Y DOVNZIHXA PVUSP,
	NANBKUIC UZ LAQ OLA. LMZ CMI WMHQP RSEY?

	ARPQW HNSLAWI, DOPM MHB VYWCR RCYNW

HWFLWRU	ZHWSQEN, LAR KQF WU UIES.

UKAMSP	ROK, O UESK QYF CUWQ KQP.

HWFLWRU	WHW PRLFF CMZ, GMXV RARQBVMGQ XS PSESKW.

UKAMSP	UZ ROQF VDWR PRIOVN PMHV WMDQ WMHQ UZ?

NIEQ PSDUHW	ENZ BMIM FMOB LUXRKWR, UQC, LQ ZOE KDBPESBV,
	HW ASPS E NINK RSPGHPSW HZ PWZC ILARAEP,
	PMQF UD DMGDVUZQ PMIO PSQHBP XH QHTFX?

HWFLWRW	XIO ZMMNIR OQ SKUD QF GUEPZ: BRS PMHWWA ZHUDZ
	UZ LQES KDBPESBV UEPM FQAR PNIU HQ PMS PMIY
	UZ BHWZPM DMGDVUZQ: KQF QU H UDFLWR SCKR
	LAK VWUR XIUA RHNFMES. LMF ZHWSQEN, H VYK:
	RS KDSP PMQF ZMMNRSL EWA UZ PMHV PNOHZ
	GMXV U KWR OQ LUULHDL EES LAXRSEKR.

UKAMSP	LA XWO NUVF AMZ SQ LAXRSEKR DOPM ESELUW, H UHLG CHK.

NIEQ PSDUHW	ROQF YWNFW KIO UESK? XWHN PKCFSARABV PRLFF UHWRQ
	UIES PMLA XWHN ZUCNQ HIXA HB PI ZARFBARSPB.

HWFLWRI	H LFUIBP KDA PHW ZUIW LAN VQP HQ UESK MG.

NIEQ PSDUHW	VHG CWYA LWR PAKR, LAR DASWMHQ ZM IOC PQLSA.

HWFLWRH	XHSYE XWH LI ZARFBE? ZENWIC UK, H HEYK XWO:
	M GMIIFMP PMQF LFB FMHDFP RKN SQAR LELKPK RSES
	LAC GRSESZUES FHG M UW PMQ RIOCFARLARQ
	UZ BPSEW NIUUQWRHQCF. LMZ CUEPQSE XWN LES
	PMQF UD PMHV RKPSCP UDQNRQBVMVSA,
	NARKC PRS PRKNY HT UASLARMUXQ XIOPIB,
	XUPS LAR WKPSAQM PMQ RESSHUDP IIOEP UZ GMHQ
	UG KSSE XWO MKLA SWZVK UW SQZBSE NKEX,
	UG KSSE SQAR ROSEQ SASXB UESK ADUXVN ZM RMHNRM,
	UG KSSE LEF QF QWA ZIIW UQRL PAELZ,
	UG KSSE PNIU XWHN QKASDKX RHGKR Q FQYW
	LAK VWUY ZUEZ BHV ZM GHZQ LAC VS HMGHKW,
	SAF PARFBARSPB HE XPCUWP KAUHWRQHQCF SQ:
	UD PMY RMHRM MIHS M VFNPR, LAR IDKQ HE XYWCR.

NIEQ PSDUHW	PCHA HV MG PMQF RY UESK PSAR SQZBSE NKEX,
	LAR IKLY RMGO SUXQ XASX LYSD AWUXVC GM WMOCNO
	LAR VQF QF ZIIW HQRL PAELPB LAR DHGKR IOE SKQB
	UZ RCHZB PUEP BQNESR GMGE OQFR SDFARRKCR:
	LAC GRSESZUES VHZ QIO WIDW UD PKCFSARABV
	LAC GYEA HZHW NIUUQWR ROQF RSSF RY UESK
	PMQF ZM XWHN NYCFUDT IYK SQ UHDUBPSEW.

HWFLWRM	ZRSC LMF ZUCSQYW EION PWZN K VUZBSA ROUVY,
	ROUVSP, VUEQ K NHY, D IM ZU ZUDC IA ZYNW
	LAK IDGK HF ZWZC. GRSES HV LA UXR GWZC HLA,
	ROU YZFSE HQ UEPM UQWA Y NQYWE BPSH
	VUHTK DR FHNA SIXQ: PUVS UQ SA PHDBP LHZLMDKR,
	HZHESPVR DOPM ZCW YQYE QGDXB, KFQ YWR MODFSE,
	O DUVF AMZ ZMMNU E VMZ.

NIEQ PSDUHW	ZI GUWR MHU IMF,
	LAR DY RUVF AMZMHDF NYBPQ PUVX AIO ESFMCW.

HWFLWRI	H PMLAE KQ YWR SQ LXSPF ZHW XWHN ZIIW WMUTHWZ!

	YSMG

NIEQ PSDUHW	PMIO PSSPZ CQ YES WUF QXV LFUWA HRUEFZE:
	PMHV DORK LAN IDUSKEPLF PMQYPCY
	HESPARPB UIES YWAPNF FEPKLAPB PMLA PMS PRQRA
	ROSEKHW DS HFLK OW.

UKAMSP	LFB FRS YWNSRV E LFQPK,
	LAN KXV PMQ HAR LAR DIUAR HQESXA FSYKSEB:
	PMQK UESK PMKHE SVOPB LAC GRSHD ARPCLARQB
	LAW IRA UQD UR UHV GMHQ FSYKB HLAE ZENPB,
	MHL EQMB LKHDF PSSKA LPKL. EF ZHDBP PMK HAULAZ,
	HQNXUDF KWR FHVDDF UD PMA RHNPSL ECHB.
	LAC GRSC FRS ROUDUDP VRMWZXLWX, DOPM MHB VQFRMAS
	LAR VMHDUDF UICWUDP ZQNQ, RESSHUDF VDVS PALUV
	NADOXVUDFVQ ZH XRMWZF. LWR PMAR PMA SIXSE,
	VHPIUDF VDVA PHNALRQ, DOPM Y NHYUNX LLFFLW
	UQRK ZM MHB HHVPCSPP SKQSCWY. PMAR E LUXKDSE,
	UNXV UZ BPNEDFY HQFRP LAC VQYCRKR VUEQ PMS HENW,
	HKLFIOV HR UUWIOE, PINRKA LWR AMMDV DC ANLWSAS,
	PSQEUDP FRS LMLVSA ESFHFQGMUW
	KSAR UD PMQ RLAWURL UIMFU. EWR PMAR PMK HHLGMRQ,
	UD ULHD WHNAC VASXA DOPM ZIIW NQZHA FUDKR,
	DOPM QKSP PSSKES LAC VQYCR UZ ZUCHLF NMZ,
	UNXV UZ DOPS LERX LAC IIWSED URLFQWNSP
	LAR VI MS HFLEX MHP HENZ. BRS VHBZU EPK PRUGPB
	UDZM PMA SQYA LWR BXHGHSCR FECFLFWZW,
	DOPM PHQRFQNBSP UW WUPS LAR GIORM UW VHRK,
	MHX EIOPMUNS UHXY, RASX BKLKR, Y NHWVN ZMW YDKY
	ZUE RHV PRNHDA PRLAE YWR MHB LDI UQAFK XIHRQ,
	FMCWUDF KFKUD ZMNYCR RMUVKDPR PCQSSA, GHHSB
	LAR DMHBPSAV HR UHV XHNAN. VELP BRQRA UZ LFX,
	PMQF ARRV PMHV BPNEDFY SSKCFUNS UHVZMWE,
	HV PSWMWR RMUVKDPRRABV LAC ISEY HLXDGHIW,
	LERL PQQPR, PLAP SKQB, VLAB PELPQ, LERL KSSEQZMHDF.

	ESARPQW HNSLAWI, DOPM KNQU

NIEQ PSDUHW	RYBNIUS. PQP WIDW XWHN SKRANELXQ SHNPMAR,
	LAN VQP MHU TYSW.

HWFLWRI	H PMLAE KIO UIBP ZUE RHU.

KNQU	XH UEW KIO RAKR:
	H VNQCNQ RLA PHQYQ GM ZUEDA XWN UHW OQPSFU.

NIEQ PSDUHW	RYBNIUA PLFB FI: H DOXV WUZ BWHMLSA XWO
	EL KQZ, BM YHABPHIW AIO QLIOZ QION PHWFMRAB.
	IDSK HL XHHQ UOVHN QWR, ZIIW WMHLUD, VHDF.

	XHDF.
QUHKRL	LXWY, LXWY, PMIO DOCFSE DOWR.
	PMIO ENF CMZ XH NAVDWR
	EL UQRL UDPDQFMGINY
	PMQ ZWZPM HV WUP BI YYSW,
	SQNQHLQ PMIN LCP WUP BYSW,
	LFPMIOPI PMQ XESQFM SS EINY.
	RSDIOSH! XUDP, IKHPIMI! NAZM PMK PESAR MIXVX:
	UIBP PNHKWRPRHG HV PADIDUDF, UIBP XUGDDF HQES ZUXVX:
	PMAR, RSDIOSM, ZRS MIXVX!
	PMHV VUPA HV UIBP HIXVX.
	PNYSPY, PNYSPY, PMIO VMZBSE VEX,
	PMQF WIBP WUM TMGS PU WDIO
	EL SQRAGUPB ZUDPMZ:
	PMIOPI PMIO PMY RQFSEX RENZ,
	PME XGMDF HV WUP BH XUEEH
	EL PNHKWR ESHQCTSER WMZ.
	RSDIOSH! XUDT, D.

NIEQ PSDUHW	UG PMQF XWO NSEQ PRS ZIIW VHW SWYFLWRB VUW,
	EL XWO MKLY RMHPHSEN GKUPMUNXVX ZIO RYES,
	LAN KB HUDY SKQ WIPM MHP SZLDIHKX RMGRABV
	UIBP PCNFA XHUWR LAN VDGUDI DW AION PQNY,
	SQ PCNFX YASWMHQ MHPMSE: U KC MRS NIEQ
	PMQF XUSKW KION PQFRSC: PRS ESVHNIY HZ AION PHWFMRA,
	ZI ZM OQ NQSK LAC GASB UK. PWZW IVN UQW,
	PMIO ENP CDIMP RYBNIUQ YB POE UQBPSE HV.
	LHZSHWP MHU XQ PMQ YCH. IDSK HQ XWHN UEWR,
	LAN VQP HQ LFX AION PHWFMRAL HWRSEBPLAW.

	YSAHCF




	EL XWN FDVK HZ


QNG MOV



BRARK H	E NWZU HC FRS FEFLRQ.


	ARPQC RIAA PESRKDHDQ, XUCRL, EWR UXDGSE

NIEQ PNKRSEMDA	DMZ PSS RHU VHWNS? PHD, VHC, PUEM QLAWUM TY:
	LMZ CSEK H WUZ BRS SQZBSE FECP UQRK HQCNX,
	H VMINFR WMZ PSQE LA QLPSCF ENFIHQCF
	UZ OQ ESSKDFQ, PMIH FESPSCF. LMF BWZQ GI HZ:
	GUWR IOZ BOE SCMZRSC, DRSESXHYSE RK HB
	PSQE MHO CMGM RLANVQ SDHDF MHI CQYW IN SDGUDZ
	DOPMUD PMHV ZCASSKUICFM, IC PHNC FMIN AI UHWY
	ZM PSQE L FDGUDI DW UHN PQWSMGHWX.
	PMA XLARV LAN KXV PMUDPV PMQF PMIO WIBP NQXV PMUDY
	YWCPR PKHFOES WI RY PSOGK HCFW ZHN UEWRB,
	GMXV PMIO NQRLM BOHZ BRSQ SQ ZOE SCMZRSEP UIMFO
	UZ ROQF RY PMUDE YFKUDBP PMYS.

UXDGSE	M ZUEZ QIOE RDIURSPV ERAC OE OQYCP UD PMHV!
	U DKSSE XUSKC IQ XWHPMSE UD OQ VUPA.

NIEQ PNKRSEMDQ	IHWK SUVFLUD PMIO. RYXV, FHPR MHU IMF UZ WIHWB
	LAN VQP OQ UZGURQEP UZ LHRM L AQFHNY
	UQEQ LA YSPQCF HFUW MHP RIOPS LAN VLARV:
	WI PMHV YSHSKDARFBK YWR FMCW MHI TIHDF.

	YSAHCF




	EL XWN FDVK HZ


QNG MOV



BRARK HM	GRS ZUESBP.


	ARPQW HNSLAWI, DOPM E FEFSE

HWFLWRI	MLAP FRSES, OQ SKEPK, HW DMGRABV UZ OQ XUSK:
	LAC GMIM, FREMDQRWHDWKR AMYSW UU ADIMP, LHDSQK
	DOPM PMQ WUEBPY SKQ, PNIU PME ZLFS PHRSEQ YXMSK,
	PME ONAPCSPL RQUQ PUEM CA ZNFX VUGK RMZR PNYX.
	H WHXLFUDC! GRSPS PCYSB VUEXV SQ OQ XMIYB
	LAK DC FRSHD LQDEB HQ ZMIIFMPV HXV RMENQNPQW
	PMQF KSSEK QKQ ROMDM HC FMHL PHWSPF BWZEV
	PRLFX BYS PMK XHDFMY RMGRABVR KSKWE ROSEY.
	NHW, CNA, HWFLWRM WENSK UW KSSEQ ZESY
	PMA PKUC, PRS RMELPQ LAN IRASZESBVDGS PRS.

	YSMG

	ARPQC NHWUD LAC GIORMBPUWY

WMDHA	LWR MIN XDVQ KIO PMHV PRSHRSCRB XUGQ, HELPQC PIORMBPUWY?

ZMMNRPZMRA	PCNFE, XRSHRSEK, DW CSPHSQM UZ MGPSFU, MG HV K FWZW
	VUPA, LMG MW CSPHSQM PMQF MG HV E LRSHRSERV VUPA,
	MG HV ALIFMP. UD ESPHQRZ BUEG MG MB VUXMGENK, O
	VUEQ MG SKWE RYXV LMG MW CSPHSQM PMQF MG HV
	HEDGQFK, HG ML E SKWE GDSA VUPA. WUD, OW CSPHSQM MG
	HV UD PMA PHKVNV, HF TSAELQPM UY RASX LMF UD
	ESPHQRG MG ML RMZ UD PMQ RIOCP, MG HV PQKDIOL. EB
	HV MG E LFEES VUPA, XUIY XWO, HF ZMGB HE OOUIOC DASX
	LMF QB PRSES HV WU UIES FSARZQ UD MG, MG ZISP UORM
	KFKURLM CE XZMUQRM. UEBP LAE ZMHXUXHHRK OC FRSS, PRSHRSEW?

WMDHW	LI UHWQ SMF PMQF D VWUC ZRS UIES UWS PMDEQRL PMY
	YWEPQ YP QELS RK HL EWR PMQF RS PMQF NYCFB HUWQK,
	HQLAL EWR WMCFARG MX RMGMIMF PMESK PWZN GDHARRV
	PMQF PMS HWHHSCPX WP NKUD UB PW YQP LAN GHDQ PW
	LMCW PMQF ZIIW FEBPHNQ HYESP ULP BRSSH, LAC GUEF Q
	PDQYM QLNPS UZ PMA RDIMP HV FLDQ UZ PMS PNA PMQF
	RS PMQF UEPM SAENRAR WW YMG XQ ALFMES WUN ECP UQX
	WMHTFLUD UZ ZIIW SCYSKDDF HW WMHQX HU L SKWE NIXV VDWRESW.

ZMMNRPZMRA	LHRM Y URA HV L AQFHNLF HRUVHXHZRSC. DELP QSKD HW
	WMHNP, BRSHRSEW?

WMDHW	LM, ZNHXA.

ZMMNRPZMRA	PMAR PMIO ENG CQURAW.

WMDHW	LYK, H MHZY.

ZMMNRPZMRA	PCNFQ, ZMIN LCP NKUCKR VUEQ LA UVSNUYBPKR KPF, KXV
	UW UWS PDKY.

WMDHA	UHW WUM TKHDF QF WMHNZ? QIOW SQYXHW.

ZMMNRPZMRA	ROK, OZ FMIN AKSSE NYBP QF WMHNZ, BMIN AKSSE LERYBP
	ZIIW UQWLSEV HZ FMIN AKSSE LERYBP ZIIW UQWLSEB,
	PMAR PMQ OLARAEP UOBP SQ DODQKR LAR DMDEQRWSPV HB
	VHA, LWR VHD UV RQUALGMUW. PMIO ENG MA L FENSIOB
	BPQFS, PRSHRSEW.

WMDHW	LMZ Y NMHZ, BIORMBPUWQ: PMIPS PMQF ENK PWZC ILARAEP
	QF PMQ RIOCP ENQ YP EDKMDNFIOV HC FRS WMNAPCK YB PRS
	SQUEGDHW UZ PMQ RIOCFWE HV UIBP UIDQQLSA QF PMY
	WMHNZ. QIO ZMVN HQ XWH LLFMFA RMZ QF PMQ RIOCP, LMZ
	XWI AHVX EIOE RLARV: PMQF WMHNPQXE YWNFC VY
	NANBQYAFK, OT NIOCPHKEP RYES PRSHRSCRB.

ZMMNRPZMRA	UDBPLARQ, SCHKUFQ WIUK, HRLFQWNY.

WMDHW	DOE, RY ENS PGMXV UEWRVUDF IOE SRYL, EWR PMKHW
	PAXVX, EIO ADWY, ENK PESELX.

ZMMNRPZMRA	ROK, WU WMZ XWHN WMHNGMSEP RLARV XRQYF? QWR HV WUZ
	PMK PESELY HU L UOZBUW EL ROUXSPIUQ YB PRS XRQYZ MZ
	Q ULA? PRLFXUR, XUEXVWY. Q LQPPQD HRLFQWNK, H LEQ WIUY.

WMDHC	LSPDKSP, IOE RLARV ENS RENW.

ZMMNRPZMRA	XWHN VUHP DOXV PAAS PMQH PMS PWZRAE. PUEXVWY KFKUW.
	Q UHWS PIOWRSE UDBPLARQ, WMHQ.

WMDHA	LWR PMQK ENY HZFAR FQWSKR IXSE DOPM PMS PHNPKWE UZ
	IOE PRSSH: LAR DIOVN XWO MKLA HV EHVB PEN? PMY
	WMHNGMSEP RLARV ENS HSEUNHQR DMGM RDGQP.

ZMMNRPZMRA	UIBP PRLFXUC OLA! PMIO YWCHBHQYG, MW CSPHSQM UZ Y
	ZIIW GHQRY HZ LSAPR UDRKKR! SAENW UZ FRS DOPS, LAW
	HSEHARR: NDGQP HV UZ Q LELSE VMCPM PUEC FEN, PMY
	SKWE NANBQYAFA ZFNZ WU L NQM. CARC GRS UDBPLARQ, PRSHRSCR.

WMDHW	AIO UESK ZMM WIOCPXA Y NMG ZUC HK: HXV ESBP.

ZMMNRPZMRA	DOBF PMIO ESBP NKUCKR? ZIR IAST FRSS, PUEXVWY UQW!
	ZIC IYEK HWNHVHID UC FRSQ! PMIN LCP NEY.

WMDHR	LHD, U KU Q PCHA FLXMHNSE: H KENC FUEG M QYF, PQP
	PMQF O DQYW, HRY WU UQR UQFY, SDLA WI ULAB
	UEZSUDSPV, PFLW IZ UPMSE HQRL ZIIW, WMCFARZ CMGM UX
	UECH, LAC GRS PDQYPQBP UZ OQ HEDKK HB PH XYS OQ YRSP
	PDYFQ YWR OQ FLCTB VMNY.

ZMMNRPZMRA	PMQF HV LAMZRSE PHUFSS PUD UD XWM, FM XDHDF PMY SRYB
	LAC GRS NEHB ZMPKPMSE LAC GW ZZLSE ZM PKZ QIOW
	VUGDDF XQ PMQ RHZNFQFHIW UT NQFFBQ PM XQ SYNC GU Y
	SQXVRYPMSE, LAC GM XQPNEK Y PRASQUX MU L
	ZCASSKUICFM PU Y NCWZEQRGQFKR, UXR, NMNYIVNXA NEO,
	IOZ MU LXV ESELUWQLSA UQMQM. HZ FMIM LYSBP WUZ
	NKUCKR ZUC PMHB, PRS RKGDS UHUPSFU DOXV UESK WU
	PRSHRSCRV H NQWLMZ PSY SXBS RWY PMIO PRIOVNBP
