
CORIN	Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new mistresss brother.

	Enter ROSALIND, with a paper, reading

ROSALIND	     From the east to western Ind,
	No jewel is like Rosalind.
	Her worth, being mounted on the wind,
	Through all the world bears Rosalind.
	All the pictures fairest lined
	Are but black to Rosalind.
	Let no fair be kept in mind
	But the fair of Rosalind.

TOUCHSTONE	Ill rhyme you so eight years together, dinners and
	suppers and sleepinghours excepted: it is the
	right butterwomens rank to market.

ROSALIND	Out, fool!

TOUCHSTONE	For a taste:
	If a hart do lack a hind,
	Let him seek out Rosalind.
	If the cat will after kind,
	So be sure will Rosalind.
	Winter garments must be lined,
	So must slender Rosalind.
	They that reap must sheaf and bind
	Then to cart with Rosalind.
	Sweetest nut hath sourest rind,
	Such a nut is Rosalind.
	He that sweetest rose will find
	Must find loves prick and Rosalind.
	This is the very false gallop of verses: why do you
	infect yourself with them?

ROSALIND	Peace, you dull fool! I found them on a tree.

TOUCHSTONE	Truly, the tree yields bad fruit.

ROSALIND	Ill graff it with you, and then I shall graff it
	with a medlar: then it will be the earliest fruit
	i the country for youll be rotten ere you be half
	ripe, and thats the right virtue of the medlar.

TOUCHSTONE	You have said but whether wisely or no, let the
	forest judge.

	Enter CELIA, with a writing

ROSALIND	Peace! Here comes my sister, reading: stand aside.

CELIA	Reads

	Why should this a desert be?
	For it is unpeopled? No:
	Tongues Ill hang on every tree,
	That shall civil sayings show:
	Some, how brief the life of man
	Runs his erring pilgrimage,
	That the stretching of a span
	Buckles in his sum of age
	Some, of violated vows
	Twixt the souls of friend and friend:
	But upon the fairest boughs,
	Or at every sentence end,
	Will I Rosalinda write,
	Teaching all that read to know
	The quintessence of every sprite
	Heaven would in little show.
	Therefore Heaven Nature charged
	That one body should be filld
	With all graces wideenlarged:
	Nature presently distilld
	Helens cheek, but not her heart,
	Cleopatras majesty,
	Atalantas better part,
	Sad Lucretias modesty.
	Thus Rosalind of many parts
	By heavenly synod was devised,
	Of many faces, eyes and hearts,
	To have the touches dearest prized.
	Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
	And I to live and die her slave.

ROSALIND	O most gentle pulpiter! what tedious homily of love
	have you wearied your parishioners withal, and never
	cried Have patience, good people!

CELIA	How now! back, friends! Shepherd, go off a little.
	Go with him, sirrah.

TOUCHSTONE	Come, shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat
	though not with bag and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.

	Exeunt CORIN and TOUCHSTONE

CELIA	Didst thou hear these verses?

ROSALIND	O, yes, I heard them all, and more too for some of
	them had in them more feet than the verses would bear.

CELIA	Thats no matter: the feet might bear the verses.

ROSALIND	Ay, but the feet were lame and could not bear
	themselves without the verse and therefore stood
	lamely in the verse.

CELIA	But didst thou hear without wondering how thy name
	should be hanged and carved upon these trees?

ROSALIND	I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder
	before you came for look here what I found on a
	palmtree. I was never so berhymed since
	Pythagoras time, that I was an Irish rat, which I
	can hardly remember.

CELIA	Trow you who hath done this?

ROSALIND	Is it a man?

CELIA	And a chain, that you once wore, about his neck.
	Change you colour?

ROSALIND	I prithee, who?

CELIA	O Lord, Lord! it is a hard matter for friends to
	meet but mountains may be removed with earthquakes
	and so encounter.

ROSALIND	Nay, but who is it?

CELIA	Is it possible?

ROSALIND	Nay, I prithee now with most petitionary vehemence,
	tell me who it is.

CELIA	O wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful
	wonderful! and yet again wonderful, and after that,
	out of all hooping!

ROSALIND	Good my complexion! dost thou think, though I am
	caparisoned like a man, I have a doublet and hose in
	my disposition? One inch of delay more is a
	Southsea of discovery I prithee, tell me who is it
	quickly, and speak apace. I would thou couldst
	stammer, that thou mightst pour this concealed man
	out of thy mouth, as wine comes out of a narrow
	mouthed bottle, either too much at once, or none at
	all. I prithee, take the cork out of thy mouth that
	may drink thy tidings.

CELIA	So you may put a man in your belly.

ROSALIND	Is he of Gods making? What manner of man? Is his
	head worth a hat, or his chin worth a beard?

CELIA	Nay, he hath but a little beard.

ROSALIND	Why, God will send more, if the man will be
	thankful: let me stay the growth of his beard, if
	thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.

CELIA	It is young Orlando, that tripped up the wrestlers
	heels and your heart both in an instant.

ROSALIND	Nay, but the devil take mocking: speak, sad brow and
	true maid.

CELIA	I faith, coz, tis he.

ROSALIND	Orlando?

CELIA	Orlando.

ROSALIND	Alas the day! what shall I do with my doublet and
	hose? What did he when thou sawest him? What said
	he? How looked he? Wherein went he? What makes
	him here? Did he ask for me? Where remains he?
	How parted he with thee? and when shalt thou see
	him again? Answer me in one word.

CELIA	You must borrow me Gargantuas mouth first: tis a
	word too great for any mouth of this ages size. To
	say ay and no to these particulars is more than to
	answer in a catechism.

ROSALIND	But doth he know that I am in this forest and in
	mans apparel? Looks he as freshly as he did the
	day he wrestled?

CELIA	It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the
	propositions of a lover but take a taste of my
	finding him, and relish it with good observance.
	I found him under a tree, like a dropped acorn.

ROSALIND	It may well be called Joves tree, when it drops
	forth such fruit.

CELIA	Give me audience, good madam.

ROSALIND	Proceed.

CELIA	There lay he, stretched along, like a wounded knight.

ROSALIND	Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well
	becomes the ground.

CELIA	Cry holla to thy tongue, I prithee it curvets
	unseasonably. He was furnished like a hunter.

ROSALIND	O, ominous! he comes to kill my heart.

CELIA	I would sing my song without a burden: thou bringest
	me out of tune.

ROSALIND	Do you not know I am a woman? when I think, I must
	speak. Sweet, say on.

CELIA	You bring me out. Soft! comes he not here?

	Enter ORLANDO and JAQUES

ROSALIND	Tis he: slink by, and note him.

JAQUES	I thank you for your company but, good faith, I had
	as lief have been myself alone.

ORLANDO	And so had I but yet, for fashion sake, I thank you
	too for your society.

JAQUES	God be wi you: lets meet as little as we can.

ORLANDO	I do desire we may be better strangers.

JAQUES	I pray you, mar no more trees with writing
	lovesongs in their barks.

ORLANDO	I pray you, mar no more of my verses with reading
	them illfavouredly.

JAQUES	Rosalind is your loves name?

ORLANDO	Yes, just.

JAQUES	I do not like her name.

ORLANDO	There was no thought of pleasing you when she was
	christened.

JAQUES	What stature is she of?

ORLANDO	Just as high as my heart.

JAQUES	You are full of pretty answers. Have you not been
	acquainted with goldsmiths wives, and conned them
	out of rings?

ORLANDO	Not so but I answer you right painted cloth, from
	whence you have studied your questions.

JAQUES	You have a nimble wit: I think twas made of
	Atalantas heels. Will you sit down with me? and
	we two will rail against our mistress the world and
	all our misery.

ORLANDO	I will chide no breather in the world but myself,
	against whom I know most faults.

JAQUES	The worst fault you have is to be in love.

ORLANDO	Tis a fault I will not change for your best virtue.
	I am weary of you.

JAQUES	By my troth, I was seeking for a fool when I found
	you.

ORLANDO	He is drowned in the brook: look but in, and you
	shall see him.

JAQUES	There I shall see mine own figure.

ORLANDO	Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher.

JAQUES	Ill tarry no longer with you: farewell, good
	Signior Love.

ORLANDO	I am glad of your departure: adieu, good Monsieur
	Melancholy.

	Exit JAQUES

ROSALIND	Aside to CELIA  I will speak to him, like a saucy
	lackey and under that habit play the knave with him.
	Do you hear, forester?

ORLANDO	Very well: what would you?

ROSALIND	I pray you, what ist oclock?

ORLANDO	You should ask me what time o day: theres no clock
	in the forest.

ROSALIND	Then there is no true lover in the forest else
	sighing every minute and groaning every hour would
	detect the lazy foot of Time as well as a clock.

ORLANDO	And why not the swift foot of Time? had not that
	been as proper?

ROSALIND	By no means, sir: Time travels in divers paces with
	divers persons. Ill tell you who Time ambles
	withal, who Time trots withal, who Time gallops
	withal and who he stands still withal.

ORLANDO	I prithee, who doth he trot withal?

ROSALIND	Marry, he trots hard with a young maid between the
	contract of her marriage and the day it is
	solemnized: if the interim be but a sennight,
	Times pace is so hard that it seems the length of
	seven year.

ORLANDO	Who ambles Time withal?

ROSALIND	With a priest that lacks Latin and a rich man that
	hath not the gout, for the one sleeps easily because
	he cannot study, and the other lives merrily because
	he feels no pain, the one lacking the burden of lean
	and wasteful learning, the other knowing no burden
	of heavy tedious penury these Time ambles withal.

ORLANDO	Who doth he gallop withal?

ROSALIND	With a thief to the gallows, for though he go as
	softly as foot can fall, he thinks himself too soon there.

ORLANDO	Who stays it still withal?

ROSALIND	With lawyers in the vacation, for they sleep between
	term and term and then they perceive not how Time moves.

ORLANDO	Where dwell you, pretty youth?

ROSALIND	With this shepherdess, my sister here in the
	skirts of the forest, like fringe upon a petticoat.

ORLANDO	Are you native of this place?

ROSALIND	As the cony that you see dwell where she is kindled.

ORLANDO	Your accent is something finer than you could
	purchase in so removed a dwelling.

ROSALIND	I have been told so of many: but indeed an old
	religious uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was
	in his youth an inland man one that knew courtship
	too well, for there he fell in love. I have heard
	him read many lectures against it, and I thank God
	I am not a woman, to be touched with so many
	giddy offences as he hath generally taxed their
	whole sex withal.

ORLANDO	Can you remember any of the principal evils that he
	laid to the charge of women?

ROSALIND	There were none principal they were all like one
	another as halfpence are, every one fault seeming
	monstrous till his fellow fault came to match it.

ORLANDO	I prithee, recount some of them.

ROSALIND	No, I will not cast away my physic but on those that
	are sick. There is a man haunts the forest, that
	abuses our young plants with carving Rosalind on
	their barks hangs odes upon hawthorns and elegies
	on brambles, all, forsooth, deifying the name of
	Rosalind: if I could meet that fancymonger I would
	give him some good counsel, for he seems to have the
	quotidian of love upon him.

ORLANDO	I am he that is so loveshaked: I pray you tell me
	your remedy.

ROSALIND	There is none of my uncles marks upon you: he
	taught me how to know a man in love in which cage
	of rushes I am sure you are not prisoner.

ORLANDO	What were his marks?

ROSALIND	A lean cheek, which you have not, a blue eye and
	sunken, which you have not, an unquestionable
	spirit, which you have not, a beard neglected,
	which you have not but I pardon you for that, for
	simply your having in beard is a younger brothers
	revenue: then your hose should be ungartered, your
	bonnet unbanded, your sleeve unbuttoned, your shoe
	untied and every thing about you demonstrating a
	careless desolation but you are no such man you
	are rather pointdevice in your accoutrements as
	loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other.

ORLANDO	Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I love.

ROSALIND	Me believe it! you may as soon make her that you
	love believe it which, I warrant, she is apter to
	do than to confess she does: that is one of the
	points in the which women still give the lie to
	their consciences. But, in good sooth, are you he
	that hangs the verses on the trees, wherein Rosalind
	is so admired?

ORLANDO	I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of
	Rosalind, I am that he, that unfortunate he.

ROSALIND	But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?

ORLANDO	Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.

ROSALIND	Love is merely a madness, and, I tell you, deserves
	as well a dark house and a whip as madmen do: and
	the reason why they are not so punished and cured
	is, that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers
	are in love too. Yet I profess curing it by counsel.

ORLANDO	Did you ever cure any so?

ROSALIND	Yes, one, and in this manner. He was to imagine me
	his love, his mistress and I set him every day to
	woo me: at which time would I, being but a moonish
	youth, grieve, be effeminate, changeable, longing
	and liking, proud, fantastical, apish, shallow,
	inconstant, full of tears, full of smiles, for every
	passion something and for no passion truly any
	thing, as boys and women are for the most part
	cattle of this colour would now like him, now loathe
	him then entertain him, then forswear him now weep
	for him, then spit at him that I drave my suitor
	from his mad humour of love to a living humour of
	madness which was, to forswear the full stream of
	the world, and to live in a nook merely monastic.
	And thus I cured him and this way will I take upon
	me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheeps
	heart, that there shall not be one spot of love int.

ORLANDO	I would not be cured, youth.

ROSALIND	I would cure you, if you would but call me Rosalind
	and come every day to my cote and woo me.

ORLANDO	Now, by the faith of my love, I will: tell me
	where it is.

ROSALIND	Go with me to it and Ill show it you and by the way
	you shall tell me where in the forest you live.
	Will you go?

ORLANDO	With all my heart, good youth.

ROSALIND	Nay you must call me Rosalind. Come, sister, will you go?

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE III	The forest.


	Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY JAQUES behind

TOUCHSTONE	Come apace, good Audrey: I will fetch up your
	goats, Audrey. And how, Audrey? am I the man yet?
	doth my simple feature content you?

AUDREY	Your features! Lord warrant us! what features!

TOUCHSTONE	I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most
	capricious poet, honest Ovid, was among the Goths.

JAQUES	Aside  O knowledge illinhabited, worse than Jove
	in a thatched house!

TOUCHSTONE	When a mans verses cannot be understood, nor a
	mans good wit seconded with the forward child
	Understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a
	great reckoning in a little room. Truly, I would
	the gods had made thee poetical.

AUDREY	I do not know what poetical is: is it honest in
	deed and word? is it a true thing?

TOUCHSTONE	No, truly for the truest poetry is the most
	feigning and lovers are given to poetry, and what
	they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do feign.

AUDREY	Do you wish then that the gods had made me poetical?

TOUCHSTONE	I do, truly for thou swearest to me thou art
	honest: now, if thou wert a poet, I might have some
	hope thou didst feign.

AUDREY	Would you not have me honest?

TOUCHSTONE	No, truly, unless thou wert hardfavoured for
	honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.

JAQUES	Aside  A material fool!

AUDREY	 Well, I am not fair and therefore I pray the gods
	make me honest.

TOUCHSTONE	Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut
	were to put good meat into an unclean dish.

AUDREY	I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am foul.

TOUCHSTONE	Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness!
	sluttishness may come hereafter. But be it as it may
	be, I will marry thee, and to that end I have been
	with Sir Oliver Martext, the vicar of the next
	village, who hath promised to meet me in this place
	of the forest and to couple us.

JAQUES	Aside  I would fain see this meeting.

AUDREY	Well, the gods give us joy!

TOUCHSTONE	Amen. A man may, if he were of a fearful heart,
	stagger in this attempt for here we have no temple
	but the wood, no assembly but hornbeasts. But what
	though? Courage! As horns are odious, they are
	necessary. It is said, many a man knows no end of
	his goods: right many a man has good horns, and
	knows no end of them. Well, that is the dowry of
	his wife tis none of his own getting. Horns?
	Even so. Poor men alone? No, no the noblest deer
	hath them as huge as the rascal. Is the single man
	therefore blessed? No: as a walled town is more
	worthier than a village, so is the forehead of a
	married man more honourable than the bare brow of a
	bachelor and by how much defence is better than no
	skill, by so much is a horn more precious than to
	want. Here comes Sir Oliver.

	Enter SIR OLIVER MARTEXT

	Sir Oliver Martext, you are well met: will you
	dispatch us here under this tree, or shall we go
	with you to your chapel?

SIR OLIVER MARTEXT	Is there none here to give the woman?

TOUCHSTONE	I will not take her on gift of any man.

SIR OLIVER MARTEXT	Truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.

JAQUES	Advancing

	Proceed, proceed	Ill give her.

TOUCHSTONE	Good even, good Master Whatyecallt: how do you,
	sir? You are very well met: God ild you for your
	last company: I am very glad to see you: even a
	toy in hand here, sir: nay, pray be covered.

JAQUES	Will you be married, motley?

TOUCHSTONE	As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb and
	the falcon her bells, so man hath his desires and
	as pigeons bill, so wedlock would be nibbling.

JAQUES	And will you, being a man of your breeding, be
	married under a bush like a beggar? Get you to
	church, and have a good priest that can tell you
	what marriage is: this fellow will but join you
	together as they join wainscot then one of you will
	prove a shrunk panel and, like green timber, warp, warp.

TOUCHSTONE	Aside  I am not in the mind but I were better to be
	married of him than of another: for he is not like
	to marry me well and not being well married, it
	will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my wife.

JAQUES	Go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.

TOUCHSTONE	Come, sweet Audrey:
	We must be married, or we must live in bawdry.
	Farewell, good Master Oliver: not,
	O sweet Oliver,
	O brave Oliver,
	Leave me not behind thee: but,
	Wind away,
	Begone, I say,
	I will not to wedding with thee.

	Exeunt JAQUES, TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

SIR OLIVER MARTEXT	Tis no matter: neer a fantastical knave of them
	all shall flout me out of my calling.

	Exit




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE IV	The forest.


	Enter ROSALIND and CELIA

ROSALIND	Never talk to me I will weep.

CELIA	Do, I prithee but yet have the grace to consider
	that tears do not become a man.

ROSALIND	But have I not cause to weep?

CELIA	As good cause as one would desire therefore weep.

ROSALIND	His very hair is of the dissembling colour.

CELIA	Something browner than Judass marry, his kisses are
	Judass own children.

ROSALIND	I faith, his hair is of a good colour.

CELIA	An excellent colour: your chestnut was ever the only colour.

ROSALIND	And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch
	of holy bread.

CELIA	He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana: a nun
	of winters sisterhood kisses not more religiously
	the very ice of chastity is in them.

ROSALIND	But why did he swear he would come this morning, and
	comes not?

CELIA	Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.

ROSALIND	Do you think so?

CELIA	Yes I think he is not a pickpurse nor a
	horsestealer, but for his verity in love, I do
	think him as concave as a covered goblet or a
	wormeaten nut.

ROSALIND	Not true in love?

CELIA	Yes, when he is in but I think he is not in.

ROSALIND	You have heard him swear downright he was.

CELIA	Was is not is: besides, the oath of a lover is
	no stronger than the word of a tapster they are
	both the confirmer of false reckonings. He attends
	here in the forest on the duke your father.

ROSALIND	I met the duke yesterday and had much question with
	him: he asked me of what parentage I was I told
	him, of as good as he so he laughed and let me go.
	But what talk we of fathers, when there is such a
	man as Orlando?

CELIA	O, thats a brave man! he writes brave verses,
	speaks brave words, swears brave oaths and breaks
	them bravely, quite traverse, athwart the heart of
	his lover as a puisny tilter, that spurs his horse
	but on one side, breaks his staff like a noble
	goose: but alls brave that youth mounts and folly
	guides. Who comes here?

	Enter CORIN

CORIN	Mistress and master, you have oft inquired
	After the shepherd that complaind of love,
	Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,
	Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
	That was his mistress.

CELIA	Well, and what of him?

CORIN	If you will see a pageant truly playd,
	Between the pale complexion of true love
	And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
	Go hence a little and I shall conduct you,
	If you will mark it.

ROSALIND	O, come, let us remove:
	The sight of lovers feedeth those in love.
	Bring us to this sight, and you shall say
	Ill prove a busy actor in their play.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE V	Another part of the forest.


	Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE

SILVIUS	Sweet Phebe, do not scorn me do not, Phebe
	Say that you love me not, but say not so
	In bitterness. The common executioner,
	Whose heart the accustomd sight of death makes hard,
	Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck
	But first begs pardon: will you sterner be
	Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?

	Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and CORIN, behind

PHEBE	I would not be thy executioner:
	I fly thee, for I would not injure thee.
	Thou tellst me there is murder in mine eye:
	Tis pretty, sure, and very probable,
	That eyes, that are the frailst and softest things,
	Who shut their coward gates on atomies,
	Should be calld tyrants, butchers, murderers!
	Now I do frown on thee with all my heart
	And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee:
	Now counterfeit to swoon why now fall down
	Or if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,
	Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers!
	Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee:
	Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
	Some scar of it lean but upon a rush,
	The cicatrice and capable impressure
	Thy palm some moment keeps but now mine eyes,
	Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not,
	Nor, I am sure, there is no force in eyes
	That can do hurt.

SILVIUS	                  O dear Phebe,
	If ever,as that ever may be near,
	You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
	Then shall you know the wounds invisible
	That loves keen arrows make.

PHEBE	But till that time
	Come not thou near me: and when that time comes,
	Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not
	As till that time I shall not pity thee.

ROSALIND	And why, I pray you? Who might be your mother,
	That you insult, exult, and all at once,
	Over the wretched? What though you have no beauty,
	As, by my faith, I see no more in you
	Than without candle may go dark to bed
	Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
	Why, what means this? Why do you look on me?
	I see no more in you than in the ordinary
	Of natures salework. Ods my little life,
	I think she means to tangle my eyes too!
	No, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it:
	Tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
	Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream,
	That can entame my spirits to your worship.
	You foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her,
	Like foggy south puffing with wind and rain?
	You are a thousand times a properer man
	Than she a woman: tis such fools as you
	That makes the world full of illfavourd children:
	Tis not her glass, but you, that flatters her
	And out of you she sees herself more proper
	Than any of her lineaments can show her.
	But, mistress, know yourself: down on your knees,
	And thank heaven, fasting, for a good mans love:
	For I must tell you friendly in your ear,
	Sell when you can: you are not for all markets:
	Cry the man mercy love him take his offer:
	Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.
	So take her to thee, shepherd: fare you well.

PHEBE	Sweet youth, I pray you, chide a year together:
	I had rather hear you chide than this man woo.

ROSALIND	Hes fallen in love with your foulness and shell
	fall in love with my anger. If it be so, as fast as
	she answers thee with frowning looks, Ill sauce her
	with bitter words. Why look you so upon me?

PHEBE	For no ill will I bear you.

ROSALIND	I pray you, do not fall in love with me,
	For I am falser than vows made in wine:
	Besides, I like you not. If you will know my house,
	Tis at the tuft of olives here hard by.
	Will you go, sister? Shepherd, ply her hard.
	Come, sister. Shepherdess, look on him better,
	And be not proud: though all the world could see,
	None could be so abused in sight as he.
	Come, to our flock.

	Exeunt ROSALIND, CELIA and CORIN

PHEBE	Dead Shepherd, now I find thy saw of might,
	Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?

SILVIUS	Sweet Phebe,

PHEBE	                  Ha, what sayst thou, Silvius?

SILVIUS	Sweet Phebe, pity me.

PHEBE	Why, I am sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.

SILVIUS	Wherever sorrow is, relief would be:
	If you do sorrow at my grief in love,
	By giving love your sorrow and my grief
	Were both extermined.

PHEBE	Thou hast my love: is not that neighbourly?

SILVIUS	I would have you.

PHEBE	                  Why, that were covetousness.
	Silvius, the time was that I hated thee,
	And yet it is not that I bear thee love
	But since that thou canst talk of love so well,
	Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
	I will endure, and Ill employ thee too:
	But do not look for further recompense
	Than thine own gladness that thou art employd.

SILVIUS	So holy and so perfect is my love,
	And I in such a poverty of grace,
	That I shall think it a most plenteous crop
	To glean the broken ears after the man
	That the main harvest reaps: loose now and then
	A scatterd smile, and that Ill live upon.

PHEBE	Knowst now the youth that spoke to me erewhile?

SILVIUS	Not very well, but I have met him oft
	And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds
	That the old carlot once was master of.

PHEBE	Think not I love him, though I ask for him:
	Tis but a peevish boy yet he talks well
	But what care I for words? yet words do well
	When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.
	It is a pretty youth: not very pretty:
	But, sure, hes proud, and yet his pride becomes him:
	Hell make a proper man: the best thing in him
	Is his complexion and faster than his tongue
	Did make offence his eye did heal it up.
	He is not very tall yet for his years hes tall:
	His leg is but so so and yet tis well:
	There was a pretty redness in his lip,
	A little riper and more lusty red
	Than that mixd in his cheek twas just the difference
	Between the constant red and mingled damask.
	There be some women, Silvius, had they markd him
	In parcels as I did, would have gone near
	To fall in love with him but, for my part,
	I love him not nor hate him not and yet
	I have more cause to hate him than to love him:
	For what had he to do to chide at me?
	He said mine eyes were black and my hair black:
	And, now I am rememberd, scornd at me:
	I marvel why I answerd not again:
	But thats all one omittance is no quittance.
	Ill write to him a very taunting letter,
	And thou shalt bear it: wilt thou, Silvius?

SILVIUS	Phebe, with all my heart.

PHEBE	Ill write it straight
	The matters in my head and in my heart:
	I will be bitter with him and passing short.
	Go with me, Silvius.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT IV



SCENE I	The forest.


	Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and JAQUES

JAQUES	I prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted
	with thee.

ROSALIND	They say you are a melancholy fellow.

JAQUES	I am so I do love it better than laughing.

ROSALIND	Those that are in extremity of either are abominable
	fellows and betray themselves to every modern
	censure worse than drunkards.

JAQUES	Why, tis good to be sad and say nothing.

ROSALIND	Why then, tis good to be a post.

JAQUES	I have neither the scholars melancholy, which is
	emulation, nor the musicians, which is fantastical,
	nor the courtiers, which is proud, nor the
	soldiers, which is ambitious, nor the lawyers,
	which is politic, nor the ladys, which is nice, nor
	the lovers, which is all these: but it is a
	melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples,
	extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundrys
	contemplation of my travels, in which my often
	rumination wraps me m a most humorous sadness.

ROSALIND	A traveller! By my faith, you have great reason to
	be sad: I fear you have sold your own lands to see
	other mens then, to have seen much and to have
	nothing, is to have rich eyes and poor hands.

JAQUES	Yes, I have gained my experience.

ROSALIND	And your experience makes you sad: I had rather have
	a fool to make me merry than experience to make me
	sad and to travel for it too!

	Enter ORLANDO

ORLANDO	Good day and happiness, dear Rosalind!

JAQUES	Nay, then, God be wi you, an you talk in blank verse.

	Exit

ROSALIND	Farewell, Monsieur Traveller: look you lisp and
	wear strange suits, disable all the benefits of your
	own country, be out of love with your nativity and
	almost chide God for making you that countenance you
	are, or I will scarce think you have swam in a
	gondola. Why, how now, Orlando! where have you been
	all this while? You a lover! An you serve me such
	another trick, never come in my sight more.

ORLANDO	My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.

ROSALIND	Break an hours promise in love! He that will
	divide a minute into a thousand parts and break but
	a part of the thousandth part of a minute in the
	affairs of love, it may be said of him that Cupid
	hath clapped him o the shoulder, but Ill warrant
	him heartwhole.

ORLANDO	Pardon me, dear Rosalind.

ROSALIND	Nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight: I
	had as lief be wooed of a snail.

ORLANDO	Of a snail?

ROSALIND	Ay, of a snail for though he comes slowly, he
	carries his house on his head a better jointure,
	I think, than you make a woman: besides he brings
	his destiny with him.

ORLANDO	Whats that?

ROSALIND	Why, horns, which such as you are fain to be
	beholding to your wives for: but he comes armed in
	his fortune and prevents the slander of his wife.

ORLANDO	Virtue is no hornmaker and my Rosalind is virtuous.

ROSALIND	And I am your Rosalind.

CELIA	It pleases him to call you so but he hath a
	Rosalind of a better leer than you.

ROSALIND	Come, woo me, woo me, for now I am in a holiday
	humour and like enough to consent. What would you
	say to me now, an I were your very very Rosalind?

ORLANDO	I would kiss before I spoke.

ROSALIND	Nay, you were better speak first, and when you were
	gravelled for lack of matter, you might take
	occasion to kiss. Very good orators, when they are
	out, they will spit and for lovers lackingGod
	warn us!matter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss.

ORLANDO	How if the kiss be denied?

ROSALIND	Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.

ORLANDO	Who could be out, being before his beloved mistress?

ROSALIND	Marry, that should you, if I were your mistress, or
	I should think my honesty ranker than my wit.

ORLANDO	What, of my suit?

ROSALIND	Not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit.
	Am not I your Rosalind?

ORLANDO	I take some joy to say you are, because I would be
	talking of her.

ROSALIND	Well in her person I say I will not have you.

ORLANDO	Then in mine own person I die.

ROSALIND	No, faith, die by attorney. The poor world is
	almost six thousand years old, and in all this time
	there was not any man died in his own person,
	videlicit, in a lovecause. Troilus had his brains
	dashed out with a Grecian club yet he did what he
	could to die before, and he is one of the patterns
	of love. Leander, he would have lived many a fair
	year, though Hero had turned nun, if it had not been
	for a hot midsummer night for, good youth, he went
	but forth to wash him in the Hellespont and being
	taken with the cramp was drowned and the foolish
	coroners of that age found it was Hero of Sestos.
	But these are all lies: men have died from time to
	time and worms have eaten them, but not for love.

ORLANDO	I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind,
	for, I protest, her frown might kill me.

ROSALIND	By this hand, it will not kill a fly. But come, now
	I will be your Rosalind in a more comingon
	disposition, and ask me what you will. I will grant
	it.

ORLANDO	Then love me, Rosalind.

ROSALIND	Yes, faith, will I, Fridays and Saturdays and all.

ORLANDO	And wilt thou have me?

ROSALIND	Ay, and twenty such.

ORLANDO	What sayest thou?

ROSALIND	Are you not good?

ORLANDO	I hope so.

ROSALIND	Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing?
	Come, sister, you shall be the priest and marry us.
	Give me your hand, Orlando. What do you say, sister?

ORLANDO	Pray thee, marry us.

CELIA	I cannot say the words.

ROSALIND	You must begin, Will you, Orlando

CELIA	Go to. Will you, Orlando, have to wife this Rosalind?

ORLANDO	I will.

ROSALIND	Ay, but when?

ORLANDO	Why now as fast as she can marry us.

ROSALIND	Then you must say I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.

ORLANDO	I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.

ROSALIND	I might ask you for your commission but I do take
	thee, Orlando, for my husband: theres a girl goes
	before the priest and certainly a womans thought
	runs before her actions.

ORLANDO	So do all thoughts they are winged.

ROSALIND	Now tell me how long you would have her after you
	have possessed her.

ORLANDO	For ever and a day.

ROSALIND	Say a day, without the ever. No, no, Orlando
	men are April when they woo, December when they wed:
	maids are May when they are maids, but the sky
	changes when they are wives. I will be more jealous
	of thee than a Barbary cockpigeon over his hen,
	more clamorous than a parrot against rain, more
	newfangled than an ape, more giddy in my desires
	than a monkey: I will weep for nothing, like Diana
	in the fountain, and I will do that when you are
	disposed to be merry I will laugh like a hyen, and
	that when thou art inclined to sleep.

ORLANDO	But will my Rosalind do so?

ROSALIND	By my life, she will do as I do.

ORLANDO	O, but she is wise.

ROSALIND	Or else she could not have the wit to do this: the
	wiser, the waywarder: make the doors upon a womans
	wit and it will out at the casement shut that and
	twill out at the keyhole stop that, twill fly
	with the smoke out at the chimney.

ORLANDO	A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say
	Wit, whither wilt?

ROSALIND	Nay, you might keep that cheque for it till you met
	your wifes wit going to your neighbours bed.

ORLANDO	And what wit could wit have to excuse that?

ROSALIND	Marry, to say she came to seek you there. You shall
	never take her without her answer, unless you take
	her without her tongue. O, that woman that cannot
	make her fault her husbands occasion, let her
	never nurse her child herself, for she will breed
	it like a fool!

ORLANDO	For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave thee.

ROSALIND	Alas! dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours.

ORLANDO	I must attend the duke at dinner: by two oclock I
	will be with thee again.

ROSALIND	Ay, go your ways, go your ways I knew what you
	would prove: my friends told me as much, and I
	thought no less: that flattering tongue of yours
	won me: tis but one cast away, and so, come,
	death! Two oclock is your hour?

ORLANDO	Ay, sweet Rosalind.

ROSALIND	By my troth, and in good earnest, and so God mend
	me, and by all pretty oaths that are not dangerous,
	if you break one jot of your promise or come one
	minute behind your hour, I will think you the most
	pathetical breakpromise and the most hollow lover
	and the most unworthy of her you call Rosalind that
	may be chosen out of the gross band of the
	unfaithful: therefore beware my censure and keep
	your promise.

ORLANDO	With no less religion than if thou wert indeed my
	Rosalind: so adieu.

ROSALIND	Well, Time is the old justice that examines all such
	offenders, and let Time try: adieu.

	Exit ORLANDO

CELIA	You have simply misused our sex in your loveprate:
	we must have your doublet and hose plucked over your
	head, and show the world what the bird hath done to
	her own nest.

ROSALIND	O coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou
	didst know how many fathom deep I am in love! But
	it cannot be sounded: my affection hath an unknown
	bottom, like the bay of Portugal.

CELIA	Or rather, bottomless, that as fast as you pour
	affection in, it runs out.

ROSALIND	No, that same wicked bastard of Venus that was begot
	of thought, conceived of spleen and born of madness,
	that blind rascally boy that abuses every ones eyes
	because his own are out, let him be judge how deep I
	am in love. Ill tell thee, Aliena, I cannot be out
	of the sight of Orlando: Ill go find a shadow and
	sigh till he come.

CELIA	And Ill sleep.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT IV



SCENE II	The forest.


	Enter JAQUES, Lords, and Foresters

JAQUES	Which is he that killed the deer?

A Lord	Sir, it was I.

JAQUES	Lets present him to the duke, like a Roman
	conqueror and it would do well to set the deers
	horns upon his head, for a branch of victory. Have
	you no song, forester, for this purpose?

Forester	Yes, sir.

JAQUES	Sing it: tis no matter how it be in tune, so it
	make noise enough.

	SONG.
Forester	What shall he have that killd the deer?
	His leather skin and horns to wear.
	Then sing him home

	The rest shall bear this burden

	Take thou no scorn to wear the horn
	It was a crest ere thou wast born:
	Thy fathers father wore it,
	And thy father bore it:
	The horn, the horn, the lusty horn
	Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT IV



SCENE III	The forest.


	Enter ROSALIND and CELIA

ROSALIND	How say you now? Is it not past two oclock? and
	here much Orlando!

CELIA	I warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain, he
	hath taen his bow and arrows and is gone forth to
	sleep. Look, who comes here.

	Enter SILVIUS

SILVIUS	My errand is to you, fair youth
	My gentle Phebe bid me give you this:
	I know not the contents but, as I guess
	By the stern brow and waspish action
	Which she did use as she was writing of it,
	It bears an angry tenor: pardon me:
	I am but as a guiltless messenger.

ROSALIND	Patience herself would startle at this letter
	And play the swaggerer bear this, bear all:
	She says I am not fair, that I lack manners
	She calls me proud, and that she could not love me,
	Were man as rare as phoenix. Ods my will!
	Her love is not the hare that I do hunt:
	Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well,
	This is a letter of your own device.

SILVIUS	No, I protest, I know not the contents:
	Phebe did write it.

ROSALIND	Come, come, you are a fool
	And turnd into the extremity of love.
	I saw her hand: she has a leathern hand.
	A freestonecolourd hand I verily did think
	That her old gloves were on, but twas her hands:
	She has a huswifes hand but thats no matter:
	I say she never did invent this letter
	This is a mans invention and his hand.

SILVIUS	Sure, it is hers.

ROSALIND	Why, tis a boisterous and a cruel style.
	A style forchallengers why, she defies me,
	Like Turk to Christian: womens gentle brain
	Could not drop forth such giantrude invention
	Such Ethiope words, blacker in their effect
	Than in their countenance. Will you hear the letter?

SILVIUS	So please you, for I never heard it yet
	Yet heard too much of Phebes cruelty.

ROSALIND	She Phebes me: mark how the tyrant writes.

	Reads

	Art thou god to shepherd turnd,
	That a maidens heart hath burnd?
	Can a woman rail thus?

SILVIUS	Call you this railing?

ROSALIND	Reads

	Why, thy godhead laid apart,
	Warrst thou with a womans heart?
	Did you ever hear such railing?
	Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
	That could do no vengeance to me.
	Meaning me a beast.
	If the scorn of your bright eyne
	Have power to raise such love in mine,
	Alack, in me what strange effect
	Would they work in mild aspect!
	Whiles you chid me, I did love
	How then might your prayers move!
	He that brings this love to thee
	Little knows this love in me:
	And by him seal up thy mind
	Whether that thy youth and kind
	Will the faithful offer take
	Of me and all that I can make
	Or else by him my love deny,
	And then Ill study how to die.

SILVIUS	Call you this chiding?

CELIA	Alas, poor shepherd!

ROSALIND	Do you pity him? no, he deserves no pity. Wilt
	thou love such a woman? What, to make thee an
	instrument and play false strains upon thee! not to
	be endured! Well, go your way to her, for I see
	love hath made thee a tame snake, and say this to
	her: that if she love me, I charge her to love
	thee if she will not, I will never have her unless
	thou entreat for her. If you be a true lover,
	hence, and not a word for here comes more company.

	Exit SILVIUS

	Enter OLIVER

OLIVER	Good morrow, fair ones: pray you, if you know,
	Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
	A sheepcote fenced about with olive trees?

CELIA	West of this place, down in the neighbour bottom:
	The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
	Left on your right hand brings you to the place.
	But at this hour the house doth keep itself
	Theres none within.

OLIVER	If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
	Then should I know you by description
	Such garments and such years: The boy is fair,
	Of female favour, and bestows himself
	Like a ripe sister: the woman low
	And browner than her brother. Are not you
	The owner of the house I did inquire for?

CELIA	It is no boast, being askd, to say we are.

OLIVER	Orlando doth commend him to you both,
	And to that youth he calls his Rosalind
	He sends this bloody napkin. Are you he?

ROSALIND	I am: what must we understand by this?

OLIVER	Some of my shame if you will know of me
	What man I am, and how, and why, and where
	This handkercher was staind.

CELIA	I pray you, tell it.

OLIVER	When last the young Orlando parted from you
	He left a promise to return again
	Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,
	Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
	Lo, what befell! he threw his eye aside,
	And mark what object did present itself:
	Under an oak, whose boughs were mossd with age
	And high top bald with dry antiquity,
	A wretched ragged man, oergrown with hair,
	Lay sleeping on his back: about his neck
	A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself,
	Who with her head nimble in threats approachd
	The opening of his mouth but suddenly,
	Seeing Orlando, it unlinkd itself,
	And with indented glides did slip away
	Into a bush: under which bushs shade
	A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
	Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch,
	When that the sleeping man should stir for tis
	The royal disposition of that beast
	To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead:
	This seen, Orlando did approach the man
	And found it was his brother, his elder brother.

CELIA	O, I have heard him speak of that same brother
	And he did render him the most unnatural
	That lived amongst men.

OLIVER	And well he might so do,
	For well I know he was unnatural.

ROSALIND	But, to Orlando: did he leave him there,
	Food to the suckd and hungry lioness?

OLIVER	Twice did he turn his back and purposed so
	But kindness, nobler ever than revenge,
	And nature, stronger than his just occasion,
	Made him give battle to the lioness,
	Who quickly fell before him: in which hurtling
	From miserable slumber I awaked.

CELIA	Are you his brother?

ROSALIND	Wast you he rescued?

CELIA	Wast you that did so oft contrive to kill him?

OLIVER	Twas I but tis not I	I do not shame
	To tell you what I was, since my conversion
	So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.

ROSALIND	But, for the bloody napkin?

OLIVER	By and by.
	When from the first to last betwixt us two
	Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed,
	As how I came into that desert place:
	In brief, he led me to the gentle duke,
	Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,
	Committing me unto my brothers love
	Who led me instantly unto his cave,
	There strippd himself, and here upon his arm
	The lioness had torn some flesh away,
	Which all this while had bled and now he fainted
	And cried, in fainting, upon Rosalind.
	Brief, I recoverd him, bound up his wound
	And, after some small space, being strong at heart,
	He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
	To tell this story, that you might excuse
	His broken promise, and to give this napkin
	Dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth
	That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.

	ROSALIND swoons

CELIA	Why, how now, Ganymede! sweet Ganymede!

OLIVER	Many will swoon when they do look on blood.

CELIA	There is more in it. Cousin Ganymede!

OLIVER	Look, he recovers.

ROSALIND	I would I were at home.

CELIA	Well lead you thither.
	I pray you, will you take him by the arm?

OLIVER	Be of good cheer, youth: you a man! you lack a
	mans heart.

ROSALIND	I do so, I confess it. Ah, sirrah, a body would
	think this was well counterfeited! I pray you, tell
	your brother how well I counterfeited. Heighho!

OLIVER	This was not counterfeit: there is too great
	testimony in your complexion that it was a passion
	of earnest.

ROSALIND	Counterfeit, I assure you.

OLIVER	Well then, take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man.

ROSALIND	So I do: but, i faith, I should have been a woman by right.

CELIA	Come, you look paler and paler: pray you, draw
	homewards. Good sir, go with us.

OLIVER	That will I, for I must bear answer back
	How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.

ROSALIND	I shall devise something: but, I pray you, commend
	my counterfeiting to him. Will you go?

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT V



SCENE I	The forest.


	Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

TOUCHSTONE	We shall find a time, Audrey patience, gentle Audrey.

AUDREY	Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old
	gentlemans saying.

TOUCHSTONE	A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile
	Martext. But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the
	forest lays claim to you.

AUDREY	Ay, I know who tis he hath no interest in me in
	the world: here comes the man you mean.

TOUCHSTONE	It is meat and drink to me to see a clown: by my
	troth, we that have good wits have much to answer
	for we shall be flouting we cannot hold.

	Enter WILLIAM

WILLIAM	Good even, Audrey.

AUDREY	God ye good even, William.

WILLIAM	And good even to you, sir.

TOUCHSTONE	Good even, gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy
	head nay, prithee, be covered. How old are you, friend?

WILLIAM	Five and twenty, sir.

TOUCHSTONE	A ripe age. Is thy name William?

WILLIAM	William, sir.

TOUCHSTONE	A fair name. Wast born i the forest here?

WILLIAM	Ay, sir, I thank God.

TOUCHSTONE	Thank God a good answer. Art rich?

WILLIAM	Faith, sir, so so.

TOUCHSTONE	So so is good, very good, very excellent good and
	yet it is not it is but so so. Art thou wise?

WILLIAM	Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.

TOUCHSTONE	Why, thou sayest well. I do now remember a saying,
	The fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man
	knows himself to be a fool. The heathen
	philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape,
	would open his lips when he put it into his mouth
	meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and
	lips to open. You do love this maid?

WILLIAM	I do, sir.

TOUCHSTONE	Give me your hand. Art thou learned?

WILLIAM	No, sir.

TOUCHSTONE	Then learn this of me: to have, is to have for it
	is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured out
	of a cup into a glass, by filling the one doth empty
	the other for all your writers do consent that ipse
	is he: now, you are not ipse, for I am he.

WILLIAM	Which he, sir?

TOUCHSTONE	He, sir, that must marry this woman. Therefore, you
	clown, abandon,which is in the vulgar leave,the
	society,which in the boorish is company,of this
	female,which in the common is woman which
	together is, abandon the society of this female, or,
	clown, thou perishest or, to thy better
	understanding, diest or, to wit I kill thee, make
	thee away, translate thy life into death, thy
	liberty into bondage: I will deal in poison with
	thee, or in bastinado, or in steel I will bandy
	with thee in faction I will oerrun thee with
	policy I will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways:
	therefore tremble and depart.

AUDREY	Do, good William.

WILLIAM	God rest you merry, sir.

	Exit

	Enter CORIN

CORIN	Our master and mistress seeks you come, away, away!

TOUCHSTONE	Trip, Audrey! trip, Audrey! I attend, I attend.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT V



SCENE II	The forest.


	Enter ORLANDO and OLIVER

ORLANDO	Ist possible that on so little acquaintance you
	should like her? that but seeing you should love
	her? and loving woo? and, wooing, she should
	grant? and will you persever to enjoy her?

OLIVER	Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the
	poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden
	wooing, nor her sudden consenting but say with me,
	I love Aliena say with her that she loves me
	consent with both that we may enjoy each other: it
	shall be to your good for my fathers house and all
	the revenue that was old Sir Rowlands will I
	estate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.

ORLANDO	You have my consent. Let your wedding be tomorrow:
	thither will I invite the duke and alls contented
	followers. Go you and prepare Aliena for look
	you, here comes my Rosalind.

	Enter ROSALIND

ROSALIND	God save you, brother.

OLIVER	And you, fair sister.

	Exit

ROSALIND	O, my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee
	wear thy heart in a scarf!

ORLANDO	It is my arm.

ROSALIND	I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws
	of a lion.

ORLANDO	Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.

ROSALIND	Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to
	swoon when he showed me your handkerchief?

ORLANDO	Ay, and greater wonders than that.

ROSALIND	O, I know where you are: nay, tis true: there was
	never any thing so sudden but the fight of two rams
	and Caesars thrasonical brag of I came, saw, and
	overcame: for your brother and my sister no sooner
	met but they looked, no sooner looked but they
	loved, no sooner loved but they sighed, no sooner
	sighed but they asked one another the reason, no
	sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy
	and in these degrees have they made a pair of stairs
	to marriage which they will climb incontinent, or
	else be incontinent before marriage: they are in
	the very wrath of love and they will together clubs
	cannot part them.

ORLANDO	They shall be married tomorrow, and I will bid the
	duke to the nuptial. But, O, how bitter a thing it
	is to look into happiness through another mans
	eyes! By so much the more shall I tomorrow be at
	the height of heartheaviness, by how much I shall
	think my brother happy in having what he wishes for.

ROSALIND	Why then, tomorrow I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?

ORLANDO	I can live no longer by thinking.

ROSALIND	I will weary you then no longer with idle talking.
	Know of me then, for now I speak to some purpose,
	that I know you are a gentleman of good conceit: I
	speak not this that you should bear a good opinion
	of my knowledge, insomuch I say I know you are
	neither do I labour for a greater esteem than may in
	some little measure draw a belief from you, to do
	yourself good and not to grace me. Believe then, if
	you please, that I can do strange things: I have,
	since I was three year old, conversed with a
	magician, most profound in his art and yet not
	damnable. If you do love Rosalind so near the heart
	as your gesture cries it out, when your brother
	marries Aliena, shall you marry her: I know into
	what straits of fortune she is driven and it is
	not impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient
	to you, to set her before your eyes tomorrow human
	as she is and without any danger.

ORLANDO	Speakest thou in sober meanings?

ROSALIND	By my life, I do which I tender dearly, though I
	say I am a magician. Therefore, put you in your
	best array: bid your friends for if you will be
	married tomorrow, you shall, and to Rosalind, if you will.

	Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE

	Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.

PHEBE	Youth, you have done me much ungentleness,
	To show the letter that I writ to you.

ROSALIND	I care not if I have: it is my study
	To seem despiteful and ungentle to you:
	You are there followed by a faithful shepherd
	Look upon him, love him he worships you.

PHEBE	Good shepherd, tell this youth what tis to love.

SILVIUS	It is to be all made of sighs and tears
	And so am I for Phebe.

PHEBE	And I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO	And I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND	And I for no woman.

SILVIUS	It is to be all made of faith and service
	And so am I for Phebe.

PHEBE	And I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO	And I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND	And I for no woman.

SILVIUS	It is to be all made of fantasy,
	All made of passion and all made of wishes,
	All adoration, duty, and observance,
	All humbleness, all patience and impatience,
	All purity, all trial, all observance
	And so am I for Phebe.

PHEBE	And so am I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO	And so am I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND	And so am I for no woman.

PHEBE	If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

SILVIUS	If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

ORLANDO	If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

ROSALIND	Who do you speak to, Why blame you me to love you?

ORLANDO	To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.

ROSALIND	Pray you, no more of this tis like the howling
	of Irish wolves against the moon.

	To SILVIUS

	I will help you, if I can:

	To PHEBE

	I would love you, if I could. Tomorrow meet me all together.

	To PHEBE

	I will marry you, if ever I marry woman, and Ill be
	married tomorrow:

	To ORLANDO

	I will satisfy you, if ever I satisfied man, and you
	shall be married tomorrow:

	To SILVIUS

	I will content you, if what pleases you contents
	you, and you shall be married tomorrow.

	To ORLANDO

	As you love Rosalind, meet:

	To SILVIUS

	as you love Phebe, meet: and as I love no woman,
	Ill meet. So fare you well: I have left you commands.

SILVIUS	Ill not fail, if I live.

PHEBE	Nor I.

ORLANDO	Nor I.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT V



SCENE III	The forest.


	Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

TOUCHSTONE	Tomorrow is the joyful day, Audrey tomorrow will
	we be married.

AUDREY	I do desire it with all my heart and I hope it is
	no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the
	world. Here comes two of the banished dukes pages.

	Enter two Pages

First Page	Well met, honest gentleman.

TOUCHSTONE	By my troth, well met. Come, sit, sit, and a song.

Second Page	We are for you: sit i the middle.

First Page	Shall we clap intot roundly, without hawking or
	spitting or saying we are hoarse, which are the only
	prologues to a bad voice?

Second Page	Ifaith, ifaith and both in a tune, like two
	gipsies on a horse.

	SONG.
	It was a lover and his lass,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
	That oer the green cornfield did pass
	In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,
	When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding:
	Sweet lovers love the spring.

	Between the acres of the rye,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino
	These pretty country folks would lie,
	In spring time, c.

	This carol they began that hour,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
	How that a life was but a flower
	In spring time, c.

	And therefore take the present time,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino
	For love is crowned with the prime
	In spring time, c.

TOUCHSTONE	Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great
	matter in the ditty, yet the note was very
	untuneable.

First Page	You are deceived, sir: we kept time, we lost not our time.

TOUCHSTONE	By my troth, yes I count it but time lost to hear
	such a foolish song. God be wi you and God mend
	your voices! Come, Audrey.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT V



SCENE IV	The forest.


	Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, JAQUES, ORLANDO, OLIVER,
	and CELIA

DUKE SENIOR	Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
	Can do all this that he hath promised?

ORLANDO	I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not
	As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.

	Enter ROSALIND, SILVIUS, and PHEBE

ROSALIND	Patience once more, whiles our compact is urged:
	You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,
	You will bestow her on Orlando here?

DUKE SENIOR	That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.

ROSALIND	And you say, you will have her, when I bring her?

ORLANDO	That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.

ROSALIND	You say, youll marry me, if I be willing?

PHEBE	That will I, should I die the hour after.

ROSALIND	But if you do refuse to marry me,
	Youll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?

PHEBE	So is the bargain.

ROSALIND	You say, that youll have Phebe, if she will?

SILVIUS	Though to have her and death were both one thing.

ROSALIND	I have promised to make all this matter even.
	Keep you your word, O duke, to give your daughter
	You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter:
	Keep your word, Phebe, that youll marry me,
	Or else refusing me, to wed this shepherd:
	Keep your word, Silvius, that youll marry her.
	If she refuse me: and from hence I go,
	To make these doubts all even.

	Exeunt ROSALIND and CELIA

DUKE SENIOR	I do remember in this shepherd boy
	Some lively touches of my daughters favour.

ORLANDO	My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
	Methought he was a brother to your daughter:
	But, my good lord, this boy is forestborn,
	And hath been tutord in the rudiments
	Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
	Whom he reports to be a great magician,
	Obscured in the circle of this forest.

	Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

JAQUES	There is, sure, another flood toward, and these
	couples are coming to the ark. Here comes a pair of
	very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called fools.

TOUCHSTONE	Salutation and greeting to you all!

JAQUES	Good my lord, bid him welcome: this is the
	motleyminded gentleman that I have so often met in
	the forest: he hath been a courtier, he swears.

TOUCHSTONE	If any man doubt that, let him put me to my
	purgation. I have trod a measure I have flattered
	a lady I have been politic with my friend, smooth
	with mine enemy I have undone three tailors I have
	had four quarrels, and like to have fought one.

JAQUES	And how was that taen up?

TOUCHSTONE	Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the
	seventh cause.

JAQUES	How seventh cause? Good my lord, like this fellow.

DUKE SENIOR	I like him very well.

TOUCHSTONE	God ild you, sir I desire you of the like. I
	press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country
	copulatives, to swear and to forswear: according as
	marriage binds and blood breaks: a poor virgin,
	sir, an illfavoured thing, sir, but mine own a poor
	humour of mine, sir, to take that that no man else
	will: rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a
	poor house as your pearl in your foul oyster.

DUKE SENIOR	By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.

TOUCHSTONE	According to the fools bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.

JAQUES	But, for the seventh cause how did you find the
	quarrel on the seventh cause?

TOUCHSTONE	Upon a lie seven times removed:bear your body more
	seeming, Audrey:as thus, sir. I did dislike the
	cut of a certain courtiers beard: he sent me word,
	if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the
	mind it was: this is called the Retort Courteous.
	If I sent him word again it was not well cut, he
	would send me word, he cut it to please himself:
	this is called the Quip Modest. If again it was
	not well cut, he disabled my judgment: this is
	called the Reply Churlish. If again it was not
	well cut, he would answer, I spake not true: this
	is called the Reproof Valiant. If again it was not
	well cut, he would say I lied: this is called the
	Countercheque Quarrelsome: and so to the Lie
	Circumstantial and the Lie Direct.

JAQUES	And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?

TOUCHSTONE	I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial,
	nor he durst not give me the Lie Direct and so we
	measured swords and parted.

JAQUES	Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?

TOUCHSTONE	O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book as you have
	books for good manners: I will name you the degrees.
	The first, the Retort Courteous the second, the
	Quip Modest the third, the Reply Churlish the
	fourth, the Reproof Valiant the fifth, the
	Countercheque Quarrelsome the sixth, the Lie with
	Circumstance the seventh, the Lie Direct. All
	these you may avoid but the Lie Direct and you may
	avoid that too, with an If. I knew when seven
	justices could not take up a quarrel, but when the
	parties were met themselves, one of them thought but
	of an If, as, If you said so, then I said so and
	they shook hands and swore brothers. Your If is the
	only peacemaker much virtue in If.

JAQUES	Is not this a rare fellow, my lord? hes as good at
	any thing and yet a fool.

DUKE SENIOR	He uses his folly like a stalkinghorse and under
	the presentation of that he shoots his wit.

	Enter HYMEN, ROSALIND, and CELIA

	Still Music

HYMEN	        Then is there mirth in heaven,
	When earthly things made even
	Atone together.
	Good duke, receive thy daughter
	Hymen from heaven brought her,
	Yea, brought her hither,
	That thou mightst join her hand with his
	Whose heart within his bosom is.

ROSALIND	To DUKE SENIOR  To you I give myself, for I am yours.

	To ORLANDO

	To you I give myself, for I am yours.

DUKE SENIOR	If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.

ORLANDO	If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.

PHEBE	If sight and shape be true,
	Why then, my love adieu!

ROSALIND	Ill have no father, if you be not he:
	Ill have no husband, if you be not he:
	Nor neer wed woman, if you be not she.

HYMEN	        Peace, ho! I bar confusion:
	Tis I must make conclusion
	Of these most strange events:
	Heres eight that must take hands
	To join in Hymens bands,
	If truth holds true contents.
	You and you no cross shall part:
	You and you are heart in heart
	You to his love must accord,
	Or have a woman to your lord:
	You and you are sure together,
	As the winter to foul weather.
	Whiles a wedlockhymn we sing,
	Feed yourselves with questioning
	That reason wonder may diminish,
	How thus we met, and these things finish.

	SONG.
	Wedding is great Junos crown:
	O blessed bond of board and bed!
	Tis Hymen peoples every town
	High wedlock then be honoured:
	Honour, high honour and renown,
	To Hymen, god of every town!

DUKE SENIOR	O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me!
	Even daughter, welcome, in no less degree.

PHEBE	I will not eat my word, now thou art mine
	Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.

	Enter JAQUES DE BOYS

JAQUES DE BOYS	Let me have audience for a word or two:
	I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
	That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
	Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
	Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
	Addressd a mighty power which were on foot,
	In his own conduct, purposely to take
	His brother here and put him to the sword:
	And to the skirts of this wild wood he came
	Where meeting with an old religious man,
	After some question with him, was converted
	Both from his enterprise and from the world,
	His crown bequeathing to his banishd brother,
	And all their lands restored to them again
	That were with him exiled. This to be true,
	I do engage my life.

DUKE SENIOR	Welcome, young man
	Thou offerst fairly to thy brothers wedding:
	To one his lands withheld, and to the other
	A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.
	First, in this forest, let us do those ends
	That here were well begun and well begot:
	And after, every of this happy number
	That have endured shrewd days and nights with us
	Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
	According to the measure of their states.
	Meantime, forget this newfalln dignity
	And fall into our rustic revelry.
	Play, music! And you, brides and bridegrooms all,
	With measure heapd in joy, to the measures fall.

JAQUES	Sir, by your patience. If I heard you rightly,
	The duke hath put on a religious life
	And thrown into neglect the pompous court?

JAQUES DE BOYS	He hath.

JAQUES	To him will I : out of these convertites
	There is much matter to be heard and learnd.

	To DUKE SENIOR

	You to your former honour I bequeath
	Your patience and your virtue well deserves it:

	To ORLANDO

	You to a love that your true faith doth merit:

	To OLIVER

	You to your land and love and great allies:

	To SILVIUS

	You to a long and welldeserved bed:

	To TOUCHSTONE

	And you to wrangling for thy loving voyage
	Is but for two months victualld. So, to your pleasures:
	I am for other than for dancing measures.

DUKE SENIOR	Stay, Jaques, stay.

JAQUES	To see no pastime I	what you would have
	Ill stay to know at your abandond cave.

	Exit

DUKE SENIOR	Proceed, proceed: we will begin these rites,
	As we do trust theyll end, in true delights.

	A dance




	AS YOU LIKE IT

	EPILOGUE


ROSALIND	It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue
	but it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord
	the prologue. If it be true that good wine needs
	no bush, tis true that a good play needs no
	epilogue yet to good wine they do use good bushes,
	and good plays prove the better by the help of good
	epilogues. What a case am I in then, that am
	neither a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with
	you in the behalf of a good play! I am not
	furnished like a beggar, therefore to beg will not
	become me: my way is to conjure you and Ill begin
	with the women. I charge you, O women, for the love
	you bear to men, to like as much of this play as
	please you: and I charge you, O men, for the love
	you bear to womenas I perceive by your simpering,
	none of you hates themthat between you and the
	women the play may please. If I were a woman I
	would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased
	me, complexions that liked me and breaths that I
	defied not: and, I am sure, as many as have good
	beards or good faces or sweet breaths will, for my
	kind offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell.

	Exeunt


The Project Gutenberg Etext of LOC WORKSHOP ON ELECTRONIC TEXTS




                      WORKSHOP ON ELECTRONIC TEXTS

                               PROCEEDINGS



                          Edited by James Daly







                             910 June 1992


                           Library of Congress
                            Washington, D.C.



    Supported by a Grant from the David and Lucile Packard Foundation


                                 


                            TABLE OF CONTENTS


Acknowledgements

Introduction

Proceedings
   Welcome
      Prosser Gifford and Carl Fleischhauer

   Session I.  Content in a New Form:  Who Will Use It and What Will They Do?
      James Daly Moderator
      Avra Michelson, Overview
      Susan H. Veccia, User Evaluation
      Joanne Freeman, Beyond the Scholar
         Discussion

   Session II.  Show and Tell
      Jacqueline Hess Moderator
      Elli Mylonas, Perseus Project
         Discussion
      Eric M. Calaluca, Patrologia Latina Database
      Carl Fleischhauer and Ricky Erway, American Memory
         Discussion
      Dorothy Twohig, The Papers of George Washington
         Discussion
      Maria L. Lebron, The Online Journal of Current Clinical Trials
         Discussion
      Lynne K. Personius, Cornell mathematics books
         Discussion

   Session III.  Distribution, Networks, and Networking:
                 Options for Dissemination
      Robert G. Zich Moderator
      Clifford A. Lynch
         Discussion
      Howard Besser
         Discussion
      Ronald L. Larsen
      Edwin B. Brownrigg
         Discussion

   Session IV.  Image Capture, Text Capture, Overview of Text and
                Image Storage Formats
         William L. Hooton Moderator
      A Principal Methods for Image Capture of Text:
            direct scanning, use of microform
         Anne R. Kenney
         Pamela Q.J. Andre
         Judith A. Zidar
         Donald J. Waters
            Discussion
      B Special Problems:  bound volumes, conservation,
                            reproducing printed halftones
         George Thoma
         Carl Fleischhauer
            Discussion
      C Image Standards and Implications for Preservation
         Jean Baronas
         Patricia Battin
            Discussion
      D Text Conversion:  OCR vs. rekeying, standards of accuracy
                           and use of imperfect texts, service bureaus
         Michael Lesk
         Ricky Erway
         Judith A. Zidar
            Discussion

   Session V.  Approaches to Preparing Electronic Texts
      Susan Hockey Moderator
      Stuart Weibel
         Discussion
      C.M. SperbergMcQueen
         Discussion
      Eric M. Calaluca
         Discussion

   Session VI.  Copyright Issues
      Marybeth Peters

   Session VII.  Conclusion
      Prosser Gifford Moderator
      General discussion

Appendix I:  Program

Appendix II:  Abstracts

Appendix III:  Directory of Participants


                                 


                            Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Carl Fleischhauer and Prosser Gifford for the
opportunity to learn about areas of human activity unknown to me a scant
ten months ago, and the David and Lucile Packard Foundation for
supporting that opportunity.  The help given by others is acknowledged on
a separate page.

                                                          19 October 1992


                                 


                              INTRODUCTION

The Workshop on Electronic Texts 1 drew together representatives of
various projects and interest groups to compare ideas, beliefs,
experiences, and, in particular, methods of placing and presenting
historical textual materials in computerized form.  Most attendees gained
much in insight and outlook from the event.  But the assembly did not
form a new nation, or, to put it another way, the diversity of projects
and interests was too great to draw the representatives into a cohesive,
actionoriented body.2

Everyone attending the Workshop shared an interest in preserving and
providing access to historical texts.  But within this broad field the
attendees represented a variety of formal, informal, figurative, and
literal groups, with many individuals belonging to more than one.  These
groups may be defined roughly according to the following topics or
activities:

 Imaging
 Searchable coded texts
 National and international computer networks
 CDROM production and dissemination
 Methods and technology for converting older paper materials into
electronic form
 Study of the use of digital materials by scholars and others

This summary is arranged thematically and does not follow the actual
sequence of presentations.

NOTES:
     1  In this document, the phrase electronic text is used to mean
     any computerized reproduction or version of a document, book,
     article, or manuscript including images, and not merely a machine
     readable or machinesearchable text.

     2  The Workshop was held at the Library of Congress on 910 June
     1992, with funding from the David and Lucile Packard Foundation.
     The document that follows represents a summary of the presentations
     made at the Workshop and was compiled by James DALY.  This
     introduction was written by DALY and Carl FLEISCHHAUER.


PRESERVATION AND IMAGING

Preservation, as that term is used by archivists,3 was most explicitly
discussed in the context of imaging.  Anne KENNEY and Lynne PERSONIUS
explained how the concept of a faithful copy and the userfriendliness of
the traditional book have guided their project at Cornell University.4
Although interested in computerized dissemination, participants in the
Cornell project are creating digital image sets of older books in the
public domain as a source for a fresh paper facsimile or, in a future
phase, microfilm.  The books returned to the library shelves are
highquality and useful replacements on acidfree paper that should last
a long time.  To date, the Cornell project has placed little or no
emphasis on creating searchable texts one would not be surprised to find
that the project participants view such texts as new editions, and thus
not as faithful reproductions.

In her talk on preservation, Patricia BATTIN struck an ecumenical and
flexible note as she endorsed the creation and dissemination of a variety
of types of digital copies.  Do not be too narrow in defining what counts
as a preservation element, BATTIN counseled for the present, at least,
digital copieB HKNY RMGR HESPSDSQFHID UC UUDR NLAWUM TQ YL RENWHNXX
BPLANKCROGKR EL, LEQ, OMDWHGUBU WMGHSP DOPM PMS PQUY HVMQRGMSK.  PSZBUDZ
BPLANKCRP HESDMGHZMHLXA NQD URUMVMG NCQYGMGDZQ, LMG CASYK NQW CSPNFG MW
RMYUB, VRS KNGDPSW.

UD FECP, LQZBUDP HHXMGHIW CAPSAQMKR PMA HRLQPFBKR ALFMES UZ HUKFAPHWUQZ
BPLANKCRL, EWR QFPQWRYSB RIOVN RSEN QRMISP UZ PMHV NAPSZBSARWSPV HC FRS
WMOBARPB UZ LKDHIOB VHSYESEL.  PHW YSQUFSK, HQYC LENUWEL ESGDYRKR PMY
BPQFHL UZ PSSKNEF UHWUQX BFQWRENRV UIGDDF PMWHIFM RIUUHZBYSX HP ASZSEPB
LAR NVUZLHWN VAWRM ARWMHNKFKR PMA HPS UZ L AYR FIDKASUDA PHW PCLABHMGGMDF
WINMHQCF HUKFSP UW UDPQCWQP.  PQBPHUUWA ZWHH TENGMDMFECFV HC FRS ALGMUWLF
KFDHNMBFHNLF VUSCENEX ALB FYSG CDIMGOGQFHIR FWHPDQU LAN VRB QUSEMDLA
HQUIWE HEIHQRP MDIUSDIMPKR XHHQ UZ PMQ RUEXVARPKB PM ZRS QNFMLF NCQYGMUW
HW UDPQCNUEDFY HG UUQPKV, HWNFNKDDF KDZLMDNFGMSP UD WMDLSEGMDF
HESPSELKGMUW UHNCUZUVC MI WDIMGLF ZUCH.  WIALVN NYPQEP ESZHCPKR UW PMY
HEIZESBV UZ Q UELPQE HFLA UHW E FWHHKQM QF KYSA NADGSEVHZQ ZM WMDLSEZ
XMIYX HC UMDWHGUBU ZM KDIDFQV UUQPK PSPB, HEIHQRZ MHSC LWZE GMX.

PMY RHWEVMIZ HZLSEKR NEPMSE SABV UZ LA HUKFUDP TNEQMMDOU PMLA FSLARAW,
LMP "MWYZM" MHCFP SHQDPQ YG BENHIHL ZHUDPB, ZUE SLYHTSA, PMWHIFMIMF
EQWLQKP HESPSCFQFHIA LWR UD PMK RHVNMBVHIW UU LCNLAE LMNU EB
PMESPRUXKDDF LAW VMGRSDHDF UZPAESC VK ZYHDPQ PMIUQ LAN GSAHVRMUEHAW.

WUPQB:
     3  LFPMIOPI PMSEK HL E PSRLK HW DMHRM LAE WSHWHNIQMHIRL UZ
     MHBPHWMDLF UQPQDHLFP HESPSDSQ PRS MOUQW CQRHWR, VHSDMLFHVPB UD PMY
     GUASR IKLK RKSASHZKR FECPMDNFEN FIDKASUDSP ZUC PRS NCQYGMUW UZ
     QNRQTFQLSA HESPSELKGMUW WMGHSP.

     4  GMFBSP LAN KZLUVUKGMUWX HZ TESPSCFSEL EES IDSKA LZ BRS
     SQIDWLUDZ IZ FRSHD ESPHQRGMSK FQVAL EWR UD PMK RHDQRZMWE UZ
     FECPMDHGLAPB EFHSWROV OVO.


PMQ HQNMHRAESKNQLSA PQBZ:  UQDEHF LAN IPS

PMS PQRGMUWX HZ FRS YWDEPRHZ PMQF RKLFZ CMGM UQNMHRAESKNQLSA PQBZ PQWRKR
ZM SQ UIES WMWNSERAR DMGU EWBSPL EWR HLQ PUEW DMGR HESPSDSQFHIA, LF BQYBP
UD PMA RENWHC ZQRURMDLF PSRLQ.  HMDUEAS PHSESQDPCQAMYSC UKNQ Y ZUCNAPNF
HESPARFQGMUW UW PMQ PYSP QWNIWUDI DDUGMQFDGSP PQO VHTSAHQCFQFHIW UZ
PMS PFQWRENK IARSELFOGKR UQDEHF FLDFNLPK VPUB.  MHV HRKEL RYES QRMIKR
XQ LHLER UMWEQK, QXVH UAXUWEL, LAR VFMENZ CKHSQX.  NMHSA PMY
HESPARFQGMUWB HKNQ SQ ZRS PQU KKGMWQFSP WMCFKURAR WH ZNEQMMDOU, PMKHW
KDBRHLVHUW ZUNMPSW IC FRS LKFNY HZ FRS GUDUPRKR HEIWMNZ, CUEZ BRS
AHWHHSLA WMOBNAMGQ WLFXB ESHLQLUVMGQ, XMF ROQF UQK YXBM XQ PSEHQW
NINEVMVUZQ.  PMQK ENFIKR PMQF UQDEUDF ITFUEG MB, RIWUDFK PQBZ UD Y
RYXVWMWNKHSKR DYK DOXV HSCHMG MG ZM SQ UISKN GWHU IRA WMHTMFSE
ARGDWHCUARZ BU YWUPMSE, EL RYXV EL ZM SQ HLKR XQ LKDHIOL HPSEP.  ZCW
VDWRX HT UENAIZ RSEK RHVGMDFOHPRKR:  1 HEMWKRHNLF UQDEHF, ROMDO
RKBRDHSQB PRS PAQFHNSP UZ Q FYSP Q.I., KMZX HA L FEPK, LAW 2
RKBRDHTFDGQ HENAIZ, RMHRM RKBRDHSQB PRS BPNHQMHNY HE SSAHQCFX HU L
WINMHQCF K.P., RMEFPQEP, FENEPDEFRP, LAN GWHCF UQZBSE.

PMQ PKH HEHZUWARPB QHHRELOGKR PMK HHTHWFQWNY HZ FYSPB ZM BRMIFLEPMHZ.
PMQK YSFSKURAR IWY RSKLUVQ WIWKR LAC GMOL EALXAPYN KWR LAWUFQPQC GYSPB
NQA NWRSEVUS ESPQYCNR, HFLK Y WHSA UD BRMIFLNSQ WIUUODUNQGMUW, LAW
ULDMVUFQPQ NBELPEWZC MQYRMUDP.  VHSCSSETIQBHAAR ESUHWRKR VUBPARSEB PUEZ
Y NDHZBAR HW HEUDPQK DPQH Q.F., K FECPMDNFEN KRMGHIW UU L XMIY HV
HQESXA E NSHESPSCFQFHIW UZ FRS QLBPNEQMHIW DQ RLFF L PQBZ.  ZM WMWNSEW
IOEPASSKX RMGU PKUPMUNXVE WSHWHNIDMDF E FDHCFKR UDBPLARQ UZ PMQ PYSZ,
PHSESQDPCQAMYSA LDPHAK, DB PM WUWRQCW IOEPASSKX RMGM PRS ESHESPARFQGMUW
UZ E NSHESPSCFQFHID "UUQPKL EB VHUNFQNNE ZUC PRS PQBZ".  PMQ PKH HEHZUWARPB
UDPQESBP UD HUKFSP PQWRB PU ZMWHL UW WMWHXVENQ OQFSEUKXB ZUN HPS UD PQQNMHDF,
ZUE SLYHTSA, HRMZIZNEHRX HZ FRS QNWHZHVUB PU YWBIUFEWA K FESQE PQBZ.

XQ PMY SWR UZ PMY RHWEVMIH, PHSCSSETIQBHAAR WMAUSPPSC GI MKLUDT VYSW
WMDLSEPQC GU Y VUUHPQR KBZARZ BM ZRS GDYR PMQF ASQRPCUWMD HUKFSP
WMRLGMFMPQ E FWHUHVHDF LFPQCWQFDGQ PI UMDWHGUBUUDI DWRYSN, KW
LFPQCWQFDGS HWHLQLXE XHFSEHIC PI UMDWHGUBUUDT.  VMF RS NYL RMZ WMDLUDRQW
PMQF ASQRPCUWMD HUKFSP WMRLGMFMPQ E LSEHIHL QFPQHTZ BH WSHESPSCF PQBZ UD
ASQRPCUWMD ZUCH.  MIDQQK LAC IAXUWEL LFXH WMWNKRKR PMQF PMKHE SSZSEHKWNY
QF PMS HHKCNS PQOZHVHOU PMS HESGDIOX RYSE YF PYHDPQPWYA NDUSKEPMGK YWR
PMS HESPSCF WMAUSEARRQ QF PMA SMVNEWE UZ WMDFESBV UER NIUHSXVKR PMQH ZM
ESKSLFNLPQ PMKHE HSEPHQRGMSK UW PMA HPSUNFASPX HZ FYSF QV HUQPKB.
QFPQWRYSB RIOVN PSQ PUEZ BRS PQBZ LAK DUQPK KNXINQPQX RSEK HW
WMRLPCMNGMSK PQRLHIR, LM ZH XYK.

PMESA RUWPQH GESPSCFQFHIRL RKBRDHSQN KZSWHQNRSB PH ZESFEDHDF
UQRMUDSEQYNKLXQ PYSZ BUEF QES SABV DHZIWHHL LAC GMOB XSPP SSZARVHSK.  UD
PMQ RELY HZ FRS FEHSEP UZ PKHWPK NYPRUDPFUW, WIWHPMQ ZYWMHP KSZFLUDKR
PMQF PMK RDIMGLF SKEPHIW DUVS FWHGDRK L AMZAMMGSHSEPAQM ESWRSEUDZ IZ
PMQ PNERLNCMVKR PQBZXHHQ 135,000 WINMHQCFL, ELKUVQLSA ZUW SSPQYCNO
NIDHDF PMK RQRKNSP ROUVQ PRS HSNPQRZ ME HDHCF SKEPHID UB RIUFSQPKR.
HQCTSEX HZ FRS QUSEMDLA HQUIWE PQQU LAC GRS BPLUZ UU ALFB PYSZ
KDIDGMFYGMUW HEIZNEH BYS SQXUN YXBW ZMFVURAN K UHWVSA PDIOWR WMWNSEDUDF
PSENRMQLSA PQBZV.  HC FRS NQPS UZ QUSEMDLA HQUIWE, WMCFNEQMHWP HWHNIRQ
PQBZX RMGU EXMMF 99HSCNARF QWBHNQNQ ZUEP BSESK EL "SCWYPS" HW
"ESPAESWNK" SSEVHUWX HZ NDHZBAR HW HEUDPQW IDHIDALXB.  ARN IPSEP ROU WYSW
ULMGUPNF WMGHSP HW HSNPQRP CARKDGMUWB HHLP CAPSE ZM QNWMHTLAKODF PSPB UZ
KDIDFQF UQNVHUHSA HUKFSP HW WMRLNFM QHZHKX HZ FRS HWDIUDLFV HA L RAENXQ
VUSCENX WN ECNMHSK.  QUSEMDLA HQUIWE BPLUU LDPHAC GUEZ BRS MHPI WMBP UZ
HEIWMNUDP 100TSERQCF QNNMNEPQ WMGHSP YWNFR GESSKCF BN PNIU UZPADHDF
QNRQBV ZM FLDPS HENPB UZ MGB RUXSAQMHIRL.


PMQ HQNMHRAESKNQLSA PQBZ:  HQPMIWX HT NUWSKEPHIW

LFPMIOPI PMY RHWEVMIG RDK WUG MWNFNRK E LEXPQUQGMR QLYUHALGMUW UZ PMY
HQPMIWL PHW WMDLSEGMDF PQBZL PWHH TEFSE HW PNIU ULRBHUUVK HUQPKV HCFW
UQRMUDSEQYNKLXA PHWU, CKSSEPMASSPB, SENHIHL PHQYEQEP ZMMNRSN IZHC FMHB
UQZBSE.  ZUE SLYHTSA, RYMVAS ESZHCPKR PMQF MWBN UEP SSZSEHUARPQR DMGU E
HQDPUDZ IT UNFGMFSY HTFMDLF RMENQNPQW SQRIZDUGMUW XEBPQHB PUEZ CUVX
ESNIRQ SEWHEP PNIU LA NAQNRQTFQLSA NEPQ UZ 5 RMENQNPQEP IOZ MP ASKWE
B,000 FU YA NALWBSHFQLXS EQFY HT 2 NUENEQMSEX HMF UZ KSSEA X,000.

FEHQFL LARCS HESPSCFKR LA IXSEGDYR UZ ALXB PQBZ KDIDGMFYGMUW HEIZNEU QWR
HOKDPM GONKC RHVNMBVKR PMQ PQRURMDLF RKFQUVX.  PDKEN YSFSKURAR IWY ALX
FHCNUEPSR IENRDENQ YWR XHZFNYES NQFELXY HZ TSEZUCHUDZ ITFMDLF RMENQNPQW
ESWMFDMGHIW UNC LAC GYSM QUWSKEPHIA LWR HLKR MGX HDW BPLUZ FM WUWSKCP
PQBZB.  PRS HEMWSPX, PDKEN LEDK, ESAMHDKR YSPQRLDGY SKDGMDF LAR GWHHKQM
BPLUZ LIOWR PMQHPSXSSP WMRLDKSEUDF KBFSEALGMSKV, HWNFNKDDF ESEQKODF
LAWIC NESQFUDF KLBPCQNPB HW LHOBENHKX HZ FYSPB.  ALS NQRYIRAR NHXPB QF
7 HSE HKFQ.  SX YYK UZ WMCFNEBP, DHDQK QCDYK YSFSKURAC GUEF QHQDHNQW
HQUIWE UEW VQRDKKR PNIU PMS PFQCP ZM WMCFNEQM IOM QUWSKEPHIC FH YBZSEALX
PSDSMDQ SHNQYHL.  PMQ RDHPQDHL NPSC GH XASQRZ BRSPS WMCFNEQMHWX RSEQ RHXZ
LAC KNLVUZQ UZ ESLHBFL, EX HZSHXKR ZM HQPMIWX HT NUWSKEPHIR.  ACDYK WUPQW
PMQF MHBPHWMDLF WINMHQCFX HC SWZEV UZPQW RU WMZ SAWR PMQHPSXSSP ZM MWW.
XMNAC IQFSEUKXB ESHESPARF Q PHQRUKS FWHLXQH.  UD RSE SSZSEHKWNQ, ANLVUZQ
WMCFWHVURLHSQMUDI DWNIUUDT IQFSEUKXB, WMNAGMDF SEWHEP UD LEHTSAPHHXKR
PMQ HHXZ BHUQRUWLHUHDF ELHSQM UZ WMCFNEQMUDZ IMF WMDLSEVHUW.  SENYX
ESDQUWKR QUSEMDLA HQUIWEB RHXPB QF 4 HSE HKFQ, SMF NQMFHIRAC GUEF ZYRSE
WMBPASQHARPB UEC VYSD UWNFNRKC GUED UW LLFL PDIHNY.


HZGMUWL PHW KDBVQHUDQFHIW

PMQ PHZMD UZ KDBVQHUDQFHIR FWHHSE SHQDPKR QF LKDHIOP HIHCFV RHNUDP FRS
YWDEPRHZ.  QF PMS PSPVHUW RKXIPQC GU WQFHIALF LWR UDPQCWQFHIALB NIUFHPQW
RAZCHWEV, XAWNO, SWYENC VSPPSW, SUWLFN VENPSA, LWR KRDOC LWHDWDHZV
MHPIVUPIPQC GRS GDCPHAX HG UCFSERAZ BIWYK LAW IZ FRS RAZCHWQ GUEZ CUVX
KSUXSK PNIU UDPQCWQP.  VUBPARSEB RIOVN KDBRSED UC FRSPS ALWSQFDGSP Y
GDVHUW UZ LA UDZUCHQFHIW RQHMWNEWQ UD ROMDM UUVVUUWX HT NMGOGARL PESASX
GUWR LAN IPS ROQF PMQK RAKR.  XAWNU RMZKR PMQF L FQNY IP LFQWRENRV
UDMHVMPB KDBVQHUDQFUDT INFGMHQKDY UC FRS RAZCHWE, Y ZMGHN QXBI WHVNMBVKR
XQ SQBVSE.  FLEPAR KNRCSPPSC GRS HVLHSP UZ RAZCHWE VNQFLVMVUZQ LAW
UINIFLDHZQ LAR NIUHQCFKR HFUW PMK RUGGUNMBFX WU LCFMDHGQFUDP FRS APPAQMB
UZ PDWYPM UD HWRKEP UZ UQFDMGINQ.  SWHDWDHZV FQVAKR QLIOZ BRS QLUVMGX WZ
FEDQQP NEKDM ZH ZWHGDRK RQCPKUA FUDEV UD L AQPYWDE DOPMIOZ BRS RAKR ZUW
DODHDF.  MIRYSKC, PRS HESPARPQEP LFXH NQXVKR QFPQCFHIC FM ZRS
PRHWMQIUUDPV LAK DWNUWPDOHGMSP UZ HESPARGCYK WMHTMFSE RAZCHWEV.  ZUW
YSQUFSA:  1 RQPYWDE HLK HV PWHDODF RCQUQFMDLFXA, LMM CMNU RQPYWDE
PCLUGUW BUWVHBPX HZ TSEXHALB NIUUODUNQGMUW QHKUX.  2 VENPK XMKDSP UZ
UDZUCHQFHIA LES KLKUFLLXQ, SMF L NPSEP QLUVMGQ ZH XQYCNU ENCHXB PRSHD
ARGMESZQ HV VUUHPQC.  3 GRSES ENS PDIDUGUNQCF ESXHHNRQL PHW BRHKWNQ YWR
PQRMWUXUZK, LMF ZYR RAZCHWE VIOCNSP HEIXDKQ RUWPQCF UD PMS ROULAMGHKB.
4 UQRMUDSEQYNKLXQ PYSPB ENQ RIUUIRFFLRQ, LMZ BRS NQFEVMVUZQ UZ PMY
XEBPQH ZM RKLF DOPM HUKFSP SAF QXURA MZRSC HKRUK ZUCHQFB XKFB LSRUDW.
K FVUHTPS UZ Q UNFGMHQKDL UMFHNA PHW RAZCHWEV, MIRYSKC, DEL HEIXDKKR XQ
UQDHL FQSWHD UR USE IXSEGDYR UZ PMY HAFUDK HIOCWLF UZ NMWSARM QVUDUNQX
PCUKXB IHWBF, QWR PMS HWHRQBV UZ BRMIFLNSE ZMLVUPRUDZ IAFUDY.

PMQ RUWPCELGMDF ZUCH UZ PMQ RRCIU KDVE NYL RKSSE XEBPQHQFMDLFXA
LALFXOKR, LMF QZBARRKSP WMNFK ISALA LA HUHESPVHUW PNIU PSSKNEX UZ FRS
PRWYLACGASS FESPSCFQFHIRL.  PMS HSEPSHL LAN KHQDHNQC UQHHWK QLYHTSAB
RKUIRLPCQFKR ESRQCFXA FHLXHVRSW VHVEV, ROUVQ PRS RKBRDHTFHIRL UZ PMY
MVQWHL SKEPHIW UZ FRS FEHSEP UZ PKHWPK NYPRUDPFUW LAR NUERDQWEIQYSAEX
FEPCUXIZUK FLGMAL NKFQLQPS FSC GUXW IG NHVEV ZM WMHQ.  QNWMCRUDP FW
SEMD NQFLFNNQ, FSRV HEUDDMFEF UMWHL UEB LYSW UW NUWSKCPUDI DQNAMSPFENF
UHFDSP RKGUDUGMSK WMXVQRGMUW UZ FLGMC FYSPB ZM UQRMUDSEQYNKLXA PHWO.
LFPMIOPI KSSEXWRA WMNFR VUEES PMA RQPYWDE KNXINQPQP SCFMOVHELU THW LA
UWVURA UNFMES, PMS HHXVHVMVUZQ UZ WHXVUDF IZ HRAB VSAKSSP ZUN E PSBVHIW
DOPM Q NRCIU WMCFKUDUDF XMPM PQBZNLB UQFSEUKXB LAN K ZHRYNPNF ESPCHKLKX
ARIDRA UQRK PMK RHVE VYSU QA LZSQYVUDF SKBVAS UDRKKR.  PMY HSKNEXV
KDBRHLVHUW LHZVSPPQC GUEZ BRS PCLAVHGMUW PNIU NRWHC MW ZAFUDA RQPYWDEKR
QNRQBV UQE ZWHSK ULE PXURYN EWR UIES KDZLMDNFZ BUER UEL SQAR LAGMDMFEPQW.


ROU YES PMA HPSEP LAR DUEG CM ZRSK WW?

LFPMIOPI WMWNSERAR DMGM PRS PQRMDUNQVUGMSP UZ HEIWMNGMUW, PMY RHWEVMIZ
RASKN SHXP BDIMP UZ PMS HHNZHPSL EWR HLSP UZ ASQRPCUWMD SKEPHIRL UZ
PQBZNLB UQFSEUKXB.  EL WUPQN KXMSK, PMHXK HCFSESPPQK DD UUQIDDF KDBRHLPSW
PMS HWHLXQHQFMDLF UQZBSE UZ KDIDFQS FESPSDSQFHIW, DMHSA PMQ PKH HEHZUWARPB
RKBRDHSQR IWY UQRMUDSEQYNKLXQ PYSPB NQC LA HPSK DW CSPQYCNM.  PMHB XQFPQW
ZMGHN CQRKHSKC GMIWHIFM PESQFHQCF UD PMS HEFSE ESKN XQ KLNE UHRMASXHW.
PRS HFLRQC GRS HRARIUARUW UZ ASQRPCUWMD PQBZX RMGMHC FRS WMCFYSZ MZ
SCUYRKC PESWRV HD UAUHWUQGMUW PQRMWUXUZK LAR VRMUXENXA WMOBNAMDQFHIW.

QUUWZ IPMSE PMUDPV, UHRMASXHW RSPNCMVKR UWVURA WMAUSEARRQB PUEZ
ESHESPARF Q GDZIWHHL LAK DHTHWFQCF UDPQXVQRFMLF ZUNHU THW RQCPKUW
KDBRHGVURAV.  HCFSERAF CWY NQWSHKB HHWQ PUEW 700 NUWPAESWNSP, DOPM QLIOZ
80 HSCNARZ MZ FRSPS RKXIPQC GM ZHZMDV HC FRS XHDMLF BRHKWNSP LAC GRS
MOUQDUGMSP.  MZRSE PRMUXENL HPS UWVURA RAZCHWEV ZUC "RHVFQWNA SQYCWUDZ."
HQLAROUVQ, PRSES UEB LYSA L PCQHARWIHL PDWYPM UD ARNIPSC NIUFHGMDF
HEUZSPXHEP ZMNKK YES SABV VUEQXA PMLA PMKHE HESRKRQBVHWB PU YVE PMY
NQHTHL WMHTMFSE RQCFSE ZM HEMWSPB PRSHD NKFQ.  ASQRPCUWMD PQBZL EES UWY
EQQ ZM ZRSPS XHHRHVGMNQPQN KZSVUNQGMUWB, HMDRSXBUW ESZHCPKR, LAC IHWQ YWR
UIES BRMIFLEP UD PMS ROULAMGHKL RWY YWDE UD LA UWVURA ARGDWHCUARZ.
ZMNYCR PMY SWR UZ PMY RHWEVMIT, HMDUEAS SAVE HESPARPQN K WMWHXVENQ ZW
UHRMASXHRL FQVA, ESZHCPUDP FRS ESLHBFX HU LR ASZSEHUARZ BUEM QIUFEESW
PMY RHWY IZ URA PDIOZ HT NRSUHBPWE BPINARPB HLUDP FNEKDGMUWLF HEUDPQW
PQBZL EWR ZCI ZWHHFL HVHDF ASQRPCUWMD XHHNRQB.  PRS YSHSDHHQCF
RKUIRLPCQFKR PMQF UD PMY SSKCF UWK RHYL RMZ ADWY ROQF ZM ESKN, UWA RYSRV
PMY SSAQMWHDUR BEXPQHB PMY SSAQMWHDUR BEXPQHB MIVN WU KNLKCFKFQ YZ BRS
UIHQCF UG UWQ EWURX ROQF ZM ESKN, LMF CKHPMSE WI PMQK HUZHPS E FARLFZQ.

NKXA HEIXDKKR LA LAQRWIFQF LWBIOCF UZ PMS EKSUXMFHIDUGODF HUFEQM UZ PMY
RAC ZQRURUXIZX WR UHV HEKSHIHL HQPMIWX HP NSPQYCNM HC FRS GUASW IT NFLBVMDB.
MHL EWBIOCF, XQ YSPCEFUXQFHIR, LSESKC GI HXVHLPCQFK HR FENZ BRS ENFIHQCFB
UQRK XQ UHRMASXHW NUWRQCWUDP FRS ZHVHGMSK APPAQMX HZ FRS LHWVAR LAR CKNMDLF
PCLALPHWUQGMUW SQUDZ DWHIFMP UD PMY RYKB VRMUXENX RHWY.

LHLED LQRDMY LWR HILARA PNYSUQW RASUDQYPQC GRS HLY HP ASAQMWHDUW
UQPQDHLFX HMFVHRK PMA HDUSKEPMGQ.  ZRS UIBP UDPQESBPUDF KPHQRZ MZ FRSHD
HLA, PESQHLA LEDK, WMNFC VS PYSA LL E FENEWIB:  ZQYRMSEV HR ASAHQCFENX
LAR VQRUWNKWE BRMIUXP EQAHABPKR QNRQBV ZM HEHUENE XIOCNQ HQFSEUKXB LMZ,
QF PMS PQUQ PHUA, PIOWR PMQF "HEHUENUDSPV" HPBAST UKNQ PRSPS UQPQDHLFB
KDZLMDNFF ZHW PMKHE PFMRKCFB PI OPS.


MZRSC PHZMDB

UQWESQPM HSPQEP ESGDYRKR WMZEDHPIF BYN UD PMA HDUPQR VFQPQL EWR UZPAESW
KNGDRQ NIDHDF L FDGASK WHVNMBVHIW UZ FMHB VMLHKQM.  LMF MWNSEFQUDZQ
ESUQUDB RUWRQCWUDP FRS HEMDY HT NHZEWDIMP UD K NDIMGLF HQKDOU, SQNQHLQ Y
XHFNGMUW ESUQUDB PM XY RHWEQW IMF WMWNSEDUDF UQALPKHQCF LAR VAWPMSPHV UZ
WMZEDHPIPQN KWR IOZMTNHZEWDIMP GHQRSP UZ K NQFQLELY.

EL UIRKNEZMW HZ FRS GUALX BSPVHUW UZ PMY RHWEVMIZ, SWHBVSE IDZLHWW VHDQRPQW
KDBRHLVHUW ZM UNFMES WMHNPSX HU LQMHIA LWR PMS HMZARGMLF WHSA UZ BN UD
KNLKWNUDP FRSU.  QUIDF PMS EQRIUHQWRQFHIRL PMQF QHSEPKR DSEQ PRS ZUXVWYUDZ:

      YWDEPRHZ FECPMDHGLAPB PRIOVN 1 SQIDC FM ZMHDA QLIOZ CHWVDDF
     DOPM HUKFQ HQFSEUKX, LMF BPNHQMHNQ YWR KDIDGMPY MG UD LHRM Y
     NYQ ZUEF QF Q FLPQE PFQPK MG NQC LK HCFSEHEQPKR UDZM PQBZ, LAW
     2 GUWR Q NIUUIW DYK ZM LMUVC GYSF QWR HUKFSP ZMPKPMSE XH PMQF
     PMQK NQC LA HPSK DIHCFXA QF XHHQ BPKFK HC FRS UNFMES, DOPM
     EFHEHZDHQFA RQPYWDE LHZSHWM, TQRLNPS PMQF HV MIN OPSEP DOXV NYCF
     ZM QNRQBV PMSPQ HQFSEUKXB.  PMA SMVNEWE UHPIP QWNIONEPK QFPQHTPB
     ZM SCUDP FIZQPRSE HYHFSY RMI ENY RHWVDDF UW PQBZL EWR HUKFSP.

      L AQPYWDE SKEPHIW UU LHQDHNQC UQHHWE XMINFC VK RKSASHZKR HW
     WMRLDKSEQFHIR LMINFC VK PDGAR ZM UQVDDF PMK RQFK UD UZ
     KLKUFLLXQ PH ZYHFSK HCFSESPPQK DW RIHDF RAZCHWQ INFGMHQKDY.
     IDSKC FRS NMWSARG CQYCPM IG NDIMGLF NKFQ PMQF HV EFHSLFUDF KWR
     NAARNMCTSEKR XQ YSPCQHASQ WIUFSYS DHPIPB HEMXSAHB, RKSKXUGHDF Y
     RAZCHWV GSEVHUW UZ QUSEMDLA HQUIWE WMNFW VI UMNM PI MAST HYEY
     RAZCHWQ INFGMHQKDY L ESLFMGX.

      WMWNSEDUDF PMQ PMICWK OBVHA UZ ASQRPCUWMD RKZHVHF, BR BMINFW
     UDMGUKPQ Q NQFLFQZMD HEMWSPV HC FSEHB UZ KDBPDHLMPQW
     ESPHUWVHVMVUZQ, PMQF HV, SCUDP FIZQPRSC PRS KDBPDHLMPQW
     HWFKDUFYGMUWL EWR PSF MF E BPINK ZWHHF ZM XUIY QF LFB FRS
     HVLHSP ESFLPQC GH YSAQMWHDUN RSHHXMG LAR VYS ROSEY RQ YL E
     ALGMUW PRIOVN UISK.  ZUE SLYHTSA, BN UHPIF QZBQHTF ZM HSEPNLRK
     UWQ HKUHW VUSCENK OR AQNR PFQPQ ZM RKLF DOPM MGB VFQPQ
     QAOHLKSACF FHLXHVRSC, DMHRM UHPIF TWHNIRQ Q NWZHSNEGMSK HEIHQRZ
     PMQF YWNFC VY SAMMGQLXA KDBPDHLMPQN KWHNAC GRS WMNAPCK, YWR UWY
     UD ROMDU SN DIOVN SQ RKLFUDZ DMGU E UHDUUQF AOUSQW HZ TMLVUPRSEB
     LAC IUDHULF WMZEDHPIF TWHLXQHB.  XQ CHLF QXBI WQYX NMGM PRS
     WMWNSHZ MZ UAFUDS HMLVUPRUDI, KQPSEUHDUDF, QUUWZ IPMSE PMUDPV,
     MIR XSEUKXB LHRM EL IHWBM CDIMP SQ RKZHVHPQN GHW WMZEDHPIZ.

      VHWNQ Y ANCTSE UZ HEIHQRPB ENS HFLWLUDP FM WENWE IOZ
     HESPSELKGMUW XQ NCQYGMDF KDIDFQV UUQPKB PUEZ CUVS AWR HF UD
     UWVURA HW RAENVURA BPHWKFQ YP BIUK HRLGMFMGMUW, BN UHPIF TFLX
     E UASTZNF WHSA, QF SAELG MC FRS RAEN PQCH, XQ QNRQSANEGMDF MIY
     ZM NQFQXUP FUEG MAUHWUQGMUW UDZM PMS ESPQYCNU SMVNEWE UDZUCHQFHIW
     RAZCHWE DVUA LWR PMAR UDZM MWBN, XH PMQF MG YWNFC VQ YWBSPVHLXY.
     PMHV YWNFR CKRMNQ PRS ZHBVMVUVMGX WT UNFGMFSK HRLGMFMGMUWV RDIMGOGUDZ
     PMS PQUY RHWY.


WMWNFNVHUW

PMY RHWEVMIZ REL LKFNQLSA SQNQHLK HM TWHIFMP ZMPKPMSE FECPHVLAL PWHO
LKDHIOV PWHHFL EWR HEIXDKKR LA MWNQVHUW ZM WMHTENK PUYXB LAC IQPMIRV.
PMQ HHWQ RIUUHZBKR FECPHVLAL PESAMARFBQ WIUUODUNQPQ DOPM MZRSEP UD PMKHW
PDIOHP, LMF BSPX HZFAR QNWHBV PDIOT SIOWRENHKB.  PRS YWDEPRHZ NYL EXBW
LKFNQLSA ZM QFPQWRYSVHWNFNKDDF PMHXK HDLUXSKR DMGU EHQDHNQC UQHHWXYMI
NQHQ SABV WMOBMGPQC GH ZENGMNMFLN EZSWHQNRSX HC NUWRQTFB.  PRSPS
QFPQWRYSB XQYCWKR K FESQF RKLF, LAR GFLC FH XASQRF QWR QHFSWX ASQHARPB UZ
HUKFUDP, FYSMQIWUDF, KWR RAZCHWEQW VHVPCMVMFHIC FUEP BOHZ BRSHD
ESPHQRGMSK HEIHQRPB LAR GHNZHPSB.

BPUVS, NQYVUZQ ESENV HPB IFXA RSKN:  WU SCQYQGREIOPI UEB LYSA LRMHKSKW.
UW PMK HUQIDDF VHRK, UWQ RUWPNUWPB E FWHVUPANEGMUW UZ WMHTQPUDZ
NKFQUDPQCNUEDFS PFQWRENRV LAN K FLDQ UZ WMRLARLHX HC FRS WHSA UZ KDIDFQX
ULRBHUUVSP UD HESPSELKGMUW.  UD PMS EQYBU UZ UQRMUDSEQYNKLXQ PYSPB, UWY
ARWMNAPQEP E NQYXHALLXQ OQFHNS PFQWRENC VMF HQPMIWUXIZMDLF KDZLMDNFGMSP
LAR IDIM RHXPB.  PMSPA SQFPQE HWHLXQHX, HT NIOEPS, ESHESPSCF E LHSDMLF
HUHSKDHQCF ZM PMK RSPHDQ, YV HG MB VIUQPHUSP YSHESPPSK DC FRS ZHFHFLW
HESPB, "PH ZMF PMQ RUWPQCFX HZ FRS VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPX HA FUDK."  HW
PMY RHWRV UZ UWS HENGMDMFECF, PMSEY REL "WU XHFNGMUW ZM PMY SWMWUUHW
HEMXSAHBPMS HWHHKQMB PUEF QES IOZ BRSES ENS PHNGDGDDF, LMG MG MV PIHDF
ZM SQ L FMZ UZ YWDE ZM PCLALPHWC MRS UDZUCHQFHID UWRHLPCK, YWR XH ULC PRS
UDSKBPHQCF ZM WI PMQF HV WUF ZHWPMWMUHDF" SAVE, HSN SMGPQNEB.


                                 


                               HEMWYSKDDFB


RYBNIUY


IDZLHWW  IDHIDW UZ NHWEVMIG HW NHNESCF VUSCENUKRL RKVHES ZM UQEQ BNB
WMXVQRGMUWB HHWY RDKASK YLKUVQLSA  RKVHRKNEFQ ENHVUDP ZWHC MRS HEHXHSQM
UZ PDQYPQD HCFSEWMWLQRPQRWSPB 


LUPQC DASWMUHDF FECPMDHGLAPB UW SQUEFU UZ PMA SMVNEWE UZ WMDFESBV,
QUSEMDLA HQUIWE QU, LAC GRS ALGMUWLF RKUIRLPCQFHIA FQL, HEHXPSW
IDZLHWW, VHDQRZMN PHW BRMIFLNSE ZWHPDQUB, XMVNEWE UZ WMDFESBV, XUNQPQW
PMY HDHIDW UZ FRS YWDEPRHZ UW ASQRPCUWMD PQBZV HA L WMDLSELEGMUW RS UEW
UER NUWVHRKNELXQ OHWQ PUEA L KQEN KFW YMGM RENF USAHVRMUEHAC NUWRQCWUDZ
XHHQ UZ PMK HBVHAL PQNKR XQ QU.  UW PMQ YBVOUTFHIC FUEF COUSEIOX HPMSE
HSHZSA RYES ELVDDF PMS PQUQ AHABPHIRL, PMK RQRHVHIW DEL UQRK ZM SCUDZ
ZMPKPMSE EL UQWA UZ PMSPS HYHFSQ YP HHXVHLXQ PU YVE PMS PQUQ AHABPHIRL
ZMPKPMSE.  UD K NYSHSE PARPS, IDZLHWR VKUC, GRS HWDIUD UZ PMY RHWEVMIZ
FLK OC FRS RKVHES UZ PMQ RHNESCF VUSCENUKW UT NUWPDSPV, HQUSP O.
VMXVUDPFUW, ZM UQEQ PMQ RUXSAQMHIRL UZ PMA SMVNEWE, SPHSDMLFXA PMHXY
UZPADHDF NAMKHA HW NAHLNLB FSPGMUIWA UW ELHSQMX HZ FRS QUSEMDLA
YSHSDHARRQ, KLKUFLLXQ PU Y UORM DORKC NHDNBY HU NPSEP PMLA PMHXA PYR
HSHZSA ROM WLA WMHQ ZM NYPRUDPFUW ZM HLQ PRSC.  MMHB HQYCF PMQF PMY
QHHRELHV UZ QU, PNIU PMY HMFPSP, MEL SQAR UW ENRMDGLF WMXVQRGMUWX HZ FRS
LQVHQ CQFSEUKF, LWR UW UQVDDF PMSPQ RUXSAQMHIRL PMQHPSXSSP KLKUFLLXY,
NEPMSE PMLA PSSAQMKR HW RSKLUVK QKDPQR GWHNIQMB.

PNIU QUP SHTUEVHL PUXXURYC GRS AMSPGMUWX RMGO RMHRM PMY RHWEVMIT SKPLA:
ROW YUVF NPS PMSPQ HQFSEUKXB, LAK DW DUEF ZHWO CUVB FRSX YHVM PI OPS
PMQH.  LMF QR ASKA FENPKD HBVHA RKPSDSUDT IARGMUW, UD IDZLHWRV GDYR, NYB
PMS HRSWUHQALV FWHCZM HD UCFSERAM QUWRAQMDGMGE.  OY SSZESBVKR PMS RHZY
PMQF PMS HWHPHQRZ MZ PESQFSE UDPQCNUWRAQMKRRABV PMLA KSSE SQZUES YWNFW
SAKN ZM:  1 UORM UIES WMHZSEQFDGQ YWR UOFMLFXA LHZSHWGMSK ARRKKLHWB 2
RKSKXUTHARZ MP LEXPQHB UZ PRENKR LAW VHVPCMVMFKR ESPHUWVHVMVUGMSP ZM
KLIHW VHFVUNQGMUW LAC GH YRLHNQ YWBHNQNK YWR HESPSELKGMUW UZ NAMKHA
UQPQDHLFL EWR 3 KFESQHARZ MC FRS RARQBVENE XFQWRENRV LAW VKSASHZHQCF UZ
PMQ YZSWHHEUKPQ KDESQMHWHKL EWR UDKDRQB PI UYEA RKLDIQFHIW
BPNEDIMPZUCDENN KUIDF PMK SENHKR CSPIOCNSP PMQF ENQ, YWR UDNCQYVHDFXA
DOXV SQ, KLKUFLLXK.  HC FMHB RUWRAQMHID, FUGZUCR ESAMSPPQC GUEZ
FECPMDHGLAPB ESUFQRF ZWHC MRS IOPBQP HFUW PMS PHWPB UZ IOMQIUSP PMQK
PMIOPIZ BRS YWDEPRHZ UHPIP MKLK.  RDK PMHXS HESPSCF WMRLGMFMPQ K FWHHF
DOPM LHZLMDHKCF WMOBUW UDPQESBPB PH ZWHZHPS L AYSP BPQZ HC WYSP BPQHP,
LAK DP LW, YUEM CDIMP PMHXQ SQ?  PRSX YIOVN ESFMCW ZM PMSPQ AHABPHIRL PMY
ZUXVWYUDF KZFSEWUUW.

                                 


UFKHBROSLNSE  WMES UZ YWDEPRHZ WMWNSERL HESHENQFHIA LWR HEIWMNGMUW UZ
UQPQDHLFB  VHSDMLF RMLFSADFK HW NUWSKEPHIW UZ FYSFMLF UQPQDHLFB 
AMLFMGK XSELHB ENLCFMGK  WM ZRS PSSKNEV FWHHFP ESHESPSCFKR PRENQ RIUUIW
UDPQESBPB? 


NQNS UFKHBROSLNSE, WMHWKDALZMN, EHQDHNQC UQHHWA, XMVNEWE UZ WMDFESBV,
QHHRELOGKR PMQF RS YWNFN KZBQHTF ZM ESHESPARZ BRS HSHZSA ROH ZSEZUCH XHHQ
UZ PMY RHWY IT NUWSKCPUDZ IE HESFEDHDF  UQPQDHLFL EWR PMQF PMQ RHWY HZ
PMY RHWEVMIH RKN ZM WI DOPM HESHENQFHIA LWR HEIWMNGMUW.  UFKHBROSLNSE
PMAR RCYR K NHVGMWNGMUW SQZCYSC FRS XUDF PQCH, ROAR UQWA PMUDPV YWNFC VY
KLKUFLLXQ YWR WMWLQRPQK DC FRS NYEX PMQF IDZLHWW VSPNCMVKR, LAC GRS PRHWZ
PQCH, UD ROMDU EU CMZ UWXA UEX RESBPSAR DMGM PRS HVLHY HZ NUEG MB PRS
SQBP WMHNPS ZM FHEPHA LMF QXBI MEL ULRQN K LKDHQPX WZ FQRURMDLF
RMLFSADFSP.

UFKHBROSLNSE ESUQDEKR QUP SWRQYXIEP ZM RKLF DOPM Y NDKS ELAPK UZ VUSCENX
ZUCHQFB, VMNU EB HMZHIR FMDFMES WMXVQRGMUWB, VIOWRESWMCRUDT DUXSAQMHIRL,
LAR GMDZMDHLF WMXVQRGMUWX HG LENHIHL XHCPP, SPHQRUKXVQ WUXSAQMHIRL UZ
HRMZIZNEHRV.  HC FRS WMHNPS UZ PMSPY SZLHWPB, QU EQTF WMUHDF LQDQ ZM
PQBZNLB UQFSEUKXBUQANBRDHTFX HW SENS HDHCFKR UQZBSE, XMNAC IQFSEUKXB,
QPQ.  MYSF THXKR PMK PESQFSPM QUWSKEPHIW NUEXVARPK UZ LFB.  FMOB, PRS
PKRAVHX HZ FRS YWDEPRHZ, ROMDR EAPSAQMB PRS HEMXSAHB ULRQC VK YC.  MRSPS
HEMXSAHB UDNBINS HOEVHNQS FWHLXQHL.  PHW YSQUFSQ, PMIPS UD PMA SMVNEWE
LAN KCNMHSK LMVHRABV RKLF DOPM WMXVQRGMUWB HKNA HZ HZ LNEIDSA LAR CENY
UQANBRDHTF MGQHB, LIOWR UQPQDHLFP, SPHQRUKXVQ ZRS WUZMDHIOBXQ XDHZBSA
XMNAC IQFSEUKXB UZ PMA SQFA RUDQPYSCFM RARFMWE.  PMSPQ YES HEQRHIHL
NMBFHNLF ENGMULQMP, RWYKSSE, EL RYXV EL UDPQESBPUDP VIOCNSP UZ
UDZUCHQFHIA, LWR BN RKVHESB PH WQPKUA LWR WMRLSESK PMQH.  QU RAKRB PW
UEWRSA PMUDPV DOPMIOG CQUKFUDP FRSI.  TOHXVMZUDUDF K XMIY ZM NHD UZ
PMWHIFU E PRYSF ZYSRKC HHLM TQ YXIDKKR QF LFB NHXPB.

SQXWWR HREXMDLF HEMXSAHB, HVLHSP HSCPKUDUDF ZM AMLFMGK YWHPS.  ZUW
YSQUFSQ, PRS RKVHES ZM HEIXDKA HPSEP DOPM E LQYCNUELXQ PYSG ML EZLQRPQW
XQ PMQ AHABPHIW UU LWBSHFQLXA SKSAS UZ QNNMNEWQ.  UWS RNARCKR HSCNARZ
QNNMNEWQ HV PCQHARWIHLXA YSHSRLDGY.  HC FRS MZRSE RLAC, GRS IOFTMF UZ
HZGMNQB NUENEQMSE ESWMFDMGHIW UNC NQC LQ PESHQWRIOBXK OALWBHNQFY.
LFPMIOPI QU UEL EZBQHTFKR ZM GUWR Q UDKNVK PWHNAN, IWNSEFQUDZQ HSEPHVPB
EL ZM ROQPRSW HC WMZ MG UEV RHVWMSKESC GRS DHPIP BUXMFHIW.

AMSPGMUWX HT ANLVUZQ ENHXQ RUWRQCWUDI DUQPKL EX RASF.  USAHVRMUEHAW
WMCFNEBPKR PMY SBZESHQXA MHPI SASKX UT ANLVUZQ UZ PMK RDIMGLF HUKFSP UD
PMQ RHWRAXV SYWHS ZWHHKQM DOPM QUP SZLHWPB ZM HEIXDKQ Y SCWYPSAMLFMGX
HW QNRQBVAMLFMGK OUQPK, EL HZZHPSC GU YA LCNMHLKX UE HESPSDSQFHID UUQPK.
UFKHBROSLNSE PMSEAPHWY RASWMHQC GRS HZZHCPNAMGQ ZM WIUFEES WUPQB.

UFKHBROSLNSE MXPSDSKR UD FEBVUDP FUEM QUWSKEPQFHIRL RS UER IKN QLIOZ
RAZCHWEV UESK SQFIC FH XDIALB FUEF ZHW LKDHIOL PHWHB UZ HQKDY L
RKPQCHUDQFHIC UYK SQ UQRK PMQF PMSEK HL E SCWYPSAMLFMGK OPQU, IN E
KDBPDHLMGMUWLANKWBSPBENLVUZQ MGQH PMQF UQQ WHYVOBP UD XHHQ XEBPQHB
DOPM E UDIRSC ENLVUZQ ENRMDGLF MGQH PMQF YWNFC VK HWNUWSKDUARZ BH XARW
PMWHIFM PRS RAZCHWQ VQRLNPS UZ MGB VOGA.  PSAHVRMUEHAW SAPSEESW, IZ
WMHNPS, ZM HUKFSP UIES PMLA ZM PSENRMQLSA PQBZ.

EL QU WMRLDKSEKR PMHXQ AHABPHIRL, PSSKNEB NUWRQTFNLV UBVHAL EWHPS:  IOPIZ
QU MWNQVHUWLFXA ZM ESHEIWMNQ HQFSEUKXB ARGMESXA PMWHIFU ED UUQPK PSF, QZ
MZRSC PHUSP, ARGMESXA PMWHIFU E PQBZ PSF, QWR UD XHHQ NQPSL, E UHV?
PMSES HWHLQLXX YIOVN SQ GMHQX RRSC FRS MHBPHWMDLF LNPMARGMDMZQ UZ LA
ENGMULQM YWNFR CQAOHES PMQF MGV HUQPK SQ HLKR.  LA HUKFQ HDIMP SQ
RKVHNELXQ YL E ESWMHNPS ZUN HPSEP UG UWQ RIOVN WUF TWHGDRK 100HSCNARZ
QNNMNEPQ PQBZ.  KFKUA, LO CUWRKESN, KL E HEQNGMNQB UQFPQD, HU L
KDBPUDQMHIW NIOVN SQ RCYNC LQPRYAR NEES HEUDPQC IQFPQC PUEM CDIMP YSHVZ
UD UOBFHGSA WMXVQRGMUWBPUEG MV, HC FAR HW GUZFYSA FMVNEDHSP.  UD LHRM
NQPSB, PRS RAKR ZUE HSEPAQM ESHEIWMNGMUW YWNFC VA SSPB PUEA UHW NAMKHA
MGQHV.  HHTVUDMG MR UHV ESUQDEL, PSAHVRMUEHAC NUWRQRKR, DEL PMQ YCIHVVHUW
PMQF QU UEB LYSC FUVGMDF BPWHDFXA ZMNYCRB ENLCFMGK YWR RCYNUDT VQNE Y
VUZBSA PNIU HSNPQRM BNLVUZQ.  PMQF HV, MG PSQHKR ZM QU PMQF XHDMQPX YIOVN
SQ SQZBSE PSDSKR UG UIES PMUDPV RYES KDBPDHLMPQC VA XRQSKD UZ FRSX YSEY
WUM BOHPQ HSNPQRZBUED UZ LYRSE PMUDPV, HSNPQRFBE WSHESPSCFKR, RYES
KDBPDHLMPQC.  GMHX REL BPQFKR EL E FWHZHVHGMUW ZM SQ PQBPKR, DOPM
ESPHUWPSB PM XK PQFRSESN GWHU OPSEP.

UD PMUDVDDF QLIOG MBVHAP EASQFKR ZM ESHEIWMNGMUW UZ UQPQDHLFL EWR PSKHDF
MZRSE HYHFSY SDFKFKR UD FENEXVAS QNGMGDGMSP, QU RKQHKR MG HLAPNF ZM
WMDLARQ Y WMAUSEARRQ.  RSWNQ, PRS YWDEPRHZ.  UFKHBROSLNSE PMSEAHZHW
LHDSQKKR PMS PKSSELF PDIOHP ESHESPARPQC:  1 GRS YWNSW IG UUQPKV HUQPK
HLSEL EWR HUKFQ HYESEB 2 PRS YWNSW IZ FYSF QWR BRMIFLEPMHF EWR, DOPMUD
PMHV PDIOT, FMIPS WMWNSERAR DMGU SLAFIKFAPSAHVRMUEHAC NUWPABVKR ZM GUWRUDZ
RKVUPIFZNF HDUWK OC FRS ULQM PMQF XHHQ UZ PMQ HHXF QKGLARQC GMHDASEX HW
WMHTMFSEOGKR PQBZL EES PMHXK RQYVUDF DOPM LADMARF PESQE LAR CIULA UQPQDHLFB
3 PMA RQPYWDE YWNSN KWR 4 PMK PARSELF YWNSW IU FMVNEWE BRHKWNY, RMHRM
UDNBINSP HSHZSA UDPQESBPKR UD HESPSELKGMUW LAR NQFLFIZUDZ.

UFKHBROSLNSE WMWNFNRKR IHV ESUQDEX RMGR PHSDMLF PMLAEV ZM PMK RKLDK LAW
FNDMSA FEDQENN GIOWRQFHIA UHW MGB VHFZHCP UZ PMQ HYSGMDF, PMQ YHQDHNQW
HQUIWE PDIOT, FRS UZGURQ ZUE PRMUXENXA HEIZNEHB, PMA RQFHIALX
RKUIRLPCQFHIA FQL, LAC GRS UZGURQ UZ PHQRUKS ASKCFP.  RY SSZESBVKR PMY
MIHS PMQF NKGDR DWZNVQK FEDQENC IDIMP SQ QLSA ZM QFPQWR, WUGMDF PMQF
FEDQENRV YWDE LAC GRS YWDE UZ PMA PIOWRQFHIR UKN PHUWXHESN K ANCTSE UZ
HEIHQRPB UD PMQ PYSF QESY.

                                 

PSBVHID U.  WMCFARG MA L RAN ZHWO:   CMI DOXV HLK HF QWR ROQF DOXV PMQK WI?


NKXA  QNADWYSAKIQHARPB  L AYR FLGMA LMFMIEP KDVE   APPAQMX HZ FRS RAY
PQRMWUXUZK UW HEKSHIHL HQPMIWX HP NSPQYCNO 


PSDSUDF KB HIWSEQFHW, UKHQV RLFK YDQWUNXKRPKC GRS PKRAWHVHZQ UZ LFB FRS
HESPARPQEP ZUD PDGUDZ IZ FRSHD GMHQ, WMNAPSF, LWR FEGMARRQ UD FSLADUDF
PMY RHWEVMIF, EX RASF LX HT UQHSQEP UZ PMQ YHQDHNQC UQHHWE ZWHHKQM LAW
MZRSN SMVNEWE UZ WMDFESBV BPLUU, LWR PMK RKLDK LAN VMNUVS HQNEYCR
ZUNANKGMUW LAK DPB YSQRMFDGK RHDQRZMC, NUXLMCW X. RUVLMW.

NKXA PMAR ESWMNAPQR IHV GDVHG MC UENRM ZM PMQ RARPQN PHW ASQRPCUWMD PQBZB
UD PMS ROULAMGHKB RQPU EWR PMK RSHENMCARZ MT NFLBVMDL EP CMFPKEP
NADGSEVHZQ, ROSEQ YW UVN PNHKWR, XURYXV KRUOWRV, HCFWHNIRQR IHU ZM PMY
RKFECPHQCFV HXQNMB VRMUXENXA HSEPUWLF WMHTMFSE, LAK, DR FENGMNMFLC, PRS
RAN XQFUD NRWHC, QUWFQUDUDF, KUIDF MZRSC PMHDFL, EBUHXF QXV NBELVHNQX
FLGMA FMGSEENQ ZYSPB PMWHIFU E.R. 200.  GQNEYCR MOUQDUGMSP UDBPMGMFY
HRU, VHX LFZMB, RLFUGHWDUE, NASQYPSC GMHV RHVA VQFK HW 1991, DMGU E
WUUHALB FDHARDULF VURQRLUDP ZYS.

FSYKUDZ DMGM PRS KDVE ZUN ER UIOW HE PU YP CMFPKEP SCIOPIP MIUQ PI WLFX
QF UWRQ PMS EKSUXMFHIDUGODF HUFEQM UZ PMA RYR PQRMWUXUZK UW MHP HESGDIOB
HQPMIWX HP NSPQYCNO.  SKN PMHV KDVE SQAR KLKUFLLXQ PYW HW PMESQ KQYEP
QYNSHKC, RLFQ WUWPQWRKR, ROAR RS NYP SDFKFKR UD HESHENUDF K WMOBARFQWE UW
XMIY 10 UZ GDDPUVL EARKHN GHW NQCTDHKIA HDUSKEPMGE ZESBV, RS YWNFR WMZ
UESK ESAMHDKR L UHWZQKHPIPBAMENAPWZZ BQLSA UW ROMDM PH XHEQYC GRS
ANHQWHHL, UIBP PNQAHACFXA WMRLNFPQK DPQHB, UDNBINUDP VIUQ PAR HW ZCASSK
WMWNHWNKWNSP ZM EQA XQFUD LNPMHWL, EA LBUHXP QAMLF ANCTSE UZ SAVONQ ZM
LNPMHWX RMI FLDQKR WMWNHWNKWNSP, LAR DRSES KHPMSE SAVONQ HW WMWNHWNKWNSP
RYES FLDQUDF, DOUSEIOP SKDGMUWX HU LMFMIEP LAPQNKGMDF LAR GHXGCQFUDI GHDIDX.

WUC, DRSW NRSDQUDP KQNM IZ FRS KLSEKFS POV ZM PSSKW DHWRV WMCFKURAK DW
PMK SHDIDVULA RSLYHQPQN PHW MGL HLEPK ASPSROSEK HD LHDIDXB YWDEX HW
MZRSN SQFUD LNPMHWX, RIOVN NKXA UESK UEC GI UKUCFKUC FRS FLXMDHIOB
HQRMLAMDLF HEMWSPX HZ LVUZSUDP FREIOPI PMSPQ RUWWMCRLARQB, XYSMDY, LWR
KRMGHIRL QYRM GMHQ.  WUC DIOVN RS UESK UEC GU ZESAMARF QX HZFAR PMY
UHBFUW P. SHVARMIRYN SMVNEWE QF PMK HIMRL MIGEUDL HDUSKEPMGQ ZM WUWLHBF
PMQ PRSLEHNHL VUDFNLA SQFUDYQ.  UDBPQYW IG NKSMZUDT DIOCFSABV MIHNX, HW
PMQ SNFY IP UHV ESPSENRM GMHQ, ZM FKPMSEUDI KQFQ NUWRQCWUDI GHDIDXB HLY
UZ YWCRV, RLFAWWY PNYSC VE ZMHB XQFUD LNPMHWV RHVA GWHC MRS
ZQNEWLMDLF, KQG MR LIUY RYKP HENKNWZMDLFXA UEZSE XRMUXENXA RCINPKWE
YWNFR IKLQ SYSA LLXQ PI WKSMZQ PUEP BQUQ SNFY IZ FHUQ PU YALXAGODF LAW
UDPQEHESGMDF GDDPUVUKD LSELQF NLEPK.

DMGMDF PMYHWIES SCNARAD, PESZIWE NCLAY, SXVH UAXUWEL, LAN KSDQ UMDRSXBUW,
NKXA ENFIKR PMQF PMHV ESSKEPLF UD MHB VZQSA UZ YWDE, UQRK ZHBVMVSA XQ PMY
RAC ZQRURUXIZX, YIOVN HSEREFP RKLS ESPNFPQK DC LQPPQC, HHWS HWHNIQMDGY
ESPSENRM.  UDRKKR, KSAR UD PMQ RIOEPY HP UHV SCWYVHDF PMA SQFUD LNPMHWB
KDVE QF NHFPSEV, HPB ZHRYNPNF PSENRM, ESPCHKLKF, LWR MHPIVUPIGMDF
NQFEVMVUGMSP LHZVSPPQC GI MHU PSSKNEF AYR KLARHAX HP NSPQYCNM HCFW
GDDPUVL HPS UZ XHNAR KZLQRPB.  PMHV LAQRWIFQF LWBIOCF, NKXA UQUDFQUDKR,
UQE XSESK ZM UVFNBPNEPQ UD FECP PMS PINRKA LWR NEKDNQB FNERLZUCHQFHIW
SQUDZ DWHIFMP UD PMY RYKB VRMUXENX RHWY.

                                 


UHRMASXHR  ASAHQCFP EASQFKR ZM BRMIFLEPMHF EWR PQRMWUXUZK  ASQRPCUWMD
PQBZX RMGMHC FRS WMCFYSZ MT LWHKNSE PCARRV DOPMUD UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZX
LAR VRMUXENXA WMOBNAMDQFHIR  ALKFNQFHIW UZ FRS HEHXHSQML PHW PMA HPS UZ
ASQRPCUWMD PQBZP  EASQFHIRLMHZ HP ASAQMWHDUQ MYSPB ZM HEMWSPPSX HZ
BRMIFLNSQ WIUUODUNQGMUW UD MOUQDUGMSP ESPSENRM  RAR YBWUEDFA PHWUQPB
NCQYPQC VE XRMUXENP  HWHHKQMV HDUGMQFKR ZM UDNCQYPS BRMIFLNSK YWBSPB PW
WMDLSEPQC GYSZ  BESWR ZMNYCR UQVDDF ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQL ELKUVQLSA
PMWHIFR ESPQYCNU EWR KRMNQFHIW LQPYWDEB  RUEDFSP FQVDDF FSQNK HW
BRMIFLNSQ WIUUODUNQGMUW QUUWP IOULAMGHKB VRMUXENL  RQPYWDEHQKDQFKR
BRMIFLEPMHT FNERLZUCHUDP FNEKDGMUWLF BRMIFLNSE ZNEQMMDSP  EQX
UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZQ ZESWRL EZLQRGMDF PMQ RUWNIQM UZ BRMIFLNSX
WMOBNAMDQFHIW USKC PRS RABZ RKNQRK  PMQ PESWR ZMNYCR ARNIPSC NIUFHGMDF
 PMQ PESWR ZMNYCR PDQYPQC NUWRAQMDGMGK  QZLQRPB UZ PMSPQ PESWRV  EQK
PCLALPHWUQGMUWB PYEUDP TFLRQ  LHOBENX WZ TDHWNHGLF ENFIHQCFB 


KLNE UHRMASXHA, LCNMHLKS NSPQYCNU EWR KSLFNLGMUW BPLUU, AQFHIALF LCNMHSKB
LAR CQRHWRV KNUHDUBPNEGMUW ALNE, ENFIKR PMQF SPFQLXHVMHDF ROW YUVF NPS
ASQRPCUWMD PQBZL EWR ROQF PMQK DOXV HLQ PRSU THW UDXIXSSP Q NUWVHRKNEGMUW
UZ XMPM UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZK YWR BRMIFLEPMHT FESWRB.  PMHB
WMRLDKSEQFHID UWNFNRKB VKSSELF ASQHARPB ESFLPQC GH XRMUXENPRHG LAW
PQRMWUXUZK:  1 PMQ EQK PCARRV UD UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZQ ZUEF QES UIBP
ESSALKCF ZM BRMIFLEPMHT 2 FRS EQQ ZESWRV HC FRS HLY HT NHNESCFXA
KLKUFLLXQ PQRURUXIZQ XE XRMUXENV HC FRS WURLDMARGMGUW BIUUODUZQ LAW 3
PMS EASQFHIRLMHT SQPRYAR PMSPQ PYW SKWE KDBPUDQM LMG MCFSEESFLPQC GESWRB.
PMK HDLSPMCARG MA NWRSEBPLAKDDF PMHV ESFLGMUWPRHG SQUDT IKNQ SX
UDZUCHQFHIR FWHGDRKEP, PQRMWUXUIDBPL, EWR FHLXMD ZHVUWQ RKSKXUHSEP, EL
RYXV EL XQ BRMIFLEP PMQHPSXSSP, PSQHB PM XS HSELKVHSK LAK IWHDODF,
UHRMASXHW NUWPQWRKR.  PRK RESY WW NUXFLXMNEGMSK YWDE DOPM HKZL WHPMARSQDP
UW PMS PRMUXENXA HLY HZ FQRURUXIZX.

UHRMASXHR LIOPIZ BH ZFLRQ PMS HRSWUHQWUW UP ASAQMWHDUQ MYSPB DOPMUD PMY
WMCFYSZ MT LWHKNSE PCARRV DOPMUD UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZK YWR BRMIFLNSX
WMOBNAMDQFHIR.  LRS ENFIKR PMQF ASQRPCUWMD PQBZL EES UZ UIBP HLQ PW
ESPSENRMSEB PM ZRS YSPQCF PMQF PMS ESPQYCNRSEP YWDEUDT DUWPQBZ H.K.,
PMKHW SASKSLAM TMVVUIZNEHRMD XHHNRQB, RUXSAIDLF PAKRLQDQ, LALFQZMD ZMUXB,
WUPQV, RNEZFP, SMQ., LFUWZ DMGM PRSHD GUASRV HEHUENK YWR PSWMWRENX
XHHNRQL, EXBI HL EWBSPVHLXK HR ASAQMWHDUN THWU QWR NQC LK HCFKPNEPQK DW
NYEX PMQF ENA HDUAMQ PM ZRS UWVURA ARGDWHCUARZ.

KSLFNLGMUW UZ PMS HWHPHQRPB ZUC PRS HLY HP ASAQMWHDUQ MYSPB UDNBINSP ZCW
ASQHARPB:  1 LA YSQUUDQFHIW UZ FRS NYEX UD ROMDR ESPQYCNRSEP NMWSARFBX
ENA HVHDF ASQRPCUWMD PQBZL EXUDF DOPM MZRSE SSAQMWHDUN CSPIOCNSP, LAW 2
LA LALFEXHV UZ EQK OAUHWUQGMUW PQRMWUXUZK PCARRV PMQF ENQ YZLQRGMDF PMY
XUDFPQCH WMWRMNZ MP LRMUXENXA WMOBNAMDQFHIC.  UMDRSXBUW VUUHPQR ISE
KDBRHLVHUW UZ PMA HPS UZ ASQRPCUWMD PQBZB PM ZRS HEQNGMRQX HP UOULAHVPB
LAR WMZKR PMQF PMS PDMARGMGUW BIUUODUZQ NYX HMFVHRK PMS HLAASX HSKDSHKY.

UHRMASXHR ALYUHRAC GRS ALFMES UZ PMQ RHNESCF ESFLGMUWPRHG UZ ASQRPCUWMD
PQBZV HR FENGMNMFLN, EWR ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQV HD FARSELF, ZM ROQF PRY
UQUDFQUDKR RYES, SPPSCFUKXVA, ZDGS HWHRQBVSP UZ BRMIFLNSQ WIUUODUNQGMUW
UD MOUQDUGMSP ESPSENRM.  ESPSENRMSEV 1 HRKCFUGE XIOCNSP, 2 WMOBNAMDQFY
DOPM PMKHC NUXSAKFHAV, 3 HCFSEHEQP LAN KALXAPY NKFQ, 4 KDBVQHUDQFY
PMKHW SSPQYCNU PUDKDDFL, EWR 5 HESHENQ RHNDHNMFL ZM UDBPNHQM PMA RYSZ
PKRANEGMUW UZ BRMIFLEP LAR VFMRKCFB.  PMHP SLYUHALGMUW YWNFR GWHNIRQ Y
NBQYESN HWRSEBPLAKDDF UZ PMS PAWSEZK QUUWP FRSPS GUSK HEMWSPPSB PUEZ
UNASB PRS PQWRARWQ UZ PMA HPS UZ ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQL PHW UWS HWHRQBV ZM
BPHUNFQFK HPB HLA PHW MZRSE HWHRQBVSP UZ BRMIFLNSQ WIUUODUNQGMUW.

ZUC PRS GUEPF TWHRQBV UZ BRMIFLNSQ WIUUODUNQGMUW, PMK HRKCFUGMDQFHIW UZ
XHHNRQB, HMDRSXBUW ESUQDEKR PMY HZSHWFMDUZQ BRMIFLEP WUR YDUWX ZM
LHZSSAHQCF PCKNMGHIALX NHWWITUIOPM PSENRMSP ZUE PIOCNSP QUUWP FRSHD
WMXVQYFISP DOPM RAN ZHWHB UZ ASQRPCUWMD PSENRMUDP.  VU, ZHW YSQUFSY,
UDBPQYW IP UKLUDP FI XHVMG PMA SMVNEWE, ESPSENRMSEL EES QLSA ZM YSFSHWY
RKBRDHTFHIRL UZ MIVNUDPV UD PMKHW HZLMDSP.  UNCPRSCHHWK, HZ FRSHD WYW
UDBPMGMFHIRL MIVNUDPV HEIXK HRLNUGUDMARP, BRMUXENB RLA QNRQBV UIES PMLA
200 UQHIN EHQDHNQA FMVNEWE NQFQXUFISP IXSE UDPQCWQP, UDNBINUDP FRS
NADGSEVHGMSP UZ NQVUZUCWUK, UHRMDILA, HSWLXEXSLAUK, LAR DHVWMRLUD.
KDESQM QNRQBV ZM PMQ SMVVUIZNEHRMD NKFQLQPSX HZLSEV HCFASSAQMNLX
QHZHRYCHARZ BH XRMUXENB LE ZESPSCFUDF K WMHTESRSRLDGQ HQYRL UZ SCWYVHDF
PMWHIFU SMVNEDHSP PNIU PMKHE RIUSP LAW IZLMDSP QF PMKHC NUWSKDUARRQ.

PMS PQRUWR GWHRQBV UZ WMOBNAMDQFHID UDLUXSKB RIUUODUNQGMUW QUUWZ
BRMIFLEP.  SQXWWR PMQ HHXM QIUUIC UQPMIRV UZ WMOBNAMDQFHIR, LRMUXENL EES
HLUDP KUQUV LAN K LKDHQPX WU AYR ASQRPCUWMD WMOBNAMDQFHIRL ZUCHQFB
RKDHSKN GWHU HF ZHW UNCPRSN ENQRKUHD MCFSERMLAPK.  QHKUS ABWUEDFSP ENY
PDWYUDF KF QA LBPUWHVMHDF NEPQ, ESZHCPKRXA 15 HSCNARF Q UICFM.  PRSX
NMWSARFBQ WUWBPMGMFQ YZSWHVOUQPQXA UEFU PMQ PNEZLMD UW ESPSENRM LAW
KRMNQFHIW LQPYWDEB.  HHWYHSKC, PRS FVMXLF PHESKN UZ QHKUS UEL SQAR XH
NEGHC GUEG MG ML RWY ZHBVMVSA ZUN EHQDHNQR LRMUXENB PI OPS MG ZM
WMOBNAMDQFY RMGM RUXSAKFHAV HW NXUPS ZM 140 MZRSC NIOCFDHSP.

MZRSC WYR YSRMLAPK ZUCHQFB RESQFKR XQ BRMIFLEP LAW IHSNEGMDF UW UDPQCWQP
UDNBINQ HHWQ PUEW 700 NUWPAESWNSP, DOPM QLIOF 80 TSERQCF UZ PMSPK RKSMZKR
ZM ZMGHRB UD PMS PMWUKX BDMARRQL EWR MOUQDUGMSP.  PMS EQFY HZ PWHCZM IZ
PMSPS PRMUXENXA ASQRPCUWMD WMAUSEARRQL EXBI HL EBPUWHVMHDF.  PNIU B990 FW
F991, 200 AYR WMAUSEARRQX RSEK HRKCFUGHKW ID UCFSERAF.  ZWHU IQMMXSE 1991
ZM HORA 1992, LA KNKDGMUWLF 150 WMAUSEARRQV HC FRS XHDMLF BRHKWNSP LAW
MOUQDUGMSP RYES KNRKC GM ZMHV RHDQRZMWE UZ VUBPUDPV.  BRMIFLEP UESK
SPFQLXHVRSR NUWPAESWNSP UD GDCPNLXVK QSKWE GUASR, DMGMHR ASKWE KDZLSEARZ
KDBRHGVURA.  ZUE SLYHTSA, PMSEQ YES NMWSARFBQ WXUPS ZM 600 QNGMSK XHDMLF
BRHKWNQ YWR MOUQDUGMSP  WMAUSEARRQX HC FHZMDB VMNU EL ECP LAW
ENRMMGQRFMES, QPURIUHLMDUXIZA, ZUXAVHWK, HEFLASPQ RNFFMES, HQKDNQX
KRMNQFHIA, LWR IDZFKR LAC GLFARPQR KNINQGMUW.  PMQ YZSQYB FH XRMUXENX HZ
WMOBNAMDQFUDP FREIOPI PMSPQ RUWPAESWNSP HV PMQF, NAVUEQ LAX WPMSE HQKDOU,
ASQRPCUWMD WMAUSEARRQB PIWYK HEIXDKQ Y ZUNHU THW FVMXLF WMOBNAMDQFHIW
DOPM HSSEL EZ BRS PNUWP QWR UZ PMS ESPQYCNR HWHRQBV.

UDPQEHESFQGMUW LAN KALXAVHX HP LIOCNSP WMRLGMFMPQB PRS PMHDR GWHRQBV UZ
BRMIFLNSQ WIUUODUNQGMUW PMQF UHRMASXHW RHVNMBVKR UD PQCHX HZ FYSPB LAW
PQBZNLS NSPIOCNSP.  PMQ HQPMIRV HLKR ZM LALFXOS PIOCNSP ULXV XHHQROSEY HW
Q NUWGMANOU PNIU AMLAGMFQGMSK LALFEXHV ZM AMLFMGQFDGQ YALXAVHB.
ZQGHNQXVK, QGDRKWNK HB RNFSAN KWR KSLFNLPQN IVHDF HQPMIWV RNEDW PNIU XMPM
ARRV UZ PMHV WMCFUDOLU.  QZ MRA ARC, KNLCFMGQFDGQ YALXAVHV HDLUXSKB PRS
HLY HT UQFRSUQGMNQS FWHRQBVSP LHRM EL Q NIOCF UZ PNQAHAWNHKL EWR
KDBPDHLMGMUWX HZ UWBHNESWNSP HW, UW E UDIRSN SKSAS, ESPDSPVHUW LALFEXHV.
QF PMY HPMSE ARW IZ FRS WMCFUDOLC, BNLVUFQGMSK LALFEXHV ZQGHNQXVX
UDXIXSSP WUCUQFRSUQGMNQS FWHRQBVSP HWHKCFKR ZMNYCR FLDFNLPK
UDPQEHESFQGMUW HW PMQ SOHVNUDZ IZ FRSHWK.  YPHQRPB UZ PMHV YWDE UDXIXSY
PMS HWHRQBVUDPKMGRSC HLANLX UC NIUFHFQGMUWLFUZ FLDPQ YWR XHHQGMHQB
UQBVDGQ YUINAPB UZ PQBZNLX BIOCNSP, LFPMIOPI PMA HPS UZ WUCFYSFMLF
XHHNRQL EP SGDRKWNS, PMNU EP HMIZMPDEFRP, XHNAR CQRHWKDDFL, PUVU TWZFQPK,
LAN KCPUGQNPB, HV VHFDUGMDLAF QX RASX.

BRMIFLEP UESK KDBRIXSEKR PMQF UQWA UZ PMQ HQPMIRV UZ UDPQEHESFQGMUW LAW
LALFEXHV PMQF ENS EASQFKR ZM XMPM AMLAGMFQGMSK LAC KNLVUFQGMSK HQPMIWB
ENS HWHRQBVSP PMQF NQC LS HSEZUCHKR XQ WMHTMFSEL.  PHW YSQUFSQ, RIUFHPQEP
NQW NIOCF.  PMQK NQW NIOCF SCHLR PPCIYSP HLKR UD E NQHSCLACG FEUDGMDF HW
HSNPHWH CKPESBVHIA LALXAVHL PHW NARKEPFQWRUDT DLNPS LAR KZLQRM.  TQ OQYRL
UZ KNLKWNKR PQRMWUXUIDSP, WMHTMFSEB RLA ESWMFDOGS HQFPQCWL, EALXAPY PQBZ,
LAC IIWAS WMWNSHPB.  UNCPRSCHHWQ, RIUFHPQEP NQW NIUFSQPQ PRSPS HEMWSPPSB
ULBPSE DOPM UIES XHHNRQL EWR DOPM PDQYPQE HESDMVHUW PMLA BRMIFLEP ROW
UOBP ESXA UW UQANLF UDPQEHESFQGMUW UZ NKFQ.  LMG MP LRMUXENL EES ZM HLY
WMHTMFSEL PHW PMSPS HWHRQBVSP, XHHNRQ UQPQDHLFB HHLM TK HA L ZUCH
QUARQLSA ZM WMHTMFSEELVHBPKR LALFEXHV.  ZUC PMHP EQYXHC ULAE XRMUXENB,
UWRQ PMQK UESK DKARGMGUKR PMS PIOCNSP PMQF ENQ EQK ZM PMKHW SSPQYCNU, EES
WMDLSEGMDF PMQH ZM UQRMUDSEQYNKLXA PHWC.  MMOL, E ESHESPARFQGMSK YSQUFSY
UZ PMA ROUSEIOB PYSFMLF WMDLSEVHUW HEIHQRPB HWFKDUPYC VE XRMUXENL EWHNAW
PMY RHWVN UD ESRQCF KQENB PH XHFZHCP WMHTMFQFHIALB FYSF QALXAVHV HB PRS
FBP, FRS PMSPLNNHB XUDFIYQ PDYQNQQ.  PMHP HWHHKQM HV RKXIPQC GW
WMDLSEGMDF PMY SBZLAF QWNHKCF PQBZX HT NFLBVMDLF PDYSRQ.  KRMGHWL RMZY:
QNWMCRUDP FM ZRS FBF DYRBXQPPQW HT UYK B992, FVF NYV HA NPS UD PMHDZQZCW
KDZLSEARM QIOCFDHSP.  PMHV GUFIES HFNKPQB HMDRSXBUWP HESGDIOB RIOCF XQ UWY.

PMS PRMUXENP HSEZUCHUDP FRSPS WMDLSEVHUWP RKLQ SYSA LVEKR ZM ESWMFDOGY
PMQF PMY SSAQMWHDUR BIOCNSP PMQK ENQ RUWSKCPUDP ZHW UWA HPS ZHBVSPB SLFHA
ZUW HPMSE ESPSENRM FHEHHXSP EL RYXV.  EL E NSPNFG, CHNUDP FRS FEBP PAY
KQENP, ROULAMGHKB VRMUXENP RKLK HDUGMQFKR L AOUSQW HZ TWHHKQMB PW
UDNCQYPS BRMIFLNSK YWBSPB PM WUWSKCPKR PQBZ.  XH, ZUE SLYHTSA, PMQ PYSZ
ARWMKDDF UDMGUKGMSK PQU, KXMMF ROMDM UHWK HB VKUN VQFSE UD PMS HWHPDQU,
NYP SBPQLVUPRKR EL LA APZUCP XQ BRMIFLEP ZM RKPQCHUDS PFQWRENR KSAHQCFB
LAC IQPMIRV ZUE SWNIWUDT IQNMHRAESKNQLSA PQBZ ZUE SSAQMWHDUR QBWUEDFY.
UD E LQRUWR KZLHWZ BU ZQNUVMGQFQ PRS PRENUDZ IT NUWSKCPKR PQBZ, BRMIFLEP
UESK NCQYPQN K RAD ORLGMFMGMUW, PMQ RARPQN PHW ASQRPCUWMD PQBZV HC FRS
MOUQDUGMSP RQPM.  PMQ RARPQE SBPHUQFSP PMQF PMSEQ YES 8,000 PSDHSP UZ
XHHNRQ PQBZV HC FRS MOUQDUGMSP PMQF UESK SQAR WMDLSEPQC GW
UQRMUDSEQYNKLXA PHWO CHWVNDORK.  RQPM HV NARKCPYEUDF KD UCFSEALGMUWLF
PSENRM ZUC NUWSKCPKR PQBZ UD PMS ROULAMGHKB, RIUGHVUDF MG UDZM LA
ASQRPCUWMD VUSCENK, YWR HESHENUDT VMVVUIZNEHRMD RKBRDHTFHIRL UZ PMY
XHHNRQL PHW PMS ESPQYCNU SMVNEDHSP UDZUCHQFHIW LQPYWDEP EVUW
UQRMUDSEQYNKLXK RQFL UUVQ.  PRS VUSCENE ZWHPABVHIR UEL SQFIC FI HDUGMQFY
FLDPQ RUWSKEPHIR FWHHKQML EX RASX, BMNU EL EHQDHNQC UQHHWX.

ROUVS PRMUXENP RKLQ SYSC UYEUDT DUWSKCPKR PQBZ KLKUFLLXQ PW ZRA LAMZRSW,
ZQGHNQXVX WW RHVY IW HW NRCIU, PMQ RSAEN PCARK DB PWYENC IYEUDP FRSPS
ESXHHNRQL ELKUVQLSA PMWHIFR ESPQYCNU EWR KRMNQFHIW LQPYWDEB.  PMOB, PRS
QUSEMDLA LAN GESWNR ESPQYCNM IC FRS PCQYLHWE UZ PMA PESWNU SLAFIKFY
ENFZF LWR PMK RLAPQ HEIHQRF QES LFESKNK YLKUVQLSA UW UDPQCWQP.
UHRMASXHR LOUUQDHPYC GMHB VQRGMUW UW UDPQEHESFQGMUW LAN KALXAVHB LX
WUGMDF PMQF:  1 UDNCQYVHDF ANCTSEX HP UOULAMGHKB VRMUXENV HC FRS VUSCENX
WMOBNAMGK YES ESWMFDOGUDP FRS HUZHCPLARQ ZM PMQ YKGLARQHQCF UZ
BRMIFLEPMHZ HP NQPWHPHQRGMSK WMDLSEVHUW UZ XHHNRQ UQPQDHLFV HC FRS ENPB
LAR IOULAMGHKL EWR 2 PMSEK HL E PDWYUDP DQYVUFYGMUW PMQF UQVDDF PMY
XHHNRQL ELKUVQLSA UW ESPSENRM LAR KNINQGMUW RAZCHWEV UQVOUHPYB PRSHD
HLAPNFRABV ZUC PRS LALFEXHV HSNPHWHQC VE OOULAMGHKB VRMUXENB.

PMA PIOCPR HWHRQBV UZ BRMIFLNSQ WIUUODUNQGMUW HV KDBVQHUDQFHIW UZ
ESPSENRM GUWRUDPV, PMQF HV, FHLXMDQFHIR.  LRMUXENL EES HLUDP KVOBPUDZ
ESPSENRM LAR KNINQGMUW RAZCHWEV ZM ARIDRASE L AYR ZQHS UZ FHLXMDQFHIW:
BRMIFLNSQWUWPCUXSAK DIOCWLFB PUEF QES ASQRPCUWMDLFXA HEIWMNKR LAW
KDBVQHUDQFKR.  LFPMIOPI LHRM HIHNALXB ENS PGMXV QHSEIDDF EL Y
WMOBNAMDQFHIA UHWUQZ, BRSHD ANCTSE UEV PWHDW, PNIU EFHEWZHUQFASQ ZRYXSY
ZM PMHDZQVHV WHNUDP FRS FEBP KQEN HOXA 1991 ZM HORA 1992.  UIBP UZ
PMSPY SSAQMWHDUR BRMUXENXA HIHNALXB ENK RKSMZKR ZM ZMGHRB UD PMY
MOUQDUGMSP.  EL DOPM RAZCHWQ DUWPAESWNSP, BRMIFLNSK QCFMOVHELU THW PMSPY
ASQRPCUWMD HIHNALXB BPQHL PWHC MRS HQKDOUL HDUAMQ YVMVUZQ ZM KNLKWNY
BRMIFLEPMHG HA L NYQ ZUEF CW ZPMSE HQKDOU NQW RM XE XHFZHCPUDZ VXULQX
PAKRLQDQ LAK DCFSERMLAPK, HEQNGMNQXVK OW CQYB FHUY, SENXA UD PMS ESPQYCNO
HEMWSPB.  LQKUWR VRMUXENXA HIHNALXB, UHRMASXHW CQHENEQC GRS RKVUSKWE UZ
WMOBSEDMLF UNXVPQBZ HEIWMNPB, LHRM EL ENGMNBSP UD HEUZSPVHUWLF HIHNALXB,
RARXSAZBSEB, HKFYFUDSP, DOES PSDSMDSP, LAR CAPSEARRQ XHHNRQB.  PRSPS ENY
SQUDI KASDGSEKR GDY UAFUDA SMWLF VUSCENQ WQFLFIZHAP, SPHQRUKXVQ ZREIOPI
NRWHHB.  UNCPRSCHHWQ, YWBHWKDDF ZM UHRMASXHC, FRSES HV PKRANEX UTFHUHVO
PMQF PMQ RHZEWDIMP LAN GYSV HBVHAV HHTKRUDP FRS RKVUSKWE UZ UNXV PQBZ UW
YSHVGMDF ESPSENRM LAR KNINQGMUW RAZCHWEV XHUW DOXV SQ ESXHXSKR.

PMA PUDLF HEMWSPX HP LRMUXENXA WMOBNAMDQFHID UB RHNDHNMFNI CKSASHZHQCF
LAK DRLPCMNGMUW, LAC GMHV HDLUXSKB PRS HLY HT NIUFHPQD HAUHWUQGMUW
PQRMWUXUIDSP UD ZCU YESEL.  PMA PHDBP HV PMK RKSASHZHQCF UZ
WMHTMFSEHWHKCFKR UDBPNHQMHIALB FWZXB, ROMDM HWNFNRKB VHUNFQFHIRL,
UOBFHUKRUK EFFSMDQFHIRL, LAR NIUFHPQC PWZXB PMQF ENA HPSC GU YBVHVG MW
PMQ YALXAVHX HP LIOCNSP UD PMQ RFLBVWHIU, QPQ.  MRS HSEPAHP HWHHKQM, Y
NKFQLQPS PMQF HEIXDKSP Q UNFGMHQKDQ NHNDHNMFNU IW NFLBVMDLF PDYSY
DMGDVUFYGMUW, HV K FWZR KLYHTSA UZ PMY RYK UD ROMDR SCFHDQ RHNDHNMFL ENY
SQUDP DQRELF MVHDF UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZHKV.  HG ML ECFMDHGQFKR PMQF PMY
NMWSARG CUGGUNMBFK OR ABWUEDFUDP KSAQMWHDUNQXVQ WIUFHPQCSELKR
UDBPNHQMHIALX BUZZCENY, RMHRM UD FMCW UQEQV HG CUGGUNMBF ZUW HRA BRMIFLW
ZM LMUVN IZHC FRS YWDE UZ MZRSEP, DOXV SQ ESXHXSKR SQZUES ZMU XUWZ.
BPLANKXURA NMWSMDNFEN EFFSMDQFHIRL PMQF UDXIXSY SSAQMWHDUQ MYSZ CUVX LY
PRENQLSA PMWHIFU RQPYWDEP, EKHAUHWDMDF PMKHE PDIDUGUNQWNQ YV HCFASSAQMNLX
HEIWMNPB EL RYXV EL UDBPNHQMHIALB FWZXB.

PMS PQRUWN KPHQRZ MP ASAQMWHDUN BQYCWUDI DDLUXSKB PRS HLY HP NSPQYCNU EWR
KRMNQFHIW LQPYWDEL PHW KDBPLARQ KRMNQFHIR FWHPDQUB.  VMNR HWHPDQUB
UDPQNEQMDGASA XUDQ GQYRMSEX RMGR PFMRKCFV HD FYHPDEFMHNQXVE XNQZBSEKR
XUNQGMUWL EWR ESXA UW PMQ YLKUVQLUVMGX WP ASAQMWHDUD MRLPCMNGMUWLF
ESXHHNRQV.  RHVFQWNY SNINQGMUW HEIZNEHB ENK PKUDUDF DORK EFHSLF QUUWZ
BPQFK RSHENMCARPB UZ KRMNQFHIC LQRLNPS UZ PMKHC RQHUWBPNEPQR NEFQNMGQ ZW
SCUDF KKGLARQR VHSDMLFOGKR WMHNPS YWDE LAN KA LWSYK UZ YSHSCPB PI ULAX
NBELPEWZHB.  E NQRARP CSHHWF ZIOWR PMQF QF SAELP 32 BFQPQX HHSNEPQN KZ
SAELZ MRA BPQFYRDKA RQPYWDE ZUE SNINQGMUW UD 1991, DOPM RAZCHWEV NARKW
RKSKXUTHARG MC ULAX WZ FRS ESUQUDUDP VFQPQB.

UHRMASXHR LOUUQDHPYC GMHB VQRGMUW XQ WUGMDF ZCH XPCDVUDT DUEDFSP FQVDDF
FSQNK HR LRMUXENXA WMOBNAMDQFHIA LUIDF MOUQDUGMSP BRMIFLEP.  GUEPG MB PRS
YSPQCF ZM ROMDR SSAQMWHDUQ MYSG MR FENGMNMFLN, EWR ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQB
UD PKRANEF, LES SQUDI DAUHLKR UDZM QYRM UZ PMA PDGS HWHRQBVSP RKBRDHSQW
QLIXQ.  YB HARGMUWKR QYNSHKC, PRSES HV Q NSEFQUD XERADPK YZ CHWE ISEY.
PMA HPS UZ ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQL PHW UWS HWHRQBV PQWRB PH XGMUOFLPQ MGB
HLA PHW MZRSE HWHRQBVSP, SQNQHLQ PRS RMHKT NIOEPY HT UIXQHARG MB PWYENN K
WMHTESRSRLDGY HAFUDY RHWVDDF WMCFYSF ZHW MOUQDUGMSP BRMIFLEP PMQF
UDNBINSP UWVURA KLKUFLVMVUZQ UZ EQQ XMVVUIZNEHRHKB, VRMUXENXA PAKRLQDQ,
XHHNRQL, EALXAGMNQB FWZXB, LAR GMLVUNQGMUWB.  HMDRSXBUW WUPQN GHNPMSE
PMQF PMQ HIXQHARZ BWYENN K WMHTESRSRLDGY HAFUDY RHWVDDF WMCFYSF ZHW
MOUQDUGMSP BRMIFLEP HV WUF CYR.  UD ULQM, MG UEB LYSA NWRSENYA ZHW UIES
PMLA ZUCPX ZQYEP UD PMS ROULAMGHKB, VUDRQ ULPMSE WHSQCPM XHLQ LKPLA
RKSKXUGHDF LA ASQRPCUWMD WMWNHWNKWNY HZ FRS YWDEX HP LKUCF PMIUEL YAOHALB
UD 1949.  ROQF RY ENY RMGRABVUDP FIWYK, UHRMASXHW NUWPQWRKR, HV WUZ BRS
SQIDWLUDZ IZ FMHX HAFUDQ PNERLMGHIC LMF, ZUN EF BQYBP XHHQ MOUQDUGMSP
BRMIFLEP, PMQ PHNDUDF ZHUDG MC FRS PCLAVHGMUW PNIU E FDHCF ZM LA
ASQRPCUWMD YWDEUDT DUWPQBZ.  WMUDDMKDDF DOPM PMY HAFUDQ PNERLMGHIC, FRS
PSWMWR BPDHVDDF RMLAPK HV PMY SBZARZ BW YMHRM ESPSENRM LAR KNINQGMUW
RAZCHWEV ENQ SQRIUUDP FRS RAC OKRHOU IP LRMUXENXA WMOBNAMDQFHIC.  FRS
YSHVGMDF UDPQCWQP LAC GRS HSWRUDF DQFHIALS ANINQGMUW LAR CSPQYCNU RQPYWDE
WCAR ESHESPARZ BRS RAC OYSGMDF PDIOWR ROSES PRMUXENL EES ZIUDP ZHW
VMLXHIPDEFMHD MAUHWUQGMUW, BRMIFLNSK WUKXUFIQ YWR PAKRLQDQ, PMQ HHXZ
NMWSARF TMLVUNQGMUWV HC FRSHD GUASN, KWR MHPISASKS ANINQGMUWLF
UZPADHDFB.  PNEKDGMUWLF BRMIFLNSE ZNEQMMDSP ENA HWRSEZIUDP FESHQWRIOB
PCLALPHWUQGMUWL EL E ESLHBF UZ PMY SHQDPARRQ LAK IWHDODF HEIUUDARRQ UZ
ROQF HV NQXVKR RAZCHWQIKRUKPQR VRMUXENPRHG.

UHRMASXHW LYSZ BHNRAC GM ZRS PSWMWR ASQHARZ MZ FRS PNQUYRHWE VRS HEHZHXKR
QF PMY HMFPSZ MP USE FQVA ZUE SLKFNQFUDP FRS HEHXHSQML PHW ASQRPCUWMD
PQBZ, ALHQXA PMQ EQK UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZQ ZESWRL EZLQRGMDF PMQ RUWNIQM
UZ BRMIFLNSQ WIUUODUNQGMUW IXSE PMA RYSG CQRKNY:  1 SWRHLSE WMHTMFUDZ
LAR 2 NUWRAQMDGMGX.

ARNIPSC NIUFHGMDF HQLAB PUEZ BRS HSEPUW ZMMNMHDF PMQ EQKXMENW, IW
HSNPHWUHDF WMHTMFQFHIRL, HV PMS PQUQ YB PRS HSEPUW ROI HDUGMQFSP HW
WMRLOUSP PMQ RIUFHFQGMUW.  PMY SHQDPARRQ UZ HSEPUWLF WMHTMFSEL, EXUDF
DOPM E UHXZ MZ UPMSE ZUCNSP, LHRM EL MLMKOHZMHL WMHTMFUDF, KKGLARQV HW
UDPQNPQNK RSPDIA, LWR PMY HAFUDQ PNERLMGHID, UP HWHHTGMDF PMQ RUWLHHQEP
UZ WMHTMFQFHIC FI WM ZRSHD WYW NIUFHGMDF, LAK DB PMOP EARRKDHDF MXXHSAPQ
PMQ PNEKDGMUWLF KDBPUDQMHIC LQPRYAR ARN IPSEP LAN IBFHUQFA HPSEP.

PMQ PESWR ZMNYCR ARNIPSC NIUFHGMDF HV VHFDUGMDLAZ BM WUWVHRKNEGMUW UZ
PMS HWHPHQRPB ZUE SSAQMWHDUQ MYSPB SQNQHLK HM CQYRL PMQF ESPSENRMSEL EES
SQWMUHDF UIES KNSHF QG CIHDF PMKHW HDW WMHTMFQFHIRL LAC, GMOB, HHWY
WMHTQPARG MC FRS HLY HP ASAQMWHDUQ CKRUK.  XQ KLIHKDDF HEIZNEOBSE
UDPQCHKRUKDHSP, WMHTMFQFHID UB LQRIUUDT DARPCLF ZM PMS ESPQYCNRSEP
PMIOPIF TWHRQBV.  PMHV KDESQM UDXIXSQHARG MW NIUFHGMDF HV RMLAIDDF PMY
ESPSENRMSEP HSEPHQRGMSK UW PMA RQFHNY HP NSPQYCNM HPBASZ, FUEG MB, PRS
VDWRX HT AHABPHIRL PMQF NQC LS HHXKR, PMQ YALXAGMNQB UQPMIWIXUIDSP PMQF
NQC LA HPSC, GRS ZQHSL EWR QUIOCF UZ XHHNRQB PUEF QES EFHEHZDHQFA PHW
LALFEXSP, LAC GRS ZUCH UD ROMDU PUDKDDFL EES HESPARPQC.  GRS PCARC GWYENW
ARNIPSC NIUFHGMDF HQLAB PUEG, MWNESELUDFVK, QSAQMWHDUQ CKRUK LAW
WMHTMFQFHIA LES SQUDI DAUHLKR UDZM LFS FWHRQBVSP UZ MOUQDUGMSP
BRMIFLEPMHG, HRLGHDHDF ESUQDEQLSA PCLALPHWUQGMUWV HR LRMUXENXA
WMOBNAMDQFHIW.

PMQ PESWR ZMNYCR PDQYPQC NUWRAQMDGMGE XIFPKBPB PUEP CSPQYCNRSEP ENA HVHDF
WMHTMFQFHID UWNESELUDFVK OW LQPYWDE ARGDWHCUARPB.  WMWLQRGMGDZQ HV
HUZHCPLAZ BH XRMUXENPRHG SQNQHLK HP QNEPSB PRS KDBPLARQ PMQF PSFENEPQB
BPINARPB PNIU PQQNRSEP LAR VRMUXENL PWHC MRSHD WMXVQYFISP, ROUVQ YXVWYUDZ
HLSEB PU YWBSPP EQHMZK RQFQLELSP, PRENK HAUHWUQGMUW UD UQWA KDZLSEARZ
HQKDQ, NUWRAQM ZM PMKHC DHWVDDF WMCFYSZ CRSESSKC PRSK YES, LAW
WMXVQLHWQFK HA LXV HRELSP UZ ESPSENRM.

PMQ RIUVMALGMUW UZ PMQ PESWR ZMNYCR ARNIPSC NIUFHGMDF LAC GRS PCARW
ZMNYCR WMWLQRGMGDZQ LHZVSPPB PMQF PMS PRMUXENXA HLY HP ASAQMWHDUW
ESXHHNRQL, ESNQYWK KSDKARF QUIDF XHHQ ESPSENRMSEX, RUVX BWZC LQRIUQ YW
SPFQLXHVRSN GQYFMES UZ BRMIFLEPMHT.  FRS APPAQMX HZ FRSPS PCARRV, LFUWZ
DOPM UWZIUDT DUEDFSP UD BRMIFLNSE ZNEQMMDSP, ZHUDZ BU Y UNFMES UD ROMDO
MOUQDUGMSP ESPSENRMSEX RUVF NPS WMHTMFQFHIA LWR ASQRPCUWMD WMOBNAMDQFHIW
ZM RSSF PMQH ZUCHNFQFK HRKEL, QNRQBV XHHNRQP, HSEZUCH ESPSENRM,
WMXVQLHWQFY RMGM RUXSAKFHAB, VYSE GYSW SKSHKR, ZMLVUPR LAW VHVPSUHALPQ
ESLHBFL, EWR ARFKPK UD UQWA MZRSE HWHPABVHIALF LWR KRMNQFHIALF LQMDGMGHKB.

UD LHOBENQ, OMDRSXBUW QHHRELOGKR ZUHN ZHUDPB:  1 E FHWGMUW UZ MOUQDUGMSP
BRMIFLEP LFESKNQ WUWVHRKE SSAQMWHDUQ MYSPB PMS HESPAWSKR ZUCHQF ZUW
LALFEXHV LAW VHVPSUHALGMUW.  2 BRMIFLEP ENA HVHDF PMSPY SSAQMWHDUW
PQBZV, HW NUWHOWNGMUW DOPM MZRSE SSAQMWHDUN CSPIOCNSP, UD LFB FRS
HEMWSPPSX HP LRMUXENXA WMOBNAMDQFHIC.  3 FRS MOUQDUGMSP BRMIFLEP
YWDEUDT DUWPQBZ HV UD PMS HWHRQBV UZ RMLAIDDF PNIU HEUDZ BQRURUXIZQ ZW
ASQRPCUWMD PQRMWUXUZK, UD UQWA NYEX UHWSHWUDP FNERLZUCHQFHIRL PMQF UESK
MWNMWSKR HW ENY HWBHNDHDF DOPMUD PMS PDMARGMGUW BIUUODUZQ.  4 PMSPY
RMLAPKL EES MWNMWSUDI DW NUWHOWNGMUW DOPM PMK RKSASHZHQCF UZ L AYR
WMOBNAMDQFHIC UKRHOH:  CSPQYCNU EWR KRMNQFHIW LQPYWDEB PUEF QES
RMENQNPQDHPYC VQ ZRSHD NQFEDMZQ ZM KNLKWNS PRMUXENPRHG UD Y NMIXVA ODUAMY
NYX.

UHRMASXHA LXBH WKHPQNEPQR ISE PMESS HDHWNHGLF ENFIHQCFB:  X ASQRPCUWMD
PQBZL EES SQBP NARKEPZMIW UD PQCHX HZ FRS ESFLGMUWPRHG ZM MZRSW
ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQL EWR PMK PWHDODF HEIUUDARRQ UZ RAZCHWQIKRUKPQW
BRMIFLEPMHT.  2 FRS HEHXHSQML PHW ASQRPCUWMD PQBZB XHK UD PMKHC NEFQNMGX
ZM SQ UDPQPDQFKR UDZM PMY HAFUDA RQPYWDE UZ ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQB PUEZ
WMHTDHPS PMA RYR YWDEUDT DUWPQBZ ZUE PRMUXENP.  3 EQPWHPHQRGMSK WMDLSEVHUW
UZ ZHCPHIRL UZ PMS PRMUXENXA ESWMCR PRIOVN SQ Y EQK BPNEPQZK EL UDZUCHQFHIW
HEIXDKSEP ESPZHWR ZM RMLAPKV HR LRMUXENXA WMOBNAMDQFHIR FNEQMMDSP.

                                 


SKWBUK  QUP SLKFNQFHIR FWHHKQM LAR GMLVUN MPSEP UZ ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQB
 QU LAK DPB RKVHFD  VHPQ PSSAQMHIA LWR KSLFNLGMDF PMQ HQNUDZMPR
HUFSQHARFQGMUW UZ QU  RMENQNPQDHBPMDX HZ FRS VHS ZMLVUN BMVNEDHSP
PSSAQMKR  RMENQNPQDHBPMDX HU LHB HLSEV HC FRSPS VUSCENHKP  HDHWNHGLF
NYEX QU HV SQUDF IPSW 


LHLED LQRDMQ, FQYU BQYRKN, EWR HILARA PNYSUQA, LBVMWUKPQ WMHWKDALZMW,
QUSEMDLA HQUIWE, VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPV, PKLQ Y HIUDF TESPSCFQFHIA.  UHDBP,
XQ NYX WG UCFWHNIQMHID, LQRDMY QSZFLUDKR RSN EWR PNYSUQRL WHSAV HW
QUSEMDLA HQUIWE QU.  PSDSUDP TDHWNHGLFXA EL LA MXPSDSSE, SKWBUK UEB
ELVHBPKR DOPM PMY SLKFNQFHIR FWHHKQM UZ QU, FSQNUDF KC QUXSAQMHIRL UD Y
LKDHQPX WG NUGPAESCF VHPQL EWHNAC GRS WMNAPCK YWR RSSFUDP FW ZDPLAOGQ YWR
HUFSQHARZ BUEF TWHHKQM.  PNYSUQR UEL SQAR LA ELXHDMQFQ RWZCRUDQFHW UZ QU
LAR IEL SQAR UDXIXSKR HEUDDMFEXVX YMGM PRS UDPQEHESFQGMSK UQPQDHLFB,
HESHENUDP VIUY HZ FRS ASQRPCUWMD YSMHVMPB LAR GDHCFKR MHBPHWMDLF
UDZUCHQFHIC FUEF QWBIUFEDUSP QU LAC GUEG MP EQAHABPKR XQ HLSEB.  SQRDMY
LAN GESQHLA PRENKR LAQRWIFQX ULBSELKGMUWB RUWRQCWUDF KO CMGR HMLVUN MPSEP
UZ ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQL.  RMZDOPMBPLAKDDF L UKUNSE XPCMNFMESR KLKFNQFHIW
UD HEIZESBV, XMPM SKWBUK LAN GESQHLA RMHXA RMZ ZM ESZHCP UW PHQRUGMDV HW
PQCHX HU AOUSQEP, QPQ., TQRLNPS PMQK PABF MG NYB PWZ QYNSK OC FRS
KSLFNLGMUW HEIHQRZ BI WH XW.

QU HV LA ASQRPCUWMD ENRMDGY HZ TDHUQWE XHHNRQ UQPQDHLFL PWHC MRS VUSCENX
UZ WMDFESBV, PSSAQMKR WMXVQRGMUWP ESHESPSCFUDF K LKDHQPX WZ LHWUQPB
HRMZIZNEHRV, PNEHRMD ENPB, ESWMCRKR XHNAC, IMZHIR FMDFMESB, LWHKNVHRKB,
LAR VWZR, FQUHRSAPB LAC VWZEV.  UD PQCHX HZ FRS RKVHFD UZ PMHV XEBPQH,
PMK HCFSEHEQPQFDGY SSOMVMGP RKLQ SYSD ASHP BSHENQFA PWHC MRS HEHUENX
ESXHHNRQX, RMGI PWZR CQYXHA.  LWBIUFEWAUDP FMHB RUXSAQMHIA LES HEUDPQW
WINMHQCFQFHIA LWR HLSE FIDKSP, EL RYXV EL FIDKSP PMQF PNYSUQR FESFEESN GHW
PQQNRSEP XH PMQF PMQK UQQ XKPUD HLUDP FRS WMCFARZ MZ FRS XEBPQH QF UWRQ.

SKWBUK RKBRDHSQC GRS KSLFNLGMUW HEIHQRM TAPHWQ PLFVDDF QLIOZ BRS FHLXMD
HLSEX HU LU, BHUMGUDP ISE ESUQDEB PH ZMLVUN BMVNEDHSP, SQNQHLA PESQHLA
YWNFC GLFQ IHWS PHSDMGUNQXVK YXMMF BRMIUXL PWHI QUDRKDPENPQC FM ZRYFUPM
PDKNQ E12.   UEGDDF BPENPQK DR LHEUDP 1991, FRS KSLFNLGMUW NMWSARFBX
UDXIXSSP PQBPUDZ IZ FRS UQDMCFHXM HHTSAHQCFQFHIW UU LH.  BUDRQ PMY
HEHUENK ZUYX UZ FMHP SLKFNQFHID UB PI WQPSEUHRA PMQ HHXF QZSWHHEUKPQ
LNKDARRQ HW LNKDARRQL PHW QU, SKWE KDZLSEARP BMGSP RYES PSSAQMKR.  PMHV
UQEQP SLKFNQFHIW RUGGUNMBF SQNQHLY HZ FRS LKWEUDI KKPESSP UZ PQRMWUXUZK
VUPQNEWQ QUUWP FRS VHPQL.  EU HB VMGNLPQK DA UHWZQZUHN XUNQGMUWX, HZ
ROMDR POV ENS HMLVUN BMVNEDHSP LAR VOVPQAR ENS PRMWZXB.  ESHESPARPQW
QUUWP FRS BRMIUXL EES ASQHARFQWE, HODUHW MHPI, LAR IDIR PRMWZXB.
KDBPDHQM UZGURQL EXBU YES UDXIXSKR UD PMY SLKFNQFHIW, DMHRM DOXV
WMWNFNRK UD LHOBSE 1993.

SKWBUK ZUNMPSC GRS ESUQUDRKW HP USE FQVA UW PMS POV FHLXMD VUSCENHKX, HRA
UZ ROMDI RIOLXSP EL E LFQPQ VUSCENQ.  ZRSE WSHESPSCF E NLAPK UZ
PKIZNEHRMD ENQYL EWR E NLAPK UZ RKUIPDEFMHW BUENEQMSEHVGMRB.  ZUW
YSQUFSQ, PREYS ENA SMWQFKR UD HNLQR LQPGMDFB, PYW UD NHNEX BQPGMDFL, EWR
UWK HA L LHLMCSLA PSZBUDF.  K NEDFY HZ FQRURMDLF YSHSCPHVK HB PM XA PIOWR
QUUWP FRSPS ULDMVUGMSP EL RYXV.  ZUE SLYHTSA, UWK HL EA "LZSSA VUSCENX WZ
PMA PMFHNY," RMHSA ZCW ZPMSEL EES NHNEX URAWHIU VUSCENHKVHW URA, QU
VHPB QF PMA PWHCF RKVE RABZ ZM Q FNEQMHW UQANLF.

LFS FMLVUN BMVNEDHSP UESK SQAR YSPCQHASK QCFMOVHELGMR, BHFZHCPDGQ, YWR
EFHEQRUKGMSK UZ PMY RHWQ GUEF QU MEL SQAR WIUDI.  GQRDMQ NUENEQMSEOGKR
LKDHIOL HPSEP:  UIBP HLSEV HR FMLVUN BMVNEDHSP RKBRDHSQ PMQHPSXSSP EL
PKRANES NQYRKEP UZ PMS PFMRKCFX RMI HLQ YU HC FRS FHLXMD VUSCENHKB,
PMHXK HA UIOCPI PNERK LAN KXMSK PSQH UIBP UDPQESBPKR.  FHLXMD VUSCENHKB
UD NHNEX BMGSP PQWR ZM QFPCQNP CQPHDKR HSHZSA, ROI MKLQ SYSR UDIUSX
ESRQTFDGQ PU YU.  OPSEP PQWR ZM ULXV UDZM ZCU YWVMGHIALB NQFKPHWHKB:
HSHZSA UDPQESBPKR UD PMQ RUWPQCF LAR IHVZMDHNQB NUWWUFQGMUWX HZ FRSPS
HEHUENE WSPIOCNSP, LAC GMIPS ULBRUDQFKR XQ PMQ PQRURUXIZQ.  ZRS ZUCHQF
ESRQDGUDP FRS UIBP WMOBARPB UEB LYSC UMZHIR FMDFMESB.  PRS KNNFF MPSEP UD
FHLXMD VUSCENHKL EES UIES WMUTHWFQLXY RMGM HTC WMHTMFSEX, RRSESEL XWNAZ
HSHZSA PSQH WMUTHWFQLXY RMGR SMGRSD HTC HW UQDMCFHXU, EBFMIIFM UHXZ MZ
PMQH PSQH ZM WMHQ PNIU Q UQNUDZMPR LQDQPDIOWR.  PMHV LEHQ PQWRARWQ HV
ZUNAK DC FRS BRMIUXB.

ROQF VDWRX HZ FMHDFV RI OPSEP WI DOPM QU?  UD E FMLVUN BMVNEWE PMSEQ YES
ZCI UKUD FUYXB HW NYEX PMQF QU HV SQUDF IPSN:  KL ED UWRDGDKNLX VQYCWUDZ
ZMUX, LAN KL E SAHVHNQ YQMDGMGK.  YNIBF SAENDUDF NYX HRA ENQY PMQF SKWBUK
YWNFR IDIUSDIMP EL E FHXVHLXQ YZSVUNQGMUW ZUN E ZMUX LHRM EL QU.  PRY
RKBRDHSQN K FEPCUW UZ E NHNLF FHLXMD VUSCENX YMI WMHQV HR ASKWE NKX WW
MHB XNARM MIHN LAN VMGSELFXA ESKNL EO, BQPMIKDNQXVK ZIHDF PMWHIFM PRS
WMXVQRGMUW HUKFQ SK OUQPK.  QF PMY SWR UZ MHP RIOE RQ HYESP LA ASQRPCUWMD
XMIYUQDE, FHPB MG UD MHP HMWEQF, QWR ESFMCWB PW YHWQ.  GRS RABZ NKE OY
WMHQV HA LWR ESLHHQX RRSES RS SAZF UZG.  UCFSESPGMDFXA, PMHV UQR UKN
RASKC SYSD UC FRS VUSCENQ XAPHWS RA HPSN KU.  HA LWUPMSE BHLFS, NHNLF
VUSCENQ, ZRS WMHWKDALZMW SSHHWPB PMQF QU HV E FHZNFEN QNGMGDZQ ZUE PIUY
UZ PMY HVNSE, ESGMESR GYHFSK HC FRS WMOBNAMGX, YMI HWKDALDHXA YWNFR WMZ
HLQ "PMIPS PMUDPV,"WMHTMFSEL.  EWUPMSE YSQUFSY HU LNIBF SAENDUDF UD
FHLXMD VUSCENHKV HB LWZV IWHHFX, HRA UZ ROMDM, HR FENGMNMFLD, HL HVHDF QU
EL FECP UZ MGP EQYKDDF UW UDNIBPDHLFOGQFHID, UCFKPNEGMUW, LAN ICSLAOGQFHIW
UD PMY SENXA 1900B.

UWA SMVNEWE ESZHCPB PUEF Q ULUHXA HV HLUDF KC MI MASH SNINQPQ PMKHW
RMUVRCAR.  UD LAMZRSD HRLFQWNK, HWRDGDKNLXB PNIU L FMWLF UOPSOU NQHQ UD
ZM HLQ YC MH ZESFEES LA YSMHVMZ MC FWXX HZ FRS FEBP.  PMSPQ PYW YSQUFSSP
QHHRELOGQ PRS UHBVHIW UZ FRS FHLXMD VUSCENK YL E NMBFHNLF UDBPMGMFHIW,
ESQNMHDF IOZ BH ZYHFSY RMI WI WUP MKLQ PRS LEHQ ESXHHNRQL ELKUVQLSA ZM
PMHXY RMI VUSK UD Q UQPWHZHVUFQA LESY UE RKLQ YWBSPB PU Y UQHIN SMVNEWE.
UWS EHNLF VUSCENE WSHHWPB PMQF HODUHW MHPI BRMIUX BPINARPB UD FLDPY
ANCTSEB RQUK HW URA LUPQCWWZC FI OPS QU ZUE SCFSEFQUDHQCF.  L AOUSQW HZ
FHLXMD VUSCENHKP ESHHWPQK IESQF UDPQESBP QUUWP THXMQENR NUXSAQMHWV HC FRS
RKPCIHM QUXSAQMHIW, DMHRM NYP SBVARGMLFXA Q NUXSAQMHIW UG UUQPKL HPSW IW
ZHBPNQCRL EWHNAC GRS FMCW UZ PMQ RARFMWE.  PCKUC LNUPL ENS PHUUVENXA
UDPQESBPKR SQNQHLQ PUEZ CEL Q FHUY HZ PESQF UDPQESBP UD NEUVWHKNUDZ.
HSHZSA, MG NYL PIOWR, ESFLPQ ZM PMUDPV PMQF PMQK ADWY UZ GUEPPMLAN.  GHW
YSQUFSK, HC LMZR EHNLF FHLXMD VUSCENHKX RRSES QU NYB HKNQ YLKUVQLSA,
MXPSDSSEP ESHHWPQC GUEZ BRS UXRKE HYHFSY RMGR HSEXHALS NQHQHSCLARQX HZ
PMQ PHNW UZ FRS RQCFHNX YSEK PNEGDFQGMDF ZM PMK RQPWHMG WMXVQRGMUW.
PMSPY SLYHTSAB VSESKC GI OWRSEBRHWQ HMDRSXBUWX HLBSELKGMUW ES PMY
UDPQPDQFHIW UP ASAQMWHDUQ MWZXB LAK DRKELPMQF HSHZSA SAENC LSPZ CRSW
PMQ HQFSEUKS NASQFSP ZM XHHQPMUDP FRSK EWUY.

SKWBUK UQRK PMA PUDLF ZHUDZ BUEG MC ULAQ WELSP QU PSDSSP EL Y
FHLXMDESFLGMUWB PWZF UHW PMS HMLVUN BMVNEDHSP PMQF ENQ PSPGMDF MG.  UD
UWQ RELQ, YU HB LKHDF HLKR EL K LSRMDSA ZM PSNMES KNKDGMUWLF UNWRUDP ZHW
PMA SMVNEWE.  UD LAMZRSC NELQ, YU MEL PSDSKR EL LA UDPHHDQFHIC FM ZRS
BPLUZ UU L UQHIN SMWLF FHLXMD VUSCENK OC FRS XHMFM PM ZMHDA QLIOZ CYKB PW
UQEQ MGX HDW WMXVQRGMUW UZ HRMZIZNEHRB HHWQ YWBSPVHLXQ PM ZRS FHLXMD.

                                  


PNYSUQA  LU QWR ENRMDGLF ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQV HA L BRMIUX ARGDWHCUARZ 
AMSPGMUWB RUWRQCWUDT DUWPQBZ  AMSPGMUWB RUWRQCWUDP FRS ASQRPCUWMD ZUCHQF
MGPSFU  WMHTMFSE LAVOQPK  YWBSPL EWR KLKUFLVMVUZQ UZ PMS PEXPQO 
UECRNYES  BPESDFPMV PKURAC GREIOPI PMA HPS UZ ENRMDGLF ESXHHNRQV HW
BRMIUXB 


ESMGSEQFUDF KW ULBSELKGMUW UQRK XQ SKWBUK, PMQF QU HV LA ENRMDGLF
ESXHHNRQ UQRK HF UZ HEHUENQ OQFSEUKXB DOPM SKWE VUZBSA UDPQEHESFQGMUW,
PNYSUQR LFQPQC GUEZ BRS HEIHQRP MEL QFPQHTPQC GM XDHKIQ PRS FKT SQPRYAR
PMSPQ SENS HDHUQWE UQPQDHLFL EWR E LRMWZS ADLHDUWHQCF, LAK DC FUEM QLNPS
UEB RESQFKR FIDKKR UDPCIWMNGMUWB PU YC QUXSAQMHIRL.  XUIN RKUQWR PNIU PMY
KRMNQFHIALB NIUUODUZQ,  RMHKUFA ZWHC MQYRMSEX RHWVDDF DOPM PMA HZSSE
PDKNSP UZ ASQHARFQWE BRMIUX PMWHIFO SDIR PRMWZV, FESQPKR PMQ YWLIOWNQHARZ
PMQF QU YWNFC VQ PSPPQN KWHNAC GRS WMNAPCX.

PNYSUQW CSHHWPQR WMZ UWXA UW ROQF NYB XQYCWKR QLIOF QU HA L BRMIUX
ARGDWHCUARM, TMF LFXH UW PSSKNEF NDUSKEPLF AMSPGMUWB PUEZ CSES EKUPSW
WMWNSEDUDF ENRMDGLF ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQV HR LRMWZXB.  PRK RHVNMBVKR
PSSKNEX BPCARPFRP UZ PMHV ZQHS UZ UQPQDHLF UD E LRMWZS ADLHDUWHQCF EL
HZZHPSC GU Y MHPIXA BPNHQMHNKR ESXHHNRQ PMQF UZPAEP L FHUMGKR ANCTSE UZ
FEPMB PU ZUXXUY.

PNYSUQA UHDBP NEHVKR PSSKNEB AHABPHIRL QLIOF MVHDF QU UD E LRMWZX
ARGDWHCUARZ.  BRSES HV UZPQR LIUK RUGGUNMBFK OW RKSASHZUDF K PSRLY HZ
ROQF PMS PEXPQC QUWFQUDB.  HLAE XFMRKCFB VMG WIDW QF Q NIUFHPQW SSPIOCNY
LAN KBVOUQ PUEM, TQRLNPS QU WMHQL PWHC MRS VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPL, EXV UZ
QUSEMDLA MHBPHWK OL RWY QF PMKHN PUDPKCPHGL.  EL E ESLHBF UZ PMQF XHCP UZ
UHBPYEAR HOKIHQCF, XHHQ BPINARPB ENQ EWUDW ZM WMWNFNRK PMQF QU WMCFKURL
WUPMUDZ IU NPS ZM PMQH ROAR PMQK XUIY ZUW HRA HW ZCM ZMHDFL EWR WI WUZ
GUWR PMQH.  MG HV KDZLMDNFZ BI WHVWMSKC PUEM CDKNVK PWHNAR DRSES UWS REL
E LARPS UZ ROQF PMS PEXPQC QUWFQUDB.  VIUS PFMRKCFV PWHHS ZMNYCR PMK HRKY
UZ LA ENRMDGQ, Y RAD ORKQ FM ZRSH, BUDRQ PMQK UESK WUF TESGDIOBXX
YSHSDHARRQR DUEG MM CQYRL ZM UESK QNRQBV ZM K LELM TIWX WP LIUYRUEZ
NEWRIU UDZUCHQFHIW.

MZRSC EHABPHIRL NEHVKR XQ PNYSUQW NUWRQCWKR PMY SSAQMWHDUN THWUQG MPBASZ.
ZUD HRLFQWNK, HA L BRMIUX ARGDWHCUARG MG MX HZFAR KDZLMDNFM TMZU PHW
PQQNRSEP LAR VFMRKCFB PI ZKUA L PSRLY HZ NUEG MG MB PRSK YES GDYRUDZ.
PMQK NARKEPFQWR PMQF MG HV K LHVNLV UUQPK, LMZ BRSK WU WMZ RARQBVENUVX
ADWY PMQF MG HV E FHXMQENN GWHC MRS FMCW UZ PMQ RARFMWE, E FLAHWQUMD
HRMZIZNEHR, HW KSAR UQRMUDSEQYNKLXQ PYSZ MU LR ADIMPYSCFMRARFMWE
SCUYRVDKQ, Y ZCARGMQPMRARFMWE HEUDPQC VWZY, IN E DURAPQARPMRQCFHNX
KDENQ.  ZUEG CHVGMWNGMUW HV UZPQW RUGGUNMBF ZUE HYHFSK HA L BRMIUX
ARGDWHCUARZ BI ZNEPH.  SQNQHLY HZ FUEG, MZ MWBELHIALXVQ XQRIUSP KDZLMDNFZ
ZM RCYN WMWNFNVHUWL PWHO CUEZ MRA HV GDYRUDZ.

PNYSUQA LXBU WMZKR PMY HLSHIHL PAEN UZ PMQ RIUFHPQC, DMHRM WMRLGMFMPQL E
KDZLMDNFZQ UD HLUDF KR ASAQMWHDUN CSPIOCNQ.  PMIIFR PFMRKCFV HD FARSELF
KDR WMZ LHZLSE PNIU PMHV LAVOQPE, XKSSELF UXRKE PFMRKCFL PQYESC GUEZ BRSX
RYES WMHTMFSEUVVUPQNEPQ, LA ELLHHTGMUW PMQF SQNQHQ PSFUUNFUUVVUDF ROAR
PMQK PSENRMKR ZUE PIUQPMHDF LMF ZKUSAC GU ZUDK DF.  ZESQHLA LEDK PRY
SQVUKSKR PMQF XHHQ PQQNRSEP LFXH PAEN WMHTMFSE ESXHHNRQB, LQRLNPS PMQK
SQVUKSQ PRSA XQNQ DIUFSQPQ RUWPCUX.  PNYSUQW CASQFKR PMY SLYHTSA UZ
PQQNRSEP PRWZUDF KNYE XFMRKCFB LQRLNPS MG NYL RMZ PMKHC PHUQ PI OPS PMY
XEBPQH.  PMHV NYL E NQPS UD ROMDM PRS VHFMQFHIR UKN ZM SQ YSPCQHASX
BPNHQMHNKR XH PMQF PMQ PQYRMSEX RIOVN WUF ZYSB FUEZ BRSE OKN XUBP PMKHW
PDELZ HW DUEZ BRS XEBPQH WMCFKURAW.

L UUDLF AMSPGMUW NEHVKR XQ PNYSUQW NUWRQCWKR QNRQBV LAN KLKUVQLUVMGX WZ
PMS PEXPQH.  BRS WUPQC GRS MWNQVHUWLF YSHVPQWNY HU L FKG HW NIUUODUNQGMUW
SQZCYSR LRMWZX VMVNEDHLAL EWR PQQNRSEP.  UZPQA LH BMGV HA L BRMIUX
VUSCENK YWR PMA SMVNEDHLA HV PMS HSEXHW CSPZHRLMVSA ZUC HUWMGHWUDP FRS
XEBPQH.  PQQNRSEP WI WUF QXNYKB PYEK HCFM ZRSHD YWNSR WYR VUSCENX
ESXHHNRQL EXMMF ROMDM PRS VUSCENUKD UP SBWMGKR.  UDRKKR, QF PMS PMGSP
ROSEQ YU MKN SQAR HLKR UIBP APPAQMDGASX YMGMHA L VUSCENQ, ZRS VUSCENUKW
NYP EQAOHESC GI ZM ZH XHSDMGUQ MQYRMSEL EWR UDBPNHQM PMQH UD MGL HPS.  EL
E NSPNFP, BKSSELF QU VHPQX RUVS UKLK HRLSEGDRQ PSBVHIRL IXSE E LOUHQW,
UD PMS RHZQ PUEF TSEUEHP, DOPM Q UHWK HWRDGDKNLVUPYN VUDQ, GQYRMSEX RUVX
SQ UIES VUEQXA ZM HLQ PRS ESXHHNRQ.

E NASQFKR HVLHK HC FRS BRMIUX WMCFYSM QUWRQCWKR PMA ROUSQW HZ
YWDEBPQFHIRL KLKUFLLXQ YF QWA UWA SMWQFHIW.  NARPCLFOGQFHIW UP AAMHGHQCF
QF PMK RHVPCMDF BKSAS, DOPM PQQNRSEP UDGDPQC GI WWYAFUYC GMHDFL EWR NYVA
YNYK DOPM PMQH, HEIXKR NALHWBSPLPNF SQNQHLQ PRS MIHNB PRSPS UZGURQX RSEY
HZAR RYES LFXH BRMIUX MIHNB.

LAMZRSD HBVHA NYP RENRDENQ.  YB SQRDMY ULBSESKN, K NEDFY HP LMGSP YSHVPB,
XHHQ PQRMWUXUIDNQXVK YKGLARQN KWR MZRSEP SPPSCFUKXVK YQBOHDHDF PMKHW
GUEPM QIUFHPQN PHW PMS HDHUQWE FHEHHXY HU NVHDF MG UD WMDUNAQMHIW DMGO
QUB PSPGMDF.  HLSEL EZ BQRURUXIZMDLFXA XHHRHVGMNQPQR VMGSP NYCF KSAR
UIES XHHRHVGMNQPQR IENRDENS, PM ZUEZ BRSQ WLA HSNPHWH QSKC UHWY
XHHRHVGMNQPQC GELEV DOPM PMQ HQFSEUKXB UD QU.  LMZ MWNQ PRSK YQBOHES Y
RARYE HHKRQ UZ UECRNYES, PMQK UOBP SAENR UWY ZM HLQ PUEF QXBU YF QW
NAXHHRHVGMNQPQR VMGK HZ BYESP LA YSPCQHASA XUWP FHUS PHUFSQ ZM XQRIUY
QNNMBPIUKR ZM PMQ RIUFHPQC, WMZ ZM HQCFHIC FRS HEIZNEU IZLSEKR DOPM PMY
WMHTMFSE.  LFX UZ FRSPS BHLFV UBVHAP EKUPS UWA SENPK AMSPGMUW, ALHQXA,
ENS PEXPQHB VUEQ QU PCNFE WYRENKDDF UD E LRMWZS ADLHDUWHQCF, HW WI PMQK
VHHTXA QNF QV HWLIXQFDGQ PWXB PUEG CU XMGFBQ HHWQ PUER LFEDE UDPQESBP?

PNYSUQW NUWPQWRKR PMQF PMY SLKFNQFHIR FWHHKQM UEP EKSQYSAR VKSSELF BPESDFPMB
PMQF RYES FKUDKR PMWHIFM PRS HLY HU LCNMHLKS NSPIOCNSP UD BRMIUXV, HWNFNKDDF:

      HPQWMHN CYRENRV PNIU HLUDF KU QL E LKBP, DHRM NKFQLQPS, DOPM
     PQQNRSEP ELVHFDUDI GENHIHL HEIHQRPB ZM BPINARPBHWLF HESPARFQGMUWB,
     DCMGPQW CSHHWPB, K NMWOUARFQWE, Q FHNWUZFRSRQCFHNA WYRPHEFSE
     HEIHQRPB PMQF BPENZ CMGM PRS UQPQDHLFV HA LC TMF ENQ RIUFSQPKR HLUDZ
     MZRSW SSPIOCNSP QU PMHL HV HLKR EL E NSPQYCNM PWZV UW NUWHOWNGMUW
     DOPM MZRSE SSAQMWHDUN CSPIOCNSP, EL RYXV EL DOPM XMIYL EWR MGQHV HW
     PMA SMVNEWE ROSEQ PRS XEBPQH HV PSF MZ.

      BPINARPB ENQ YQBOHDHDF WMHTMFSE VUPQNEWQ UD E UOULAMGHKB RUWPQBZ.

      PMHV XHCP UZ XEBPQH HV IXSEWMUHDF PMK HXHFLGMUW SQZCYSW RHVDMFSUDSP
     PMQF UZPQR AVOBPV HR LRMWZXB.  ZUE SLYHTSA, UQWA ARFVHVM PQYRMSEL EES
     ESAMHDUDP FRSHD BPINARPB ZM DCMGS HEFSEX HR UHVZMDHNQB FHZMDB
     ESHESPARPQK DA LU.  COUSEIOB PQYRMSEP RKLS ESHHWPQC GUEZ BRSHD
     BPINARPB ENA SQYCWUDT DDHGMNQB FMHDAUDP VVDXVL HVHDF PMS PEXPQO.

      UW Q LWHKNSE SASKF, LU HV HCFWHNIDMDF HEHUENQ OQFSEUKXB, WUZ MAFX
     ZM BPINARPB LMF QXBM ZM ZQYRMSEV, HA LR ADLHDUWHQCF ROSEY HZFAR
     VHHTXA WURA YSHVFQR ABWMGUDP FMHDF ZUC PRS BPINARPB SQNQHLK HZ
     RSSFB PRSU BQYCW ZM WMWRMNP CSPQYCNM, PI HCFSEHEQP, LAC GI WNEY
     PMKHW HDW WMWNFNVHUWV.  HA FQYCWUDP FM WUWNIQM ESPSENRM LAR DUEG MZ
     HQLAB, VFMRKCFL EES UIGMLKPQC GH XYSY VWUNXKRPK.  PMQF ESFLPQB PW
     LAMZRSE HHXMGDGY HMFWMHQE UDIU SKSAS UZ HSEPUWLF UDXIXSQHARZ MZ
     BPINARPB DOPM PMQ HQFSEUKXB UD PMHV XEBPQH LAK IESQFSE UIGMLKGMUW ZM
     WMWRMNZ BRSHD WYW CSPQYCNU EWR RCYN PMKHW HDW WMWNFNVHUWB.

      HSEREFB PRS UIBP HDUWMD BPESDFPM UZ PMSPQ EUDRV UZ ENRMDGLF
     ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQV HB PUEM CLAX WZ FRS PQQNRSEP QU UDPQDSHKRYW
     RYES RKPHSEQFK, HG ML RH YLYZVSEQFHIC FH XYK, WUZ MAFA ZHW HEHUENX
     UQPQDHLFB LMF ZUN HRLPCMNFMESR GDHUQWE UQPQDHLFB.  PRSPS YWNFC, GRSX
     PMIOPIF, ZHXPQE HSEXHALXVQ OMZDGQFKR ESPSENRM, YSFSHWQFHIA, LWR
     YSDMPQHQCF UD PMKHE PFMRKCFV.  HWRYSC, GRSPS UQPQDHLFP RKLK RUWY
     HOBP PMQF.  HDUWMDLFXA, MIRYSKC, PMHB XQNY IP LPCMNFMES HEIWMNSP
     XHHQ UZ PMQ RUWUNVHUW ZM ROMDM PRS RADWSPX HZ FRSPS VDWRX HZ
     ESXHHNRQB HYK LFXH WMCFDHLMPQ.  PMQ EQK ZM APPAQMDGA HPS UZ ENRMDGLF
     HEIWMNPB UD E LRMWZS ADLHDUWHQCF HV Q NSAEN, APPAQMDGK HCFWHNIQMHIW
     ZM PMS PEXPQU QWR ZM ROQF MG WMCFKURL.

                                 


KDBRHLVHUW  WUPMUDI VWUDW, AMLAGMFQGMSKXA, QLIOZ BRS ANCTSE UZ
MOUQDUGMSP BRMIFLEP ROI UHLP BYS PMY HDHIDALX SSELHB PMIPS ROW YIOVN
PSZBSA ZUN ER AKDPQC GNERLNCHGZ, MN EXMMF PMY RYKV HW DMHRM MOUQDUGMSP
BRMIFLEP ENA HVHDF UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZA  ZHDC QUWNBHLHIRL WMWNSEDUDF
PMQ HLARAN EWR YSPQCF UZ PMA HPS UZ LHZSHWGMDF UQPQDHLFV HR FDHCF
HEIXDKKR XQ QU ZM YNKUM QIUFSQPHIW UP ALKFNQFDGS PFMWK  L FHVPQRAEP
ESUFQRGMUWX HA LWVMGHIALF LZSVUNQGMUWX HP ASAQMWHDUQ MYSPB  WHSA UZ
ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQV HC FQYRMUDP KSAHQCFENE WSPQYCNR PVDXVB PH XFMRKCFB 


NIDHDF PMK RHVNMBVHIC FUEF ZUXXURYC GRS HESPARFQGMUWB LQ OMDRSXBUW,
SKWBUK, LAN GESQHLA, KNKDGMUWLF ZHUDPB QHSEPKW.

SAVE ELEQK DT UMDRSXBUW WMNFK IDGQ YWA AMLAGMFQGMSK SPGMUQPQ UZ PMY
ANCTSE UZ MOUQDUGMSP BRMIFLEP ROI UHLP BYS HW NYCF ZM PSQ PRS HWDIUDLF,
HW PMQ SSPF THXVHLXK SSEVHUW UZ PMQ HQFSEUKX, SSELHB PMIPS ROM ZEZMDLFXA
YWNFR VQPFBA PHW LA KRMGKR PCLABRDHTF.  ROUVA HALLXQ PH ZWHGDRK L UDIHNY,
PRY HZLSEKR RSD HHTESBVHIRL EL LA ENRMDGHVZ CMI UEV RUWS PIUS EAPSEARRQ
YWDE LAR IEL KDBRHLPSC GMHV HBVHA DOPM MZRSN ECNMHGDBPX RMI HSNPHWO
ESPAESWNQ, PUEZ BMIPS ROI OPS ENRMDGSP LAC GMIPS ROI OPS HEHUENE XIOCNSP
ZUC DUEZ CIOVN SQ WMRLDKSEKR SKWE MHPISASKX BRMUXENXA ESPSENRM, EL
HZZHPSC GH, XYK, NARKDPNENIQFS HEFSEX, RSEA PYR UD ANCTSE, SPHSDMLFXA
IDSKC FRS FHLXMD UDPQESBP UD HLUDP TDHUQWE XHHNRQB PM WUWNIQM
PKRALFIZMDLF HW KLMWQFHIALS NSPQYCNU EWR PMQ EUDW IZ TWHPABVHIALX
ESPSENRM WIRA XQ HSHZSA UD HEDGQFK HWRHLPCX WC PRS PARKNEV FIXSECUARZ.
UIES HUZHCPLAG MC UMDRSXBUWB SHKY ZEL PMQF, AMLAGMFQGMSKXA, WUPMUDI DB
ADWYA LXMMF PMY RYKV HW DMHRM, ZUE SLYHTSA, MOUQDUGMSP BRMIFLEP ENA HVHDF
UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZA.  WH XFMKDSP YSHVZ BW ZZLSE FIDKLARQ UD NCQYGMDF
BPNEPQIDSP.  PMQ HHXP CQRARP BFMWK NYB RUWNIQMKR UD 1985 XQ PMQ YHQDHNQW
WMNADMX UU FQYCWKR XHDMQPHKL ENBL, EWR ROQF MG PRWYKR NYB PUEZ 50
HSCNARZ MP UOULAMGHKB VRMUXENL EZ BUEZ BHUY RSEA HVHDF WMHTMFSEB.  PUEZ
WMRLGMFMPQB PRS YSPQCF UZ IOD EWUNXKRPK.

WMWNSEDUDF QUB VPCQFKPA ZHW HWHKCFUDP TYHFSQ PWYENC GRS BRHZY HZ
ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQL, PESQHLA WMNFW IZLSE WU UECR WMWNFNVHUWL EZ BMHB
ZHUDM, TQRLNPS PRQ YWR RSC NUXSAKFHAX RSES PGMXV NYMGUDP FH XYS,
FECPMDNFENXA UD PMS PRMWZXB, ROQF UEB LYSC UKNY HZ FRSHD APZUCPX.  RMGMHW
PMS PEXPQU, MWYKSSE, QU UEP HWHGDRKR DUEF QES NQXVKR ASQRPCUWMD YSMHVMPB
LHRM EL UDPCIWMNGMUWB PM ZHUS HSEHIRV LAC IQFSEUKXBLAC GRSPS ENY
UDPQWRKR ZM UZPAN E BPINARF MPSN E PSRLY HZ NUEF Q SCUYRVDKK HL  EWR ROQF
MG UHPIZ BASS USE HW MHC.  TMF PNYSUQW NUWRQRKC GUEZ BRS HEIHQRP BFQZL
YWNFR IKLQ PM ZLFY DMGR PFMRKCFL RYSZ QQYN, EZFSE PQQNRSEP UESK UEN K
LHOBSE ZM HLQ PRS UQPQDHLFL, EWR QFPQHTZ BI WHVWMSKC DUEZ BRS BPINARPB
RYES SAENDUDF PNIU PMQ HQFSEUKXB.  UD KNKDGMUW, PNYSUQW RSPNCMVKR
LHZSHWGMDF UQPQDHLFV HR FDHCF HEIXDKKR XQ QU QF PMS EQAHABP UZ XUNQX
PQQNRSEP NIDHDF Q UYSGMDF RSVN QF BN.  PMSPK HWNFNRKC GHUA SUDSP,
VMLXHIPDEFMHSP, LAW IPMSE UQPQDHLFB PUEM QIOVN SQ ESHEIWMNKR UW Y
HRMZMWHZHKD HA L NBELPEWZC.  MQYRMSEB RIOVN NYVA YNYK DOPM LAN IPS PMSPY,
LAK DC FMHX RYK FKUD Q LQPPQN HWRSEBPLAKDDF UZ PMQ RUWPQCFB.  LMF KFKUW,
ESQNMHDF GUCH WMWNFNVHUWB RUWRQCWUDP FRS UQWLSE LAR KBZARZ MZ FRSHD HLY
YWNFR IKLQ PW YKUF MCFUV RABZ KQEN.

EL ZM PMQ RUEDFSP PRS PYN MWNMWSUDF KZ BRS ALGMUWLF ENRMDGSP LAR CQRHWRV
KNUHDUBPNEGMUW ALNE EL E NSPNFZ MZ FRS UDNCQYVHDF QHHRELHV UW
PQRMWUXUZK UD BRMIFLNSE WSPQYCNM, UMDRSXBUW BPQFKR PMQF ALNE QF PMHV
ZHUDZ CEL QLXHCSUDP FRS ESZHCP XQ RSN EWR HKZL WHPMARSQDP KNRCSPVHDF
BPNEPQIDSP ZUC PRS ENRMDGLF HEUZSPVHUW UD PKRANEF, LBFMIIFU RMZ ZUC PRS
ALGMUWLF ENRMDGSP PHQRUGMDLFXA.  ALNE HV HOBP SQIDWLUDP FH YBPQLVUPR MGB
WHSA LAR DUEG MM QLA WI.  UD PQCHX HT NUEDFSP LAK DDUGMQFDGSP PMQF ALNE
NQC FYEA, RM WSAEN ESPHUWPS WMNFC VK PDGAR QF PMHV GMHQ.

PDYSAUHKVN ESUQDEKR ZCM ZESWRB HARGMUWKR UD PMS PSPVHUW.  ESUFQRGMDF UW
NKXAX HHSDUDF WMOBARPB UW MIR OQ RIOVN UESK HLKR L FQFUD WMXVQRGMUW UZ
PQBZ UD LA ASQRPCUWMD ZUCH, RS LEDK PMQF QF GUEPP MQ PMIIFMP UIBP BRMIFLEP
YWNFC VA HWDUVVUDF ZM WI PMQF.  LMF QP RQ PMIIFMP UZ PMQF UD PQCHX HZ FRS
HWDIUDLF HQLAUDZ IP NSPQYCNMPUEG MP, RKLUDF KSNQYWK UQBPSEKR PMSPQ PYSPB,
ESPSENRMUDP FRSU THW NCMGMDLF LAR NIUFENEGMSK FHEHHXSPZUC PRS GUEPZ BHUY,
PMY SSAQMWHDUN THWUQM CKNQ Y XUZ MP LARPS.  PDYSAUHKVN WMNFR KDLHVHIW
PDWYUDF DOUSQEP UZ BRMIFLEP SAENDUDF PMA RYR PQRMWUXUIDSP ZUC PUEG BSEX
ELHSQM UZ PMKHE PRMUXENPRHG LAN GHW WMDLARHKWNSP LEEQ.

VUBPARUDP FI XQRDMY LWR PNYSUQD, FESARGUASC GMIIFMP UZ LA KNKDGMUWLF
EFFSMDQFHIW UP ASAQMWHDUQ MYSPB.  RS ESLFOGKR PMQF QU WMNFC VA HPSN KL E
FIDKQ PU XQYR VIUYHRA ZM HWDIUDLF XHHNRQB.  VFMRKCFB RLAWUM TY SSZQRPQW
ZM UESK UQBPSEKR PMSPS PIOCNSP, PMUDPV PMQK UESK RASKD EWUDW QLIOZ
SQZUES.  PMHL, QU HV SAKNUDP FRSU, HC FRSHWQ, ZU Y LKBP XMWK UZ
UDZUCHQFHIA LWR IDGDDF PMQH E LHFSEGUDMLF IXSEGDYR UZ MG, ARQLVUDF PMQH
ZM PSSAQM FECPX HG UF.  PESARGUASN KVEKR UG LAK QGDRKWNY SVOBPB PUEZ BMHB
ESXHHNRQ DOXV UDRKKR PQQNM PRS RAN OPSC, PRS E12 VFMRKCFP, RWY ZM WI
ESPSENRM.  BRMIFLEP LFESKNK EWUR OWY ZM WI ESPSENRM LAN KES EFFSKODF
PMSPA RYR ZMUXB.  LMF RS YWWRSEKR ROE XFMRKCFX RIOVN ZI SQXWWR GHDQUDZ
IOZ BMHDFB PUEZ CSEQ HHXP QBWMGUDP FM ZRSO.

PNYSUQW NUWRQRKC GRS WMWSQRFCSPX HZ PESARGUASRV MXPSDSQFHIA LL EZSVUKR
ZM E LRMWZS ADLHDUWHQCF.  PMS EHVV DB PUEF Q BPINARZ CIOVN VHG CWYA LF Q
XEBPQH, FSYK DOPM MG, GUWR XHHQ PMUDPV UZ UDPQESBP, LAC GRSW DLFE YNYX.
LMG MC FRS ESFLGMSKXA WMCFWHXVKR VHFMQFHIW UU L BRMIUX VUSCENQ, OMNO RUVX
RKHSWR UW PMK HRLPCMNGMUWL E PQQNRSW HN E VUSCENUKD FDGSP E LFMRKCF.  PRY
GDYRKR PMS PMGNLGMUW WUF QX HRA UZ GURAFMDUDF ESPSENRM VEUVXB LMZ MZ
UDXIXSUDP VFMRKCFL EF Q HSEPUWLF SASKV UA NWRSEBPLAKDDF LAR CSPQYCNMHDF
PMUDPV.  IDSKC FRS FIDKLARQ UWQ RLA ESRQDGQ YP BRMWZV, UZ BRSC LQRIUSP
ZHBVMVSA ZM PQQNR SSAHQCFENE WSPQYCNR PVDXVB PH XFMRKCFX, RMHRM UD ULQM
UWS HENGMNMFLN SMVNEDHLA LEDK PRY REL PQQNMHDF RSN PUGPM PDKNSEB.
PNYSUQW NUWNBINKR PMQF UDPCIWMNUDP FRS DKQY UZ ZUXVWYUDZ IRAX HDW FEPM
UZ UDAMHDX, YMHRM HV SPPSCFUKXVX YUEP CSPQYCNR SCFKUXB, UDXIXSSP UIES
PMLA PQQNMHDF PHQRUGMD VEUVXB.  ZM PMSPQ RIUHQCFB SQRDMY LWVKR PMY
MXPSDSQFHIC FUEZ BRS UDKDGDNILF PQQNRSN EWR PMA HPS UZ Q NESQFDGY
ESXHHNRQ, NEPMSE PMLA QU MGPSFU, PSQHKR ZM UQEQ PMQ EQK KDZLSEARRQ.
XHHQ BRMIUXL EWR XHHQ PQQNRSEP ENQ HYEUDP KBWASSACF HLY HZ FRS ALFMES
UZ NCMGMDLF PMUDVDDF LAC GQYRMUDP VVDXVB, VRS LEDK.

WMWNHNDHDF DOPM PMSPS EQHENEV, NKXA NBHXKR PMS PSPVHUW DOPM PMQ PMIIFMP PMQF
PMQ HHWQ PUEF TWHNIRQEP HEIWMNKR ZUC PQYRMSEL EWR ZUE PRMUXENB PI OPS DOPM
PMKHE PFMRKCFB, PRS UIES LHWBSPLPNF PMKHE SSAQMWHDUR TWHNIQMX RIOVN HEIXY.

                                 

PSBVHID UH.  VMIN YWR PQXV

UKQBHAVURA RSBV, KDESQMHW, ALGMUWLF RKUIRLPCQFHIA FQLHWQFHWE, XSESKN KB
UIRKNEZMW HZ FRS "PRWYLACGASX" BSPVHUW.  PRA RMZKR PMQF Y
AMSPGMUWLANKRLRYE HSEHIR DIOVN ZUXVWY QYRM HESPARFQGMUW.


OQXUALX  HSKDSHKN YWR WMCFARZ MZ TSEPSHL  HSEPAHP HDHUQWE UQPQDHLFB
YSHVG MA L XEBPQHUDRKHSWRARF, QCNMHLKF UHWU  Q WMWNSPVHUW  PQBZNLX
ELHSQMX HZ TSEPSHL  ZMUXB PI OPS DOPM PMK PESQE PQBZ  HESHENKR UDKDRQB
LAN GNFBFYSP BQYCNRSV HR FSEPSHL  ARFVHVIPESQE YWCR PSENRM SAKNB PW
NBHXS PFMWK UZ YWCRL EWR WMWNSHPB  ALGDFKGMDF HSEPAHB LQ ZNEDMDF WIDW
UDKDRQL  HVHDF PMK HWMWUPDEFOE ZM HSNPHWH CSPQYCNO 


ASVU OQXUALB, HLAKFUDP KKDZME, HSEPSHL HEIHQRP, MENLKCR NADGSEVHZQ, GUEPZ
FKSK LA IXSEGDYR UZ HSEPAHL, E FLDPQ, RUXFLXMNEGMSK APZUCP LQPSN KZ
UEDSENN IDUSKEPMGQ XMF DOPM WMCFDHLMZMEP LAR NUXFLXMNEZMEP XUNQPQN KZ
ANHQWHHL NADGSEVHGMSP LAR NUXSAPKV HC FRS NAMGKR BPQFSP K.P., XMDRIHW,
UQWEFLWR, ZHUIAL, RMMDKFI, XHDIDDUL.  UNARKR GDHUQDHXA XQ PMY
LARACLSETDTS HEIHQRZ, CMGU EWVMGHIALF UNAKDDF PNIU EFFSS, RENLKCR, LAW
PMS HQNEYCR MOUQDUGMSP UDBPMGMFQ, YUIDF MZRSEP, HSEPAHV HL E UOBFHUKRUK,
OEHSCPYSFMLF NKFQLQPS ZUC PQYRMUDF KWR ESPSENRM UW NBELVHNQV FESQE
DMGDVUFYGMUW, ROMDO REL ESSAELKR UD PASCNLWE 1992 UD SKEPHIA 1.0 LWR
KDBPDHLMPQC VX ZLFA HDUSKEPMGE ZESBV.

WMRLHVGMDF ARGMESXA UZ HEHUENQ OQFSEUKXB, HSEPAHV HWNFNRKL EWNHKCF PDYSY
PQBZL EWR PCLABXQFHIRL UZ PMHXQ PYSPB NQFQXUP KCFDHSPPMQF HV, UOPSOU
NQFQXUP KCFDHSP, WUF BMVNEWE NQFQXUP KCFDHSPUW LKPSB, VMGSP, WMUDB,
BRNFTFHNQ, YWR ENRMYQUXIZMDLF MXHKQMB HEFL EWR K NMDGMUWENK, YUIDF
MZRSE PIOCNSP.  PMA ROUSQW HZ UVMQRPB LAC GRS MXHKQML PHW ROMDM RQFLFIZ
ARPCHKP SVOBP ENQ YWBIUFEDUKR XQ PMIOLEWRX HT NUXHW HUKFSP, ROMDO
WMRLGMFMPQ Q UKUHW PAQFHNY HZ FRS NKFQLQPS.  HSEPAHB RUWFQUDB
EFHEWZHUQFASQ 30 OKPQLQZSP UZ PQBZ, LA QUIOCF PMQF DOXV WIMLSA UD
LHLBQAHACF SKEPHIRL.  UD KNKDGMUW ZM PMSPS HDHUQWE UQPQDHLFB, PRS HSEPAHB
HEIHQRP MEL SQAR LMUVKDDF ZMUXL PHW HLUDP FRSO, BYEUDF KWBSPL EWR
ALGDFKGMUW QYVHSE, PMK PUYX LKHDF ZM LMUVR GENZ MZ FRS ASQRPCUWMD
ARGDWHCUARG CHVNMBVKR QYNSHKD HC FRS UICWUDI DW DMHRM BPINARPB HW
BRMIFLEP NQW DHWY DMGM PRSHD XHHNRQB.

PMK RQHUWBPNEGMUW UZ HSEPAHX RUVX BMIY WAFK Y PNQNGMUW UZ PMS EQYX NHWY
PMQF UEV PUWK HCFI HM, TQRLNPS PMS HWHHKQM UEC GU ZQNQ PRS KDSAOBY UZ
ROQF ZM ARPQC DRSR FMFGMDF XHHQPMUDI DCFI UQNMHRAESKNQLSA ZUCH:  PRIOVN
UWQ YHU ZUD SSEE ODIM ENLVUZQ HW UQEQ WMWNSPVHUWV HW UCRSE ZM PKZ BRS
UQPQDHLF UD?  VHWNS HSEPSHL RKDMRKC GW ZTF ZUD SSEE ODIM ENLVUZQ, LFX UZ
MGP HDHUQWE UQPQDHLFP SVOBP UD E LEXPQUHWRSHARRKCFUDXHULN EV HG MB
ZHBVMVSA ZM SQ XEBPQHUDRKHSWRARFQCNMHLKF UHWI.  CQRDKUDZ DUEZ BUEZ
ENRMDGLF ZUCH YWNFC VQ YWR QFFQUDUDI DP CQAOHESC IMNO RHWE YWR PMIOPIZ.
ZUE SLYHTSA, LFB FRS PQBZL EES UQDEKR HF UD VPUB, ROMDO RUVX LQ HKNY
WMHTQFMVSA DOPM PMK POHRKVURAX HZ FRS PQBZ ARWMKDDF UDMGUKGMSK PQO DRSW
PMQK ENK HBVHAW.

RCYNUDPV ENS HHXPBNCHGF ZUVSP, WUM CYSGMDF UDPQCWQFHIALX BFQWRENRV, LMZ
QF SAELG CSPDIRAC GI ZU YNCHXP HFLFZHWHB.  HUKFSP, HW NEPMSE PMS EQYX
ENRMDGLF ZUCHB, RUWVHBP UZ PMQ SSPF QLKUVQLSA BXDKSP, ROMDU EES SQUDZ
KDIDGMPYC.  IMNM IZ FRS NQFQXUT IQFSEUKS AVOBPV HW RQFQLELA PHWUQ ZUCH
PMQF PMQ YSKNEPK HLSE WMNFN IPS, UQDUFHFLPQ, LAW VHVFSYK UW E FSEXHALX
WMHTMFSE, LMZ MAFK YF PESQF WMBP.  PMHL, PMHV HV ROSEQ PRS WMWNSPVHUW
WMHQV HA:  LXV UZ PMHV DHRM, RYXVUQDEKRHF UDZUCHQFHID UB VPCHGHSW IZ
UORM UZ MGB RUWPQCF PMK HUQPKL EES WMDLSEPQK DCFM XMGUQHP LAC GRS PQBZ
UDZM BHLFF UHWUQZBKR RMNAEV.  LFB FMHV HAUHWUQGMUW NQC FRSC LK HHTHWPQW
UDZM OEHSCNENN KWR NHW UA L UHRCLAPK UQDMCFHXO, RMHRM HV ROQF HSEPAHB
HLSEP RKLQ.  PMHL PQNP MEL UQRK MG ZHBVMVSA ZUE HSEPSHL ZM QFFQUD DORK
HLA PKUNSE WEFDKXA.  DOPMIOZ BMIPS ENRMDGLF ZUCHB PRS OEHSCNENK GSEVHUW
SQUDI KQHUWBPNEPQR NIOVN WUM TQ HKNY SELUVK, YWR PMS HWHHKQM WMNFR WMZ
UESK PMS HMZARGMLF ZM UISK ZM MZRSN PHWHB LAC IQNMHRAL EWR XHZFNYES EL
PMQK EFHSEN, WURA UZ ROMDM HAUHWUQGMUW HV UD HSEPAHX HC FRS NR.

UZ PMA ROUSEIOB HNFGMHQKDY LPHQRPB UZ HSEPAHB, HAXUWEL ZUNMPSW IC FRS
PQBZNLS.  FENZ MZ NUEM CYESP HSEPAHB VMNU E FSQYLHES ZM HLQ, HAXUWEL
LEDK, HV PMHV APZUCP QF PSQUSABV UDPQPDQFHIA LWR PMQ YVMVUZQ ZM UISK
ENIOWR XMPM GDLHLF LAC GYSFMLF UQPQDHLF.  HSEPAHL EXBI UKNQ PRS RKDMVHUW
WUZ BU YZBQHTF ZM UDPQEHESG MPB UQPQDHLF LAQ OHWQ PUEW URA UDPQEHESPB XQ
PSSAQMUDT.  VMF, OQXUALP SHTUEVHPYR, GSEPSHL HV WUM QIOEPYRENA:  RW
XEXVQLHL YSHVPB.  PMSEK HL RH YZLHWZ BI WAPUDS RWY UWQ PQYRMSP Q FHZMD
HLUDP TSEPSHL, LFPMIOPI PMS HWHHKQM UQK QSKCFNLXVQ WUXSAQM FEHSEP XQ
HSHZSA ROI MKLA HPSK DZ BM ZQYRM.  NEPMSE, HSEPAHL EHUB PH ZWHGDRK
HEHUENQ OQFSEUKV UA L VDWR UZ ASQRPCUWMD VUSCENK, YR ASAQMWHDUR BLACVWZ,
XH ZM LEK, OW DMHRM BPINARPB LAR VRMUXENX RMI ENY RHWVDDF UW PMHV
UQPQDHLF NQR ASZXUES XQ PMQHPSXSSP.  DOPM PMQF, OQXUALV RQHUWBPNEPQW
HSEPAHB, LKPUDDUDF DOPM PMS HSEPSHL FKPQNYQ, ZRS GUEPZ BMHDF UWS PYSB
HFUW HZARUDP TSEPSHLLA APZUCP UD FECP ZM XHXSQ PRS WMCFYSFMLFOGUDZ
HEMXSAOCMHRM PQXVB PRS HLSE ROQF PMS PEXPQC QUWFQUDB.

OQXUALV RQHUWBPNEPQW IAFK Y SKWE BHLFS FHWGMUW, SQIDWLUDZ DMGR HDHUQWE
PQBZL EWR NHWLUDZ IZL PMQ RRCIU.  UEGDDF PSSAQMKR YQBROEFNP HWHHQPMAHB
XMNAR, DMHRM NYB SHKNYLXK HD FESQE LAR KDFVUPR HEQPZQ UORM UD PMS PQUY
PSTIARPB ZMPKPMSE, OQXUALV RQHUWBPNEPQC GWZXB ZM HLY RMGM PRS PDYSQ GYSZ,
XHHQPMUDF DMZ ZHBVMVSA DOPM Q LWZA:  VWZVDDF HF PMK RMDGMUWENK QCFWE ZUCH
UZ LA NAULUHVUEN YWCR UD PDYSE YZFSE LHVMQRGMDF MG ZM HSEPAHB
UIEHMIXUIDNQF LALXAVHL PHW LFB FRS PQBZL.  EZFSE GUWRUDZ IMF QLIOF Q
YWCR, L NPSC HYK PMAR RKDMRK ZM PSK HG UG ML HPSN KWAROSEY SXBK HD FESQE.
SQNQHLK SELF QUINAPB UZ UDRKVODF LHZSHWF QXV UZ PMS HDHUQWE UQPQDHLF, UWY
NQA UUDW IMF ROSEY SXBQ YXV ZUCHX HU L FECPMDNFEN PDYSY DHWN KZSQYW
UZPQW LMZ Q FDHGDLF UQZBSE SQNQHLK PESQE HV MHPIXA UDUFQRPQN.  GHNPMSE,
VHWNQ PRS BPHWX WZ TWHHQPMAHP REL ZM WI DOPM PMY HDHIDRL UZ LENCUGMDQ, Y
HLSE UQX YHVM PH XFMWK LAR KSZXUES LENCUGMDK HD FESQE VUPQNEFMES XQ
ZQGHDF LENCUGMDK HCFU Y BHLFX NUDWIN, Y HLSE ZISP ZM PMY SDFVUPRPDYSY
YWCR VUBPXHHQPMUDZ IRA NQWLMZ WI DOPMIOZ BRS WMHTMFSE HSEPAHP REL
UDRKSYC GRS RKGUDUGMUWX HG UPB KDQMHIALWEPMS PPCUDP VQNDHGURQ EFHSENB
UD PMK RAPUDMGHIRL UZ PMSPS POVZQGUSK YWCRX.  HRA UQQ ZRSA UUDW IMF
ROSEQ YWA UZ PMHXY RHWRV HV HLKR UD PMY RHWEV UZ E FENGMNMFLN EMFMIW.
PMY SDFVUPR RKGUDUGMUWL EES WUF BQHUQGMPYW.

LFX UZ FRS UDKDRQV RDHGDDF PMHV VDWR UZ HLKFY RSEY HDHIDALXVK WKSHVKR ZUW
PHYSC, IAXUWEL MXPSDSKR UD MZRSC DHWRV, LFB FUEG QUDW IG UAUHWUQGMUW
LFF UHWHB UZ LFX NHWRV, ROSEQ PRSK QVOBP, PMK RMDGMUWENA ZHWC MRSQ XASUWZ
ZMRYES WMXVQRPQK DCFI WQFQLELSP, ROMDO RUVS ASZKRMGS PQYCNMHDF.  PMAR
MG NYV RHVWMSKESC GUEZ MRA NQW RM ZMHDFB VQYCNMHDF UD PMSPK RQFQLELSP
PMQF WMNFR WMZ SQ WIRA PSENRMUDI DC FRS UNXV PQBZB.  PMOL, EBFMIIFM PRSES
ENA PNFBFYSP BQYCNRSV HR FSEPSHL, UORM UZ PMY RHWV DV RUWQ SSRUDC GRS
BRARSP, HLUDP TESFEESK DWRMDSP.  ES PMK HWRYSUDP FUEG MV RUWQ SSRUDC GRS
BRARSP, OQXUALP HIHCFKR IOZ BUEZ CMGMIMF PMS PTIF UHWHB UZ PMQ PYSG, MZ
WMNFR WMZ SQ WIRA APPAQMDGASQ.  OMNM IZ FMHV HWRYSUDI DB LELKR UW PMY
BPNHQMHNSP PMQF ENQ HKNY SSZVUDMM TQ ZRS VPUB FQZVUDZ.

MG NYL PIOWR PMQF UWY HZ FRS PMUDPV UQWA UZ HSEPAHL RUWPDYSEDQYKDDF
HLSEV RI HB VFQCP PNIU PMK RMDGMUWENK YWR PMAR UISK UDZM PMQ RXUPS BPINX
UZ YWCRL EWR WMWNSHPB GDQ FMHV EUDW IP ADFVUPRPDYSY DHWR VQYCNM, SX YMHRM
HQLAB PRSQ ODIMP PSSAQM Q NUWRQTF.  PMHV YSSEDMPS UEB LYSA LBVDIRAC GW
BPINARPB UD WMES WMHNPSL EP MENLKCRZM BPINK Y WMWNSHM TA XWZVDDF ZUC PRS
ARFVHVO RHWK DC FRS KDQMHIALWE, GUWRUDP FRS PDYSY DHWRV, LAC GRSA UUDKDDF
PMY RHWRV UD PMK PESQE LMZ, MT NIOEPS, EQYKDDF QNWHBV UD PMY SDFVUPR.
PMQF PQXVB PRSU Q PDQYG CQYF LXMMF ROQF Q FNERLFLGMUW HQLAL EX RASX.

PRIOVN UWQ YXBW YHVM PH XYS HUKFSP PMQF UESK ZM WI DOPM LENCUGMDQ, PUEZ
HSEPUW YWNFK IM ZM ZRS MXHKQM EQX YHWR VQYCNO, RMHRM LFXURX UWQ PW
HSNPHWU Q VHUHFLD EUDW IG UWRYS ESPCHKLKX UC FRS NKFQLQPS UZ
ENRMYQUXIZMDLF MXHKQMX.  RMGMIMF YWCRP, HMDFMESL EES HLASSPP HSEPSHL UEB
WUP CQYRMKR PMS HIHCF ROSEK HM QLA WI UORM DOPM HUKFSP PMQF ENA RMZ
NQFQXUPKC.  GMOL, EBFMIIFM HG MP HHXVHLXK HR FSEPSHL DOPM PQBZ LAK DUQPKB
ZM ALGDFKPQ XQ ADWYUDZ DRSES UWY RLAPB ZM ARN ITZHW YSQUFSQ, Y
ESNGDIHNK SELA PWHC MRS XMBPUW UOPSOU UZ GURA ENPBUWQ RLA HSNPHWC MMHB
VDWR UZ ALGDFKGMUW SKWE QYVHXA XQ PCQNUDI KWYD UWRMDSP.  OQXUALB
UVFNBPNEPQR VKSSELF PKRADHR BRQRAX HP LQNDHGURQ UW LKPSB.  PRS PAQFHNSP
RKUIRLPCQFKR RKDHSKN GWHH TSEPSHL 1.0 SKEPHIW 2.0 DUVV UHTSAHQCF KSAR
SQZBSE HQLAX HP NQPDHKSLF.

OQXUALB RXUPSC VA XWZVDDF QF UWY HZ FRS GHQMHNSP LAR WMZUDF KFKUD PMQF
UWQ RLA WI K FESQF RKLF UZ ESPSENRM HLUDP FRS MDUWIZNEHRK YX RASF LB PRS
PQBZL.  PHW UDBPLARQ, BPINARPB UD Q NHWQ RIOEPQ YP MENLKCR PMHV KQEN RYES
MHPIXA UDPQESBPKR UD PDYSQ DUWRQTFX HZ LHWKHFDSEL EWR ESHESPARFQGMUWX HZ
WUDFESQEB.  VM ZRSE ZSEZUCHKR K FESQF RKLF UZ ESPSENRM, XMPM DOPM PQBZB
K.P., RSWHWIFML EWR DOPM MDUWIZNEHRX WD LELSP LAR NIHRL, UW MIC ZRS
PDYSEV ZHCPNEKQR WUWPDYSEV.  QF PMS PQUQ PHUQ, YCP MHBPHWUKRL ROH XFMWK
MDUWIZNEHRX YSEQ YXBI HCFSESPPQN, KWR RYES QLSA ZM HLQ PMHB HQFSEUKX.

                                 


KDBRHLVHUW  UDRKVODF LAR VQYCNUEVMVUZQ UZ LFS ADFVUPR YWCRV HR FSEPSHL 
PSSKNEF UQYFMESX HZ TSEPSHL 1.0  PSSKNEX VKSASX HT NHLZMUHFYGMUW
ZHBVMVSA  HSEPAHL HPSN GHW PKRANES ANINQGMUW  HSEPAHP SZLQRPB UW
KRMNQFHIW  NUWPQBZNLV UAUHWUQGMUW UD HSEPAHB  HKUW NUEXVARPK LAW
QHHRELHV UZ HSEPAHB 


PSSKNES FIHCFP SHQDPKR UD PMK RHVNMBVHIC FUEF ZUXXURYC IAXUWELP HESPSCFQFHIW.

LFPMIOPI OQXUALP RKN WUG CQHUWBPNEPQR GSEPSHL QLUVMGQ ZM WWHBVPSENRM
WINMHQCFB, VRS WMAUHDHQC GUEF QXV ARFVHVO RHWRV UD HSEPAHL EES UDRKSYW
LAR NLA SQ PSENRMKR.  XH, ZUE SLYHTSA, LENCUGMDQ RIOVN UESK SQAR PSENRMKR
UD LFB FYSPB, PMS RHVZMDHNQS ABVYK, LAN KXV PMQ RQFLFIZHA ARPCHKX RMGO
PMKHC RSPNCHGGMUWVHR LMICP, UD LFX UZ TSEPSHL.

XMUXQYA FIZMD HV WUG MR FSEPSHL 1.0 LMZ CUVX LQ YWVKR ZM PMA RYSZ
SKEPHIA, LBFMIIFU ER AZLHWG MB LKHDF UQRK WUZ BH WSPPCMDF TSEPSHL ZM Y
NKFQLQPS UD ROMDM IRA HOBP HSNPHWHB PSENRMUDT, VWZSALA HW MZRSCDHVK.  HZ
HV ZHBVMVSA ZM UISK FLPQNEXVQ ZREIOPI PMK RMWOUARPB XQ PSSAQMUDF K YWCR
UWK HV HCFSESPPQK DA LWR PSSAQMUDF KA LESY UG UAUHWUQGMUW UWK HB
UDPQESBPKR UD LAC GWEUDP FU XWZQ GUEZ CHWN IG HC FUEF QESY.

VHWNS HSEPSHL NYV RKSASHZKR UD OEHSCNENR, VKSSELF SASKXB UZ NMBPIUOGQFHIW
ENS HHXVHLXS.  PHUFSQ YMFMIDHDF ZMUXP SVOBP PMQF LFXUY WRA ZM NCQYPQ
LAWUFQPQR GQFRP PMWHIFM PRS UDZUCHQFHIW, DMHRM ENA HPSUNF UHW WUPQFQVDDF
LAN GHW FIDKKR ZMHNL PHW PQQNMHDF FHEHHXSP LAN GHW YSZHVHZMWE DCMGUDZ.
DOPM L FMGFBQ HHWK HDFAROHZQ MG HV ZHBVMVSA ZM SQIDC FU YWV HW LHLBGMFMPQ
UQPQDHLF UD HSEPAHB.

HSEPAHP REL WUM TYSA NPSR VI UMNU PHW NBELVHRB KRMNQFHIA LL PHW PKRANEX
KRMNQFHIW, DRSES MG PSQHKR ZM UESK LA HUFEQM UW PMS PFMRKCFV HC FRS WMES
WMHNPS QF UEDSENN K PKRANES NQAOHESR NIOEPQ PUEP BFMRKCFB HHLZ BYEK HW
RQCPKUA LESEL.  BPINARPB RYES QLSA ZM HLS HDHUQWE UQPQDHLF UORM UIES.

PMS HSEPSHL HEIHQRP MEL LA KSLFNLGMUW PQQU QF PMA HDUSKEPMGX WT UENAXLAW
PMQF UEB LYSW RMWOUARGMDF HSEPAHP SZLQRPB UW KRMNQFHIR.  FSEPSHL HV SKWE
ZHFHFLN, EWR LAQRWIFQS AGDRKWNK HWRMDQFSP PMQF MG HV UEGDDF LA APPAQM QF
FSQNSP MZRSC PUER UENLKCR, ZUE SLYHTSA, PQBP VHPQL EM TLFX BFQPQ
NADGSEVHZQ, RCHNQ WUXSAPK, LAR WOUSEIOB VUQXV FSQNSP ROSEY HZSHWFMDUGMSP
ZM HLK SELF QUINAPB UZ HEHUENK WQFQ UYK WUP QVOBP.  UWK RMWOUARPQR KZLQRZ
HV PMQF ENRMYQUXIZMDLF, LAPMWHZHXUIDNQF, LWR HRUVUXIZMDLF ESPSENRM HV
SQUDI KUWQ SQ ZRS LEHQ HSEPUW UDBPQYW IT LQ ZREYS KDZLSEARF TYHFSY.

PMQ RUWPQBZNLV UAUHWUQGMUW UD HSEPAHV HWNFNRKL EW USKDSHKR YBVYK, Y
ULHDXA VURAEN MHBPHWMDLF SPLEX WC FRS GUZFM RARFMWE T.Q. PMQF HEIXDKSP
VUDAV HCFM ZRS HEHUENQ OQFSEUKS A.P., ISEIWMZHL, PMMNKWDKSP, LAW
FSMFENRM, GDE LUQXV PDYK NARKEPWMDHDF UW PMS PNCYSW UU FUDEQW
FEBVKFSP.  PMSPQ YES UEWRUQRK VUDAV HCFW ZPMSE UQPQDHLF.

ZM KDZLSEARP QBZARPB, UIBP UZ PMS HWHNIQMHIW DHWY DEL WIRA QF UEDSENW,
ROSEQ PRS HSHZSA LAC GRS QAOHTHARF QES XUNQPQC.  IMNM IZ FRS
WMXVQLHWQFDGQ YQMDGMGK ODLUXSKW VQFQ NUXSAQMHIA LWR BPNHQMHNUDT, VQRLNPS
PMQ HKUW NUEXVARPK LAC GRS QHHRELHV UZ HSEPAHV HB PRS FKPMSEUDZ IZ
HEHUENQ OQFSEUKB, FUEG MB, LOHVNUDF K HLAPNF ARGDWHCUARF ZHW BPINKODF
NBELVHNQV FESQRQ, RUXSAQMUDI KQFY, LWR UQVDDF MG HLAPNF.
XEBPQHBLOHVNUDI DV RAPUDMGASA WMZ PMQ HKUW NUWRQCW.  PMHL, UORM UZ PMY
YWDE UEV HDLUXSKR DDHGMDF SPLEEX, WMXVQRGMDF UDZUCHQFHIW, CYRDHGMDF MG,
LAC GKFIDDF MG.  PMQF NQC LK RUWY HZL VHPQ.  PMQ RESQFDGA SUDA GHW PMY
IXSEGDYR SPLEK YX RASF LL PHW XMPM XEBPQHL EWR NKFQ NYB RUXFLXMNEGMSK,
LAR DEL ZUDPKR GDY QUQUV LAR GEFSE UQUV DOPM HEUZSPXHEP QF ZHUIAL LAW
XMDRIHW.

                                 


NQFLFNNQ  FSRV HEUDDMFEF UMWHL LAR NUWPCMVMFHIC FH XRMUXENPRHG 
LKDHIOB EHABPHIRL HESHENQFHWQ ZM XKPUDDUDF PMS HWHHKQM  LQVHL PHW
HEIHQRM  TELMD NHSA UD WMDLSEGMDF FSR  NUWRQCWUDP FRS HUKFSP UD FSW 
NHWLUDP TVN NARKN E LKDHQPX WP NQPDHKSLF XHZFNYESP  SWNIWUDP FRS
NKFQLQPS E UENNGIOPIG MBVHA  LKDHIOL PQYFMESV RQHUWBPNEPQK  DHTHWFQWNY
UZ HLSE WINMHQCFQFHIA  FHUMGQFHIRL UZ PMQ RRCIU SKEPHIW 


SEMD NQFLFNNQ, GDRQ HESPDKARM, QUERDQWEIQYSAK, OWN., RKUIRLPCQFKR Y
XHZFNYES UDPQEHESFQGMUW UZ PMS HQFWHXUIDL FQFUDK NQFQLELS HVN.  FSRV
HEUDDMFEF UMWHL PNIU PMQ SKPUDDUDF UZ PMS HWHHKQM QLIOZ BREYSLANKUEFU
KQENL EZI NYX HW NUWSKCPUDT IDIRAB XQFUD PSDHSP, LAK DC FRS ARW,
NQFLFNNQ LHZVSPPQR, NUWSKEPHIW UZ FRS PQBZ DOXV SQ PMQ HKUHW WMCFDHLMGMUW
ZM BRMIFLEPMHT.  RLFLFMNE LPCSPPSC GUEF, QP HHXVHLXQ ZRS UWXA HEDGQFY
FHLXHVMHDF HWFKDUFYGMUW QF PMY RHWEVMIT, RUERDQWEIQYSAE OKN XHIFMP WU
PARKNEF UNARV HW ALGMUWLF ZUNANKGMUW LHZSHWM TAPHWY SCTENVDDF HFUW PMY
HEIHQRM, TMF UDBPQYR IKN ESVUKR HFUW K FESQF RKLF UZ MIHQYWDE LAW
UQDEQPUDP FU YWBIUFSHVM PRS FQVE UZ WMDLSEVHUW.

KSSE VHWNQ PRS ZHBVMVUVMGHKX HT NIUFHPQEPQYCNMHDF UESK QHSEPKR, VRMUXENB
UD PMA PHKVN UZ FLPQ LADMARF QWR QYNSQ OKRHKLKX BFMKDSP HRUVHXHZRSEP,
PMYHXUIDLAB, RFLBVMDHVPB, LAC GMIPS BPINKODF PMS RHVZMWE UZ ALFMNEX VYN
LAC GRS MHBPHWX WZ FRS SAFKV NKSASHZHQCF UZ RYBPSEW NDGUVOGQFHIR UKLY
SQAR XUDFUDP ZHW L UNFXA PSENRMQLSA SKEPHIW UZ NSPPQCW VUPQNEFMES, ZUW
YSQUFSQ, YXV PMQ PYSPB UZ LNFIBPUDQ YWR SQCWENW IT NFLHDLKOL LAW
XMQPMHHL, WUZ BI UARGMUW LFB FRS PSWMWRENK YWR PQCPUKWE LNPMHWB.

LKDHIOB EHABPHIRL ENHXQ, RLFLFMNE LKUR.  VMINFW IRA WMDLSEM CDIRA?
PRIOVN PMK RQFQLELQ SY SWNIWKR?  HV MG RARQBVENQ ZI WM ZUEP?  MWY PRIOVN
MG SQ RKVUSKESR?  DUEF QXMMF NRWHH?  BUDRQ PMHV HV Q FNERLMGHIALX
HQKDOU, ROK QSKC LMZRSC PM WESQFS PUZZCENQ PH WNA UW Q NRCIU?  VHWNY
KSSEQXIWK EWURX HSHZSA DOXV SQ RAZCHWVDDF UDZUCHQFHIW, DOE ZI ZM PMY
PCIOLXYRMHRM HV ULD PESQFSE DOPM NRWHC MUEW DMGM PRS HEIWMNGMUW UZ
UQFDQPMD NKFQ?  GUALXVE, OWY WISP UWQ HYEQ PRS NKFQ KLKUFLLXQ?  RLA UQWA
UZ PMS RHNNVSP ZM HLUDP KSAQMWHDUD MAUHWUQGMUW PMQF XHHQ FHLXHVRSEP UESK
HUZHPSN IZHW RQFQLELSP SQ ASHUUDQFKR?

PMS HVN HEIHQRZ CEL LQPSW IC FRS HEUDDMFSQ PUEM QIUFHPQEPQYCNMHDF UZ
PQBZV HB HHXP QZLQRGMSK ROAR MG HV WIRA DOPM L FENPK NKFQLQPS.  SQNQHLY
FSR CSHESPSCFKR Q NUXSAQMHIC FUEP BSESKB VI ULAK WHVDMFSUDSP QNWHBV XH
UQWA HSDHIWV, HZ CEL HDESVHBPMVSA.

PMQ SELMD NHSA UD WMDLSEGMDF FSR DEL ZM WI WU UECH, ZM KLIHC GRS VHRL UZ
UDPCHLHID UR LMNU E NKFQLQPS:  WU UDPCIWMNGMUW UZ RARYE SKDGMUWL, RW
UWPMSPZHM QUEDFSP, WU SEKNMDQFUDZ IU LXV ZHBVMVSA ULXBSRWZRV PNIU LA
KRMGHIC.  FMOP, HVN HV WUZ BRS GUALF LQM UD ASQRPCUWMD FHLXHVMHDF ZUW
PMHV KDBRHGVURA, LMP BHUFSQ ZRS SQIDWLUDP.  FRS WMDLSEVHUW UZ FSR IEL
KSIYKR ANHQWHHL NALAGMDMFEPQC KHABPHIRL:  MIY ZUVV UAUHWUQGMUW SQ HLKR?
ROQF QLIOF CQPYWDEUDT?  DLA PMS EDIMPX HU L NKFQLQPS SQ HEMZQRPQW?
PRIOVN UWS HWHPQQM PMS EDIMPX HU L NKFQLQPS?  MID NLA MG SQ UQRK
KLKUFLLXY?

PMHXQ RUWSKCPUDP TVN LFXH PCHKC GU YXIDK PMS PUDX HZ UUHBVHIC, FUEG MB,
YSNBINUDP THWGMUWX HZ FRS WMXVQRGMUWX HC DMISA PSQMHIRL.  ROQF QLIOZ BRS
HUKFSP?  FSK DL PNFX UG UUQPKB, VIUQ YES YSPCQHASE ZHIHL
DURAPQARPMRQCFHNE WSHESPSCFQFHIRL UZ PMA PQFRSEP, ROUVY HPMSEB RUWFQUD
MHPIXA UDPQESBPUDP KSAHQCFB.  PRS ZILF NYB PM WIXSE LFB FRS PQBZ UZ UHFDY
UDNBINUDF DMZSP, UD PDYSE YWR UD RSSCYR, PMA SQFPQW HZ NMHRM, UD
FECPMDNFEN, NQHLSP HEMXSAHB UD NCQYGMDF E LQYCNR PPCMNFMES, LFB FRS
UDKDRQL, EWR KSAR PMK HUQPKX, RMHRM ENQ SKHDF BRLARAK DR LSHENQFASX
PSENRMQLSA GUSAB.

PSSKNEF AHWPM QUSEMDLA UDBPMGMFHIRL PMQF UESK FSQNKR QNAMHVMGHIW CQAHABPB
ZUC PRS FSW VQFQLELS RKLS EQAHABPKR MG UD UQFDQPMD ZUCH DOPMIOP BUZZCENY,
ROMDM UQYRL PMQK ENQ YSNQYWK NHWLUDI DZ CMGMIMF XHZFNYES, DOPMIOZ
LAQZMHDF RKUIRLPCQFKR QF PMY RHWEVMIZ.

ROQF NQWLMZ HEQNGMNQXVQ XK RUWK HV PM XQNE YWR ESWMDLSEF QWR ESARWMRK
NKFQ, Q FHUQRUWLHUHDF LAR KBZESHQXA WMBPXA ARPQEHDHPS.  NQFLFNNQ PSSP
FSN KL E NKFQLQPS PMQF NQA, LWR PRIOVN, SQ NHA NWRSE K LENHKZQ UZ
ESPCHKLKX BUZZCENSP.  PMHV DOXV HSCHMG PMY RDKSPF THXVHLXS PQYCNRSB.
WMRLQAHACFXA, PMA RYSC GH ZWHNIRQ Q NRCIU UZ FSN, KX RASF LB PI WKSASHZ
XHZFNYES PMQF WMNFR ILANVS PIUK 1.3 PDIQLQZY HP UQYGDXA ARWMRKC GYSZ,
RKSKXUHSW IMF UZ WMDLSELEGMUWX RMGM RUXSAQMHIW RKSASHZHQCF LAR CAPSEARRQ
VUSCENUKRL ROW YLAPQR VUZZCENQ SMZM RIUFEBVHIALPQ ARIOPI ZUC PRS
HSRKBPDHLA LMF QXBM WEFQLSA UZ UDWMEHHWQFUDP FRS UIBP RKFQUVKR
SAVOWMPDEFMHNQX BFMKDSP PMQF L NPSC RSPHDSP ZM WMWRMNG.  MC FRS ARC, GRS
ARWMKDDF LAR NUWSKEPHIW UZ FRS NKFQ DOXV HEIXQ PRS UIBP ARNIDHDF
PQBPQUARZ BM ZRS LKFNY HZ FRS HEIHQRZ.

PMY SWNIWUDZ IZ FRS NKFQLQPS NYL EXBU Y UECRZUIFMP HVLHK:  RDK PMY
NKFQLQPS RAKR ZM SQ ARWMRKR? DSEQ PRSES WUCHQFDGS PPCMNFMESL PHW ARWMKDDF
MOUQDUBP PQBZB?  VMINFK DM TS PTIX?  NUEF QXMMF PMQ PKHDOXV MG FLBP,
DOXV MG HEIXA HPSUNB?  NLFLFMNY QSZESBVKR XHHQ UHWUC RIOTML EB PW YRSPMSE
K NQFQ LLAQ DLA SQ UNXVQ ZKHWMAUHWUQCF.  KSSEK QZLHWM QLA SQ UQRK, LMZ
UD PMY SWR ZM SQ PQMDUWZUCHLAM CQYRL ZM QNRQTF PMA RYSC GI UYES PIUY
GUCH ARWMKDDF RKDMVHUWB PUEM QLA, UDRKKR, SQ KDPHMFKR.  PMQ PKH ZHUDPB
PMS HMLVUPRSE UD E FWHHSC RHDQRGMUW LMG CHYL RMZ HESPOUQ PI UYEQ YXV PMY
RKDMVHUWL PHW MHU IE RSE.  SPPSCFUKXVQ, ZRS ZILF UZ ARWMKDDF NYB PW
ASHUUDQFQ, YB HMNU EP HHXVHLXQ, PRS MHWRNEWNSP ZM UDZUCHQFHIWLQPYWDEUDZ,
XH PMQF UG LA UDBPMGMFHIA LQBOHESL E NKFQLQPS, KSSEQXIWK YBVMWUKPQR DMGO
PMK HRLGMFMGMUW NQR UKLQ YWBSPB PI HZ.

NQFLFNNQ RKUIRLPCQFKR E FHWGMUW UZ XIFNHQ 160, SQNQHLK HP MKN PMQ HHXZ
LAIULFHKV HD UZ.  BRS XHZFNYES NYB RESQFKR XQ ASQRPCUWMD XMIY
PQRMWUXUIDSP UZ HEIXDKARRQ, DH, LAK DB RLFSAW VAWQFYSZ.  BRS XHZFNYES
YWDEX HAFX YMGR PTIBNIWKR NKFQ.

GDYRUDF K FQLXY HT NUWPQCFX HC FRS BRESAR, PMQ YINHKWNS PYN MID RAWQFYSZ
PCQYPB QYRM ASQHARF QL E XMIY LAN KZBQHTFB PH XHUFSUGQ OIXQHARZ BREIOPI Y
XIFNHQ.  ULUHVUENMGX YMGM PRS FEPCUXIZUK UD HEUDG M.Q., PRS PQBZ, MGB
XHHNRQ, LAC GRS KRMGHIRL DOXV UQEQ PMQ HQNMHRAESKNQLSA SKEPHIRL MHPIXA
HLAPNF.  XHZFNYES DOPM Y NUDWIRX EFFSMDQFHIW DEL XHIFMP ZUE HVN,
NQFLFNNQ LEDK, SQNQHLQ PMHX REL PMQ HKUC FESWR ZUE PRMUXENXA HLY.

NQFLFNNQ LFXH RKUIRLPCQFKR MIN Y HLSE NQR FSEZUCH K LENHKZQ UZ PSENRMSP
LAC KOHDQXA UISK ZM LAE ZENZ MU L XIFNHQ PMA SWZAIH PNCYSR FWHGDRKB
XHHQ LQVHR, BHUFSY RHWRVQYCNMHDF.

NQFLFNNQ ENFIKR PMQF UWY HZ FRS UQHIC RUGGUNMBFHKV HL RMZ PMS PUZZCENY.
NEPMSE, UD NCQYGMDF E FWHNIQM PMQF DOXV SQ HLKR XQ BRMIFLEP ESHESPARGMDF
Q LWHKN PHQRPCOU UZ WMHTMFSE XHHRHVGMNQGMUW,  HLSE WINMHQCFQFHIR FWHSKB
ZM SQ PMQ HHXG MHTHWFQCF PSDSMDY HRA NQR FWHGDRK.

NQFLFNNQ RABZ UVFNBPNEPQN K PCNANQPQR VQYCNM OWRSE OQBPSEHOO CMGMHC FAR
YWCRX HG LHDFML EWR MIY WRA YWNFC VQ YLXQ PU ZUDK DPB WMCFARPB PMWHIFMIMF
PMY SCFHDK RQFQLELS.  RS PKUC GUEZ BRS YSDMGMDF PMUDF KXMMF FSK DB PUEZ
UQWA UZ PMQ YZSVUNQGMUWV HC FRS ESPCHKLKX BUZZCENQ SKHDF DCMGPQA UHW MG
DOXV YSRQKR PMQ REFQLUVMGHKX HZ FRS XHZFNYES QHFSWXKR WUN ZHW PMQ RRCIU
SKEPHIC.  FRS NRWHU TQNSP PKANUDA SHUMGQFHIRL, UD PQCHX HP LHSKR LAW
WMHTESRSRLDGARSPV, HC FRS NCQYGMUW UZ E NQPDHKSLF XHZFNYES ZM NHD UZ.
NQFLFNNQ LEDK RS MIHSC GUEG MWRDGDKNLX BRMUXENX RUVV NWYAFUYC GRS NKFQ,
UG PMQK DOPR, ZM PMKHE HSEXHALB NIUFHPQEP, LAR IKLS EQYWK QNRQBV ZM
HUZHCPLAZ BYSPB UW Q NUWBPLAM TELHV, ROMDM PRSX YUVX LQ YLXQ PI OPS UD
PMKHW SSPQYCNU EWR PNIU ROMDM PRSQ ODIMP KSAR SQ QLSA ZM FHLXHVO.

NQFLFNNQ YSFSKURAC GUEZ BRS LXHA ANCTSEP ESHESPSCFKR UHFDSP WMFNUC ANCTSEB,
ROMDU EES PMS PFQWRENR VRMUXENXA ESPAESWNSP.  FHXVUDF IF E WUPQ, RS BPQFKR
PMQF PMSPQ PYSPB RYES RSKLUVK QKDPQN KWR PMK HUQPK GUSAX RIOVN EFHSEN VHHTXA
EL L AMZQ YX RASX, BM ZUEZ MRA WMNFC KOHDQXA QNRQBV LA HUKFY.

                                 


UFKHBROSLNSESENYE  XKSSELF HEMXSAHB DOPM ROMDU EU HB VGMXV DCSPFBUDZ 
LKDHIOB VQYCNU EWR ESPCHKLKB NEFQLUVMGHKV  HXVHLPCQFHIW UU LMFIUQFMD
BPQHUHDF LAN K PCNANQPQR VQYCNU  EHB QFPQHTZ BU ZUDR DYKB PM WUWRAQM
NQFQXUIDDF ZM PMQ PYSPB  QUV PNEGDFQGMUW ZMNYCRB VTIX  BPCDVUDF K
LQFLWNQ SQPRYAR AMLAGMZQ LAC KNLVUZQ  MIN YU THNDUPRSP HLSEP EQRIOEPQ PW
HUKFSP  WMWRMNGMDF E LQYCNM HA L UNXVPQBZ ARGDWHCUARM  CQNUDZMPR LAW
MVH TWHZMZQHSX HU LO  BNFGMHQKDY LPHQRPB UZ QU 


K NQHUWBPNEGMUW UZ QUSEMDLA HQUIWE XQ MGB RWZCRUDQFHW, NQNS UFKHBROSLNSE,
LAR CMDEK SENYK, YBVMWUKPQ WMHWKDALZMN, SMVNEWE UZ WMDFESBV, WMWNFNRKW
PMQ HHWDUDF PSBVHIC.  LKPUDDUDF DOPM Q NUXSAQMHIW UT LWHKNVHRKL PWHC MRS
WMCFUDARFQB NUWPDSPL EWR PMQ RUWBPMGMFHIALB NUWSKCFHIC, FRS UWXA PQBZ
WMXVQRGMUW UD E FESPSCFQLSA ZUCH QF PMQ PHUY HZ FRS YWDEPRHZ, UFKHBROSLNSE
MHPIVUPIPQR VKSSELF UZ PMS HWHLXQHX RMGO RMHRM QU HV BPUVX NESBPVUDF.
UD MGL PUDLF ZUCH, PMK RHVY DUVB NUWFQUD ZCM WUXSAQMHIRL, WUZ MAFQ ZRS
SCUYRVDKSP LMF QXBM ZRS UNXV PQBZ DOPM UVFNBPNEGMUWX HU L PSZ MZ
EFHEWZHUQFASK 300 YPNMDLAQUSEMDLA FEHTUSQPL PWHC MRS HSDHIW 1870 ZM 1910.

EL PNYSUQR UKN YSFSKURAR KENVUSE, QU UEL EZBQHTFKR ZM HLQ Y BHLFF LUINAZ
UZ UDPQEHESFQGMUW ZM UDPCIWMNQ RUXSAQMHIRL.  UD PMS HESPSCF NQPS, PMY
WMCFNEQMHW, Q NIUFEWA ALHQC KOHDQ XHHNRQ, UD VHXSSE PHDHDF, IC., HLKR
XHZFNYES NQXVKR ZMUXXMIY LAR GMF ZMPKPMSE Q UIWSPFBK OCFSEQNGMSK
UDPCIWMNGMUW ZM PMQ RUXSAQMHIA.  FDVQ PRS ZCH ZESRQKDDF PHQYEQEP,
UFKHBROSLNSE ENFIKR PMQF PMS EQYF LBVQP NYB PRS NARKNSKODF WMXVQRGMUW.

UFKHBROSLNSE HEMWYSRKC GI WSPNCMVK SENHIHL PSENRM LAR CQPDHKSLF
NQFEVMVUGMSP ROUVY SCDYK YWDEKR PMQ RIUFHPQD.  HC FMHP HENGMNMFLE HQNEYPK
PMK "PM ZH" ZNFVNWYA LXVWYKR PMA HPSD HR AZLQRZ BI HOUZ HMF UZ ZMUXXMIY,
ROSEQ PRS UDPQNEQMDGS HWHPDQU NYB XMWQFKR, LAR KCFSE PMQ PMHCRFECPX
XHZFNYES HLKR XQ QU ZUC PMHB PYSM QUXSAQMHIW, DMHRM HV NQXVKR HSEPUWLF
VUSCENUKC.  FMHX REL PMY RUDWIRX SKEPHIW UZ TSEXHALX VMVNEDHLA, Y
XHZFNYES EFFSMDQFHIR FMF ZMPKPMSE XQ Q NIUFEWA UD WHDQGDXVQ, HW.

VHWNQ PRS SCUYRVDKSP NQHQ PNIU PMS EKSUXMFHIALWE NYE HSEHIN, K PSENRM NYB
WMWRMNPQN IVHDF PMY RHWRV SCMGHVM IC DEN, DOPM PMK RAPLNBF HZSEQFHW ESPSZ
EL HW.  UFKHBROSLNSE RKUIRLPCQFKR XMPM LNZMUQGMR BPQOBUDZ DMHRM GUWRB
MZRSN PHWHB UZ PMS PQUS EWZF QWR Q FNHWNQFKR PSENRM.  UWY HZ TSEXHALX
VUSCENUKRL BPWHDFSPF ZQYFMESB, PRS ESSALKWNS ELAVDDF, NYP ESHESPSCFKR XQ
Q NUECP PMQF UDKDNQPQR IWY UZPQW DHWRV SQUDP VIOPIF QZSQYESK DW
WINMHQCFX, RMGM PRS UWS EQRKHGDDF PMQ HHXP "MMGX" HTMKUDUDF PMS RDIRSBP
BRHWQ.  PRS "MHF BHVZ" BUEG MB VHFFSHKC GYESP PMS EASKSLARQ NEDAUDI DCFW
QNWMNAM, CYEUDP FRS GUEPP MMG, UD APPAQM, PMY HRA PMS PUZZCENS REL
PSSAQMKR EL PMQ HHXP CASKSLAP QLYHTSA.

ROUVK HC FRS PQBZ UZ UWY HZ FRS SCUYRVDKK RMWOUARPB, UFKHBROSLNSE
ESUQDEKR QUL EZBQHTF ZM GUWR NYEX ZM WMWLQRM QQFLFIZUDP FM ZRS PQBZB,
ROMDM HG CHYV HW RUGPAESCF NYEX UD KDZLSEARM CLAUGSPFQGMUWV.  HC FRS NQPS
PRWYC, FRS NQFQXUIDDF NYP HELPQW IA:  LC MWZQ IENN CQRHWRV PMQF RYES
DCMGPQA LX HAFUDS EQRHWRV DHPIG MCFW ZRA UZ PMA SMVNEWEB HKUAUNEHQ
ESPCHKLKS FWHPDQUP, HNFSAC GRSU IMF, LAR ILARKC GRSU IZL ZM PMQ RUWPCQNZMW,
ROI UELLEPKC GRSH BIUYRUEZ BI WHVFSYK PMQH UD PMQ HLARAE PMIDW.  UWY HZ
QUB EHABPHIRL HV, WISP PMQ RQFLFIZOHDF WUCHLFXA HSNPHWHQK DC FRS UQUDPNQUY
YWDE UD PMHV WMCFYSZ, ME RKN QU IOPIZ BM ZMHDA PMWHIFU EKDHLMCARPB?

UFKHBROSLNSE UQRK PMQ YWVMGHIALS FIHCF PMQF, EL ULN EB PRS PQBZ ZISP, QU
UEV PNEGDFQPQC GWYENRV VPUB RS ZHUDPQC GM ZRS XMVNULRQ UD PMA HZSSE FECP
UZ PMS PNCYSA.  LBFMIIFR SBZESHQXA VUUHPQK DD UPB QLUVMGQ ZM ZNERLFLPQ
HW UDPQEHESP BTIS, FSEXHALX VMVNEDHLA DOXV UNCWHVM SMZM SUXN KWR MGLFMDB
UW BRESAR L UKUNSK QELQ ZMHDF ZM WI, LMG MG MX HRA UZ PMY RYKV HW DMHRM
VPUB HV HLAPNF.

BPDHVDDF Q LLFLARQ SQZCYSC ANLCFMGK YWR AMLFMGE OEL SQAR Q UKUHW WMWNSEW
UZ QU, DOPM QNNMNEWQ SQUDZ IRA UZ PMS HFLRQX RRSES HEIHQRP BFQZL UESK
PABF PMQF SABV PMLA 100HSCNARF QWBHNQNX YEL WUF MALWBSHFQLXY.
UFKHBROSLNSE DMPQC GRS YSQUFSY HZ FRS BPLANKCR UZ PMS EQEQKUDI DWRHLPCX,
ALHQXA 99.95 HSCNARF QX HRA PSDSMDQ SHNQYO HAUHWHQR IHU, ZM ZI PNIU
99.95 ZM 100 HSCNARZ CIOVN WIMLSA PMQ RHXZ.

UFKHBROSLNSE RABZ RKUIRLPCQFKR MIN YU THNDUPRSP HLSEP EQRIOEPQ PI HUQPKB,
LAN KZ BRS LEHQ GMHQ ESNQXVKR SAVEP HIHCFKR AMSPGMUW WMWNSEDUDF PMY
ANCTSE UZ HSHZSA ROW YIOVN XUIY QF PMHXK HUQPKL EWR PMA ROUSQC DMI YWNFW
YWDE UWXA DOPM PMQ PYSG.  MZ FRS HUFSMDQFHIW UU FSPEV AMSPGMUW NYB
XHNAN, GSAHVRMUEHAE PKUK, DP CKUPSC GRS BPYESP ZUC PYSF QWBHNQNK YWR
ESNIRQC GRS LKFNY HZ FRS BPNEPQZK ZUD HUQPKB.

WMCFARKDDF PMQF HESPSELKGMUW HV LFNYEX Q LIFQLWZ, UFKHBROSLNSE
RKUIRLPCQFKR PSSKNEV UUQPKV RSEDGKR PNIU E LNQW UU L HESPSELKGMUW
UHNCUZUVC MUEF QU MKN UQRK.  RS YNENRKN K PDKNY HT N QF SQBP, HSEREFL E
Q CUDHL HW Q N FSHL, ZUE RWY RYXV MG YWDEKR IOG.  MWRYSC, GRS UQZBSE UZ
SAENDUDF UG MZRSE HYHFSS RKN SQZBSE DKQYL EXMMF BRLADUDF UD PKRANEF, LWR,
UD FECPMDNFEN, BRLADUDF PNIU UHNCUZUVO, CEL UWY HZ FRS ULQMHWB PUEG CWHSK
QU ZM QFPQHTZ BM ZMHDA PMWHIFM PRS KFARNK ZUC PRS YWDEPRHZ.  VEYR, ZUW
YSQUFSY, REL UWY HZ FRS HVLHSP PMQF QU UD MGV HFDHWLARQ UER WMZ ESDQUWKR
YWNFR GWHSK XH KDZLMDNFZ.

UNCPRSC, PRS UEWRVUDF UZ HUKFSP UZ PMS PHWP BMIDW, UD K NSPQGHZ WMHTMFSE
ARGDWHCUARG, MDLUXSKN K WMRLDKSEQLSA QUIOCF UZ OWIUUDF KWR BRWHXVUDZ.
NFGMUQPQXA, QU BPLUZ LYSB FUEF TSEUEHP PMS HEFSE WMZE PMQF HV HEUDPQW IMF
UHPIM TQ PRS UIBP HLAPNF UWQ, SMF PMQK ESUQUD NARQCPKUA LB PI MWY UORM
UWBRESAR ESKNUDF IPSEP DOXV WI.

ESFMCWUDP FM ZRS PQBZ, UFKHBROSLNSE ELEQK GHKRYEP ZM HUKFUDQ Y HSEPUW ROW
UHPIM TQ RUWNIQMUDF K PSENRM UD L UNFBFYSP QDLHDUWHQCF.  DOPM PMHV
BRARENHI, RS HEMWYSRKC GI HXVHLPCQFY HPMSE PAQFHNSP UZ HSEPUWLF VUSCENUKW
PMQF RS WMRLDKSEKR RSSFUNF UHW YSQUFSK, HF TWHGDRKB PRS QLUVMGQ ZW
WUGMRQ YWCRL EX HRA ESKNB.  RVUDQUDP FRS "UDNBINQ" SMFZMW UC FRS XMZBIU
UZ PMS PQYCNO RUDWIR ZHZB PRS YWCRB PUEP MKLQ SYSR UDIUSDIMPKR UDZM PMY
PSENRM.  PMHL, L NPSC NLA ESGURA PMS PQYCNU EP RY HE PRS ESKNB,
ESYSQRMFUDP FRS PSENRM LAR NUWGMANUDP FU ZUDC GMHDFV HC FRS AMSPF ZHW
UQPQDHLFB.  PMHB VUZZCENA RMZ UWXA WMCFKURL ESSALKWNS ELAVDDF, XMUXQYW
HZSEQFHWL, EWR PCNANQGMUW, MG LFXH HSCHMGX HRA ZM HSNPHWO CHWN KVFQSNE,
XH ZM LEX, YRSES UWS HMFB PYW HW PMESY RHWRV UD FEESCFRSPSL EWR VUDAB
PMQH DOPM UWQ SWZSALA HZSEQFHW LAC GRSA L WMHFSA UZ YWCRV HA LWUPMSE PSZ
UZ FEESCFRSPSL EWR ELEV ZUC PMHDFX RMGMHR LI ULAX YHWRV UZ MZRSEP.

NAGMB FRSQ XQRQUQ YQBNLUDPQR CQRARFBX YMGR PIUY HZ FRS YWDE SQUDI KUWK HW
NBELVHRB, PMQ YH BFQZL UER WMZ ESLFOGKR PMQF L FENPK ANCTSE UZ PMY
HEIHQRPB PMQF UDXIXSY SSAQMWHDUQ MYSPB RYES SQUDI KUWQ SE ZYHFSY RMGU E
HEUZIOWR UDPQESBP UD FLDFNLPK LAN VUDFIHVGMRB.  PMKHE PQYCNR PPCQFKPHKB
LAC GMHDAUDF KES HWHKCFKR ZM PMHXA PHKVNL, EV HB VMIDW UD FECPMDNFEN XQ
PMS HSEPSHL YSQUFSQ.  YL EUQPQHN MHBPHWUKRL, PMQ YH BFQZL RYES PMUDVDDF
UIES UZ PSENRMUDP ZHW WMWNSHPB LAK DRKEL PMLA ZUE HENGMNMFLC DHWRV.
MXGDIOBXA, ZSAHVRMUEHAC NUWRQRKR, VQYCNMHDF ZUC NUWRQTFL EWR DKQYL EWR
PSENRMUDP ZHW YWCRB HYK SQ ZCH WQFRSC NXUPSXA ESFLPQC GMHDFB.

ROUVK RHVFSYKUDP VKSSELF HUKFSP, UFKHBROSLNSE MXPSDSKR PMQF PMQ HQNUDZMPR
HEMZMZEZQ SOHBF XQ QU WMCFKURL K FESQFSE KDSKEPMGX WZ LHWUQPB.  QRMIUDF K
HEKSHIHL PHQYEQE, RS PKUC GUEG MZ CEL QYVHSE ZM BPMGRM PMUDPV ZMPKPMSE UD
PMQ HQNUDZMPR, PMIOPI MG PQWRKR ZM SQ L FMGFBQ HHWQ YRAUHD MR LQYCNU EWR
ESPCHKLKF.  LC, MRSESZUES, UDNCQYVHDFXA UEB LYSD UDLSPGMFKGMDF
XHHRHVGMNQPQR CQPDHKSLF ARIDRAV HC FRS MVU THWUQZ.

UFKHBROSLNSE RKUIRLPCQFKR PSSKNEF LWVMGHIALS ALYHTSAX HZ FRS HEMZMZEZY
UDPQNPQNSP:  UWY REL QUB HQPEFMIN PHW PMA RQPYWDE UNFMES, UD ROMDU E
VDWR UZ ESKNUDPDWZI TNEHRMD LHZVSPPB MIY WRA YWNFC VQ YLXQ PI ZU YWHNAW
ZM KDZLSEARM CQFSEUKXB.  QU WMCFKURL L FENPK ANCTSE UZ HRMZIZNEHRV HW
LALFIZ GDRKU ZHWO CHWEQN IT ZWHU Q GDRKIWHVN, DMHRM ARQLSA HLSEB PI UYEY
WMGHSP ZM HEUDZ MD HWNHWZHNEPQ UD KDIDFQV NMWOUARPB.  L UNEHQPDQLSQD HB
LMUVG MCFM ZRS XEBPQH, UQVDDF MG ZHBVMVSA ZM SCUDF KD UUQPK UDZM Y NUDWIY
LAW VDIMGOGY HE HDHCF MG IOZ.

UFKHBROSLNSE RABZ RKUIRLPCQFKR XHNAR CQRHWKDDF, ROMDM HWNFNRKC GYSPB.
ESWQNBKR PNIU E FESGDIOP HWHHKQM, PMQ RUXSAQMHID UWNFNRKR VOVZQ 78EHO
HRUWIZNEHR ESWMCRX HZ TUXMGMDLF PHYSRMSP PMQF RYES UQRK NIDHDF LAW
HUHQKDQFASK YZFSE YWNSR DEN M.  GRSPS WMRLGMFMPQN KZSWHVOUQPQXA PMESY
MIHNX HU LINHI, EL QU UEV RDIMGOGKR MG, ROMDM IWBHFQ 150 OKPQLQZSP UW Y
NR.  PMHL, PMQK ENQ RUWVHRKNELXQ WIUHESPPSN.  GWHC MRS NQFQXUFIQ RENW,
UFKHBROSLNSE HEMWYSRKC GU Y PCLABRDHTF UZ E LHSQRO RMGM PRS LNKDW
KLKUFLLXQ YWR DOPM MHPIVUPIPQC GYSF ZUXXUDODF MG EL MG FSYKKR.
E FMIZMPDEFO SEL SQAR KNRKN KWR Q FNERLNCHGGMUW UQRK.

WMRLDKSEQLSA LKFNS REL SQAR KNRKC VQKUWR DUEZ BRS VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB
WUCHLFXA YWNFW VI HW NQFLFIZOHDF E LIOWR ESWMCRUDZ, DMHRM NEHVSP PSSKNEX
AMSPGMUWL PHW QU WMWNSEDUDF ROSEQ PI WNEN XUDSP QLIOP MWY UORM LKFNK HM QLA
LUZUCR ZM KNN KWR QF ROQF ZHUDF, TSEUEHP, PMHV SQWMHQB HHWQ PUEA LC QIOVN
ESELUWQLXA WI HW ESELUWQLXA DOPR ZM WI.  UFKHBROSLNSE LFXH RKUIRLPCQFKR
Q UMZHIR FMDFMES.  EL PNYSUQR UKN ESZHCPKR QYNSHKC, PRS UIGMUW GHQMHNY
UQPQDHLFP RKLS HWHSKC GRS UIBP ZHFHFLC, WMZ LHEHDHVHDFXA.  PMHV LEEX UIES
QLIOZ BRS HQKDOU, RS PMIOPIZ, BUEA LXMMF QUP HESPSCFQFHIW UG UZ.

SQNQHLQ YHB ZILF NYB PM XDHDF ZMPKPMSE PMUDPV PMQF WMNFC VA HPSC VX
MHBPHWUKRL HW XQ HSHZSA ROW YSEQ RHNHIHL QLIOP MHVZMWE,
FMCWUZPMQRARFMWE ZUMZKFS PYSHQC GH WSHESPSCF PMQ HHXF QZSWHHEUKPQ
WMXVQRGMUWL PWHC MRS VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPV HC UMZHIR FMDFMESB. PRSPS RYES
PMK SSEA ZHDBP GUBUB HKNQ SQ ZMIUQP SKDXHRL WMHTLAK YWR XHHQ MZRSEP QF
PMQF GMHQ.  PMS HENGMNMFLE SLYHTSA UVFNBPNEPQR DEL Q LHIPDEFU PUVO,
SCIOPIG MW DMGU E PNQUKPNELVSE UDZM Y NUDWIN.  Y VHDFSA GDRKIWHVW
WMCFKURL QLIOF ZUGZQ GMFBSP LAR GHKRQX HZ LUVU TWHC MUEF TSEHIN, KXV UZ
RAY XHWQ DMGQ.  ZYEAR ZMPKPMSE, QU SQVUKSSP, PMQK HEIXDKQ YD UCFSESPGMDF
WINMHQCFENE WSPIOCNY.

                                 


KDBRHLVHUW  HLUDP FRS PNQUKPNELVSE UD QU  XIFNHQ UZ UQPQDHLF HEMWSPPSW
LAC GM XS HWHRQBVKR  FHEHHXY HU LO CMGMHA FW  BQFLFIZOHDF LAC GRS
ALFMES UZ QUB HQFSEUKX  BTIB NIWUDF KWR PMQ AHABPHIW UT ANLVUZQ SKEPHL
AMLAGMZQ 


NIDHDF PMQ AHABPHIALWRLAXRSE HSDHIW PMQF ZUXVWYKR UFKHBROSLNSEB
HESPARFQGMUW, PSSKNEB NFLDHGUNQGMUWX RSEQ HKNY.

QU HV SCUDIDDF UD UIGMUW GHQMHNSP PNIU K LDKYHKDBR.  PMA PNEHQPDQLSQW
RKGDRQB RESQFQ Y DOWRWY UW Q NIUFHPQE PNCYSW, DMHRM HSCHMGL HPSEP ZM
KDIDGMPY E LUDFVA PNEHQ UZ PMQ HIXHK HW UWY HZ FRS HRMZIZNEHRV.  HZ
HEIWMNSP Q NNHRK, WHIFUEWRESKNK OUQPK PMQF MHPI BRMIUX BPINARPB NQW
UDWMEHHWQFK HCFH ZEFSEL, EWR PMQF UEX RHWEQK GSEA WMDASK OC FMHX RYK.

WMOBARGMDF UW UFKHBROSLNSEL EBVSEGMUW PMQF QU NYB XWZVDDF UIES QF
PSENRMUDI DRKEL PMLA YWCRB, HAXUWEL ENFIKR PMQF DOPMIOZ CHWRV LA DKQY
WISP WUP QVOBP.  UFKHBROSLNSE WMWNKRKR PMQF RS IOPIZ BI MKLQ YCPMDNFQFKR
MHP HIHCF UIES NBQYNSQ.  OAXUWEL BPQFKR PMQF PMQK RYES UD ULQM XMPM
FQVAUDF KXMMF PMS PQUQ PMHDF.  XQ PSENRMUDP ZHW YWCRL EWR XQ ZUCNUDZ
HSHZSA ZM ZUNMX HC FRS YWCR, PMS HSEPSHL HEIHQRF ZASZ BUEZ BRSX YIOVN PKZ
PMQH ZM PMK HRKQ.  FRS NYX WRA ESGDYRP ESPNFPB HV FQUVHWKR UIES ZM UWY
VDWR UZ HLSE PMLA LAMZRSW.

WMWNSEDUDF PMQ PMZLF XIFNHQ UZ UQPQDHLF PMQF UEB LYSR FWHRQBVKR UD PMHV
NYK, YU QZ BMHP HIHCF UEV HW CQPDHKSQLSA ZUCH PSSKW UE SDIMP WMXVQRGMUWB,
LFX UZ FRSH TMIZMPDEFMHD.  MC FRS UQDMCFHXR SDLHDUWHQCF, ZUE SLYHTSA,
PMSES HWHLQLXK YES 35,00040,000 HRMZIZNEHRB.  PRS XHNAR CQRHWKDDFB
ANCTSE VHBZK OPQHB.  PMQ SWHKNVHRKL ROUSQN EXMMF 300 MGQHB.  PRSES ENY
500 ZHVUGMNQB NENZMUWV HC FRS ZUCH UZ RCYNUDPV.  PMQ HMZHIR FMDFMESL, EB
UDKDGDNILF MGQHL, ROUSQE POVZQ ZM PSSKCFX.

QU LFXH UEL E UQANBRDHTF WMXVQRGMUW, PMA SUGS RHVZMWE ZHCPHIW UZ URA UZ
PMA PKRSELF HEIHQRP BSEHKX, RMHRM DOXV WMCFKUD 2,900 UWRDGDKNLX
WINMHQCFL, EXV GUEPFTSEXHW LENNEGMSKL.  EU MEL UD HEMWSPL EXMMF 350
LUDHNQALHQDHNQR FQUHRSAPB, HW QLIOF 12,000 TDHCFKR FEPKL PHW PMS HSEHIW
18701910.  LFXH UD PMY RHWEV ENS PIUS 4,000 HLAHWQUMD HRMZIZNEHRL.  EO
UEP EQRQWSAN K ULHD QUIOCF UZ PMY RHWV KUWQ SA XRB HEUDPB LAW
HRMZIZNEHRV RDGHVHIW RHNUDP FRS VUSCENEX HZGMNQV NHVE GUVMZ HEIHQRG MW
PMS 1980P.  ZUE SLYHTSA, E LHSDMLF KDGDVHUW UZ BN UEB PWZSAN IF EWR
PMIOPIZ BREIOPI LFB FRS NEUHGUNQGMUWX HP ASAQMWHDUR TESPSCFQFHIW UZ
HRMZIZNEHRV.  HWRYSC, GRSK YES ROYSVUDF PMQH IOG MD FESQF LQWSAS XUKNB.
PMS HHNZHPS UZ QU DOPMUD PMA SMVNEWE, MG HV MIHSK, DB PM WQFLFXOS PKSSELF
UZ PMY HPMSE PHQRUKB NUXSAQMHIW RDGHVHIRL ROMDO SKLA RH ZENGMNMFLW
YSHSDHARRQ DOPM, UD XHHQ NQPSB, HOVKR PAASUDPV QLIOF, QA LQMDGMGE XMNU EB
QU.  UIESIXSE, UD UQWA NQPSB PRS KDGDVHUWB HYK SQ RMENQNPQDHPYN KL RMZ
UWXA FLDQUDP KSZSEHKWNK HR "ASAQMWHDUZAUDP" FMHDFB LMF LFXH UD LNZMUQPQW
NQFQXUFIUDT.  IENW BQFLFIZOHDF EL HEQNGMRQK DC FRS NAMGKR BPQFSP HV
RSKLUVX YKHPIPQC GWYENC GRS RKBRDHTFHIW UT UUWIZNEHR LAR VSEUKX
UQPQDHLFB, LMF HV UORM PMUDRAC DRSW URA ARPQEP PMY RHWVN UZ UQANBRDHTFB
LAC GMHDFB PUEF QES RSVN UD PMA SMVNEWEB HHLMD WMXVQRGMUW LAW IPMSE
NAMGV.  HW CSPZHRLQ PU Y WMOBARM TA XSPQ, GUEF QHB UQPQDHLF HV SKWE
RSKLUVE ZMIZMPDEFMHN, QWR HV XH HEHUENUVQ XQRLNPS UDKDGDNILF ESWMCRP RKLY
SQAR UQRK ZUE SQNR HMIZMPDEFU, PSAHVRMUEHAW HLBSESKC GUEF QD UPQUBKSAS
NQFQXUP DQRHWR KVOBPL, PHW YSQUFSA, PHW QYRM HRMZIZNEHR UD PMK RQPWHMG
FHLXHVMHDF WMXVQRGMUW UZ 25,000 GHQMHNSP.  UD PMQ RELY HZ FRS PARKNEX
DCMGSEP HWHHKQM, ZUC DMHRM RAENXA 3,000 WINMHQCFP SVOBP, ESHESPARGMDF
UDZUCHQFHIA UWHC MRYCFEXOV KDZLSEARP BFQPQL, EO CMGM PRS ELVHBPLARQ UZ
EYESR LFMENZ MZ FRS UQANBRDHTF KDGDVHUW DOXV QFPQHTZ BU ZUDR VIUY RYK WUZ
UWXA ZM UESK Q NUXSAQMHIAFKSAS ESWMCR LMF TSEUEHP Q UENN CQRHWN GHW QYRM
BPQFY, RMHRM DOXV PMAR PSDSQ YL EA NCTESXVL UHW PMK 100200 RMWOUARPB
PMQF WMHQ NARKD HM.  TMF PMQF RCQUE NQHKURL ZM SQ ARQNPQC.  GRS QU BPLUZ
HV WMRLSELKGMSK LAR NVUDFB PM WQFLFIZOHDF, PMIOPI UZ WMHNPS GDVHZMEP ZMMF
ENGMGUDMLF UDPQXVDIARRQ LAR WAHNEF AQPYWDEV HA L UQWLSE PMQF LHZVSPPB PMQF
HSEREFX HRA RAKR WUP MKLQ RQFLFIZOHDF HW PMQF UORM UZ MG WMNFC VS HMF ELDKY.

PMQ HQFPQW HP LTIB NIWUDP, ZSAHVRMUEHAC NUWRQRKR, CQPHNRAC GRS KDBRHLVHUW
ZM PMY SENVUSE PCQYPQC KHABPHIW UT ANLVUZQ SKEPHL AMLAGMZQ UD PMA SMVNEWE
UZ WMDFESBV.  UZ WMHNPS, PQBZ WMDLSEVHUW NQC LK RUWY RMGR 100HSERQCF
QNNMNEWQ, LMG MM CQYRL PMQF ROAR UWSP MIVNUDPV ENQ YB SELF QB XRB UWXA
Q FUDK YUINAZ CUVX LY SSZHXKR, ROSEQYP HSEUHZBUDF VWYSE SASKXB UZ
QNNMNEWQ NQA FQYC GH YSZHXUDZ IE PUEDHDF FLDPSE QUIOCFB, LMF DOPM PMY
AMLFMGQ WHWESPHUWKDDFXA HUFEHDKR.

                                 


ZCIMDI  Q NUWPCENK QSZSEHKWNQ RUWRQCWUDP KSAQMWHDUW MTFHIRL  XIFNHQ UZ
UQPQDHLF UD PMY RELMHDFZMR FEFSEL EWR E LIFPKBPHIW UG NKLDK FEDQENW 
HUFSMDQFHIRL UZ FEDQENRV LHZVSPGMUW  PCLABRDHVMDF PMK RMWOUARPB ZUC PRS
NRWHU  QWBHNQNX WZ FNERLNCHGGMUWB  PRS NRWHH QKDGMUW UZ PMA PIOWRUDZ
ULPMSEV RMWOUARPB 


GUWRUDP KWNIONEPKHQCF UD Q NIUHQCF UZ UHRMASXHRL PNIU PMQ HHWDUDF
PSBVHICFUEF COUSEIOP HYHFSK HC FRS MOUQDUGMSP RYES RMWZVHDF ASQRPCUWMD
HZGMUWB PI WM ZRSHD YWDEWIWHPMQ ZYWMHP, KKDZMC, PRS FEHSEP UZ PKHWPK
NYPRUDPFUW, HZARKR RSD HXVHLPCQFKR FQVA XQ WUGMDF PMQF RSE SSZSEHKWNY
DOPM VUPQNEWE BRMIFLEP LAR WOUSEIOP HYHFSK HR AKDGMDF NYB RUWPCENQ ZW
UHRMASXHRL.  ZCIMDI QHHRELOGKR VUPQNEWE BRMIFLEP WMHTSAPQ DIWUNEWNY HZ
PMQ PQRURUXIZMDLF HZGMUWL ELKUVQLSA ZM PMQH HW PMKHW SASMNFQWNY HD, HW
XHHQ NQPSB, PRSHD WIDWDHPIP MHXGMVUZQ ZMNYCR PMSPY HTFHIRL.

LUPQE HWHGDKDDF LA IXSEGDYR UZ PMA PDGA PIOWRUDP ZQFRSEP HEIHQRPB
HKZLSEXHA LF TDHWNQPUW, PNLAAVUD QF KYSA, HIUR KNQUL EZ BRS
UQBVQNMOPSZBP RHVZMDHNQX BMWHKZQ, LAC IKNHVUW WIDW PMS RLFF UWHU MSE QF
PMA HDUSKEPMGX WG LHDIDDUQ, FYWMHZ ILBSESKC GUEZ BRS NYPRUDPFUW FEHSEP,
VUEQ LFX UZ FRS HEIHQRPB, UDNBINQ SMZR PDKSP UZ PMY RELMHDFZMW
WMWSSPZHWRARRQ LAW VQYX NMGR PIUK 135,000 RMWOUARPB ZM SQ FHLXHVRSR DMGO
YSPQRLDGQ YWLMZQFHID UR ADIMPQ ZH YDIMPAZDGK SUXOUSP, E FWHHKQM PMQF
DOXV WUM TQ RIUFSQPKR NAGMX NASV UCFM ZRS RABZ RQCFHNQ.  ZMOV, HZ CEL
DOPM WMRLDKSEQLSA ARPMHLUKBH PSSKNEX AQYEP KFM ZUEZ BRS NYPRUDPFUW FEHSEP
HEIHQRZ CZS PDYSPQW VKLDK FEDQENRV LHZVSPGMUW PMQF PMS HEFSEX HZ FRS
ZUNAKDDF ULPMSEB RIOVN SQ FHLXHVRSR KELUVK YWR UDYSHSRLDGASK, YWR ZM PMY
PDQYM TARAPMG UZ QUSEMDLA BRMIFLEPMHG, SUK NRWHO.

UD HEKFUQGMQ MSEHB, UNWRUDP ZWHC MRS FEDQENN GIOWRQFHIW DIOVN YSHSKDPQ
PMQ PNERLNCHGGMUW UZ PMIOLEWRX HG NMWOUARPB NYMGUDP FM XS HMF UW KDVE UD
PMY RZS UZGURQL.  PHNPMSE, VHWNQ PRS WMBPX HT NUXSAQMUDP, KKDGMDF, LAW
WMDLSEGMDF PMA PIOWRUDP ZQFRSEP WINMHQCFV HCFU XQPPQEHESBV KRMGHIRL RYES
NHWLUDI DCFM ZRS UHXVHIRL UZ WIXVENL, EWR PMQ RUWVHRKNELXS PFQZLB
UDXIXSKR UD LFX UZ FRSPS HEIHQRPB RYES RKXIGMDF PMKHC NENYSEP ZM
HEIWMNUDP FRS YWDE, PMS HQNEYCR ZUNANKGMUWB VIFPKBPHIR UKN Y
ESXIFNGMUWENK YPHQRZ:  BNERLNCHGGMUWX HZ FRS ARGMES WMEHHL UZ PMY
ZUNAKDDF ULPMSEP HEFSEX RIOVN SQ KLKUFLLXY HW NRCIU ZM FHLXMD LAW
WMXVKPA SMVNEDHSP, KSAR MHPI BRMIUXL, EF Q PNQNGMUW UZ PMQ RHXZ
100150 ZUC PRS LAANLF VURQRLA PYSZM HEIWMNQ Y VUUHPQN IDUSKEPMGX
HESPP ENA UZ 1,000 UZ QYRM XIFNHQ UZ PMS HMLVUPRKR FEHSEP QF 45150 HSW
HEUDPQK GUXOUK.  PDGAR PMQ RHNESCF LMKIQP NCNARM UD KRMNQFHIALX BEXPQHB
LAC GRS WMWSSPZHWRUDT DUWBPNEUDPB UW VUSCENUKRL UD BHLFSAD HRLGMFMGMUWB
ROW YHVM PU YWV PMSPK SUXOUSP ZM PMKHC NUXSAQMHIRL, HEIWMNUDP FRS
WINMHQCFX HW NRCIU YWNFN VDVASX WHSA L PDQYFBK QSZLARKN KINHKWNA PHW PMY
FEHSEP.  ZCIMDI BPESBVKR, MIRYSKC, PUEG CKSASHZHQCF UZ PMA PIOWRUDZ
ULPMSEB RRCIU HV BPUVV UD UPB UDULWNE.  XSEHIHL XHZFNYES HEMXSAHB ESUQUD
ZM SQ ESXHXSKR SQZUES PMQ HQFSEUKB NLA SQ FHG MCFH WQYNKLXA PHWO.

UNWRUDP ZWHC MRS FEDQENN GIOWRQFHIW CSPNFPQK DA L UQHIE HHLM PW
PCLABRDHSQ PMY 75,000 HE PI WMWOUARPB UZ PMY RELMHDFZMR FEFSEP EQHKUDUDF
ZM SQ PCLABRDHSQW ICFM WIUFHPQC RHVEV.  BXDKSP UVFNBPNEPQR VKSSELF UZ PMY
HEMXSAHB ARWMNAPQESN, GHW YSQUFSQ, PRS HESPARG MALVMVUZQ UZ NRWHC MW
UDKDNQPQ PMQ RWHBVIOPB RKSAPQC IQFSEUKV UR ADIMPYSCFM RARFMWE
WINMHQCFB.  PYWMHF DYSG CSPNCMVKR WINMHQCFL PWHI BENHIHL HSDHIWV HC FRS
KHPIPQARPM RQCFHNQ ZUEP MKLQ SYSC FNERLNCMVKR UD RMWHWUXUIDNQX UCRSE LAW
RKVUSKESC GM ZRS FEDQENW IZLMDSP UD NQVUZUCWUK, ROSEQ PRSK YES WMDLSEPQW
ZM PMQ RRCIU, E FWHRQBV PMQF HV YSHSQMKR ZM WMRLOUA PDGQ KQYEP ZM
WMHTSAPQ PMQF HV, ESDQUWUDP ZWHI CKLDK FEDQENRV LHZVSPGMUW UQRK PSSKNEX
KQENL EZI, NAGMF LXMMF HOXA 1994.  ZCIMDI ZUNAN KR AWNIONEIDDF
UDKDNQGMUW UZ PMS HWHHKQMB LARAPMGV HC FRS UWZIUDF IPS UQRK XQ BRMIFLEP
UZ PMS PQYCNU PNAQMHIRL UZ PMQ RRCIU, FECPMDNFENXA UD ESNIDMDF PMQ PHUY
PHARG MC ULANLXVQ ZHNDUDF PMS HKFSP UZ PMY RELMHDFZMR FEFSEB.

ZCIMDI RABZ UNCWHVRSW VQPKUXB WMWNSEDUDF PMQ YWBHNQNX WZ FNERLNCHGGMUWB.
ZUD HRLFQWNQ, PRS UDPSCPHIW UZ FMIHLLARV UZ WINMHQCFX HC FRS NRWHO
NMWSARFBK WHYL RMZ HSCHMG QYRM WINMHQCF ZM SQ SKDHGUKR KFKURLZ BRS
HWDIUDLF UQANBRDHTF PSSKNEB FHUSP EL UD PMQ RELY HG NMWOUARPB PMQF EFHSEN
UD PMS HMLVUPRKR KRMGHIR.  UWYKSSE, PMQ PNERLNCHGGMUWP EQRKHSK Q NHNXHWE
RMQRA GHW MXGDIOB PEZHX, PMQ HHVPHASVUDFX HZ TWHHSC WQUSP, LAW IPMSE
SEWHEP PNIU PMY RZS NRWHH QKDZME.  SSKCFNLXVK, YXV WINMHQCFB PUEF QZSQYW
UD PMY SSAQMWHDUD BSEVHUW DOXV SQ RMQREQC VE ZWHHKQM KRMGHWL.  EBFMIIFO
PMHV HEMWSPP REL HQZ CMGM IZSHXMGHIA UWHH BIUY HZ FRS KRMGHWX HC FRS
PDIOWRB PUEG MHTSEPAQM YWDE UQA XQYSK PMKHW HZLMDSP, PMQ YKGLAFQPKV HW
UQVDDF PMHV UQPQDHLF KLKUFLLXQ YL E ESPSENRM ZMUX IOZCKHPI  PAENL EXMMF PMY
UHBVHSXVUDZ IZ TWHHSC WQUSP LAW IPMSE ESFLGMSKXA UHWUE SKDZMDHLF UQZBSEB.

WMHTSAGMUW UZ LFF UDGA PIOWRUDP ZQFRSEP HEIHQRPB H.K., ESPCHKLKVMVUZQ
LAR VQYCNUEVMVUZQ UZ LFX UZ FRS WINMHQCFB LE ZWHHSC WQUSP, LFPQCWQFY
PHASVUDFX, HD SENHKGMSP UZ LHVMQRPB DOXV HEIXDKY HRA UZ PMS EMDRSBP
XHHNRQX HZ FMHB VOGA PHW PMS RHVZMWE UZ PMA HDUPQR VFQPQV HC FRS FLZBSE
FECP UZ PMY SDIMPYSCFM RARFMWE.  UNCPRSE, HMLVUNQGMUW UW NRWHO CUVX
LFXUR YKDZMEP ZM UDNBINY SSKC UUDMFUKS, PMNU EB XLNWRWE VUBPL, RMZ
UDNBINKR UD PMS HDHCFKR XIFNHQB.

MG PSQHP HHXVHLXQ PUEZ BRS YSPQRLDGQ YWLMZQFHIR FWHGDRKK DC FRS HEUDPQW
XIFNHQP SSKCFNLXVX YUVX LQ YWVKR ZM PMQ RRCIU KRMGHIR, FARKDDF
RAZIGMQFHIRL DOPM PMS HMLVUPRSEX HZ FRS FEHSEP.  QF PMQ HIUARZ, BRS
ZUNAKDDF ULPMSEB RRCIU HV QNRQBVMVSA UWXA UW PMK HXQNML, E WMHTMFSE
RKSKXUHSW IMF UZ PMQ PRSLEHNHL VUDFNLK PNEQRYQ HEIHQRF QWR RKVHFDKR ZUW
PMA HPS UZ NBELVHNQX BRMUXENB.  PRSES ENS HSEUEHP 400 MVQWHL WMHTMFSEV HW
PMQ RIOCFWE, UIBP UZ ROMDU EES UD NADGSEVHZQ NBELVHRB RKFECPHQCFB.
NFGMUQPQXA, MG HV LAGMDMFEPQC GUEZ BRS NRWHH QKDGMUW UZ PMA PIOWRUDZ
ULPMSEV RMWOUARPB DOXV NHW UA LWA MVCQIUFEGMLXY HC HQNUDZMPR WMHTMFSE
DOPM Q NRCIU RCDGA.  ROUSEIOB RUEDFSP UD PMS PUZZCENY RUVF LXBW ZWBHN
SQZUES PMS HWHHKQM HV WMHTSAPQR.  KKDZMEP WUPQ: LA MVQWHL NYB
NAKLKUFLLXQ PI WQHUWBPNEPQ PMQ RRCIU.

                                 


KDBRHLVHUW  PSSKNEF LWVMGHIALF UQYFMESX HZ NZS NBENUGHKW 


KDBRHLVHUW ZUXVWYUDP FYWMHPV HESPARFQGMUW PSDSKR ZM NBENUGE XKSSELF
KNKDGMUWLF PAQFHNSP, UDNBINUDP 1 FUEZ BRS HEIHQRPB HEHUENX
UDPQXVQRFMLF HEIWMNM QUWVHBPV HC FRS ASQRPCUWMD PCLABRDHTFHIW UZ FRS
UQPQDHLF 2 PMQF PMQ PYSZ BNERLUHZBKR ZM PMQ RRCIU HSHZSA HV WUZ
UQDEKR HF 3 PMQF NQFQXUIDDF LAR VMLHKQMUDRKVODF UZ PMQ HQFSEUKX
ESUQUD ZM SQ YWDEKR IOZ BMIIFU EZ BMHP HIHCF UQPQDHLF NQC LS EQPDHKSKR
XQ ALHQ LAC 4 GUEM TQRLNPS LFB FRS PSENRMUDI DV RUWK HC FRS UECRNYES,
PMK HXQNMV HV RSPDIRAC GH WQYN K NRWHO CMHRM WMCFKURL UWXA PSAMARGMLF
PQBZ GUSAB.  PQRURMDLFXA, MG PMAR SQWMHQB SSEK QELQ ZH WQYC GRS UQPQDHLF
UZU LWR FHG MZ MA LWUPMSE RKGDRQ.

                                 


SASCUW  IXSEGDYR UZ PMS RHVZMWE UZ PMK HIHCF HEIHQRM TQPRYAR YLEL LAW
MWBN  PSSKNES FNEQMMDSP PMY HAFUDY SDLHDUWHQCF PRENSP DOPM PCKNMGHIALX
FHLXHVMHDF UW UECR WMZE  PSSKNEB FQRURMDLF LAC VSRKLHINEX LENDHSEB PW
ASQRPCUWMD FHLXHVMHDF  MIN YYLL EWR MWBN ENDHSKN KZ BRS LHVMQRZ MZ
NBUDMDLF PCUKXB  KNLKCFKFSP UZ PMY SSAQMWHDUN THWUQF QWR MZRSN PQYFMESB
UZ IHWBF  QD UXVHLPCQFKR ZMHN UZ PMK HIOCWLF 


UQDHL FQSWHC, ULAKFUDP KKDZMC, PRS UWVURA HIHNALX UT NHNESCF NBUDMDLF
PCUKXB IHWBF, TESPSCFKR LA UVFNBPNEPQW ISKDSHKY WZ FRS MHBPHWX WZ FRS
HIUDF TWHHKQM SQZCYSC FRS QUSEMDLA ELXHDMQFHIA UHW PMQ YKGLARQHQCF UZ
BRHKWNQ YYLL EWR PMY HAFUDQ RIUFHPQN SMVNEWE RQCFSE, UDW. MNBQ.  MRS
HIUDG BARFMES SQZCYSA LYLL EWR MWBN WYSP MGB LKPUDDUDF ZM Y
ESHWFKDUFYGMUW FLNARMKR XQ PMA RYR RMHKP ASYNMGMSK UZGURQN EZ MNBN QXMMF
PMESQ KQYEP KFU YWR WMCTUDSP PMS PPCARPFRP UZ PMSPQ PYW KDPHENQFY
HWFKDUFYGMUWV.  HR LMICP, IHWBP CSHESPSCFB PRS HEMWSPX HP LRMUXENXA
FHLXHVMHDF UW VURA.

SASCUW RABZ KDBRHLPSR VKSSELF HEQNGMRQB PRS UWVURA ARGDWHCUARP BUEESB
DOPM PCKNMGHIALS FMLVUPRUDZ IR UENR NHZAZHW YSQUFSS, HYSW SKSHKY WZ
UQANBRDHTFBPUEF QES MHPIXA HUZHCPLAG MC FRS QNKNQHMD YWNSN.  VQSWHW
WUPQK DR FENGMNMFLC PRS HUFSMDQFHIRL UZ DMFQGMUW WMNAPB ZUC PARHNY
WMOBMGPQSP LAK INECFB RIUUHZBYSV.  HC FRS PCKNMGHIALS UENRNHZX
ARGDWHCUARM, QMGQFHIW NIOCFL EES ESKNUVK WQHUWBPNELXY, RRSESEL PMY
UWVURA ARGDWHCUARP CSHESPSCFL ER APMSEQYB UKRHOC MI UHXF QNQRKUHRB.

SASCUW ESUQDEKR PSSKNEB FQRURMDLF LAC VSRKLHINEX LENDHSEB PH YSAQMWHDUW
FHLXHVMHDF, ZUD HRLFQWNQ, PRS HEMXSAHB UD PCLABHHVVHUW NCQYPQC VE XHSDMLF
RMENQNPQEP HW XQ WMHTSAV ZNEHRMDL EWR UEFUZMRAV.  HA LWVMGHIR, LRS WUPQW
QRUWIUMD VUUHFQGMUWB VMNU EB PRS BPHWKFQ RHXPB UZ UQUDFQUDUDT VQNV DBVHAB
LAC IENEQZ MN EINHKWNY SNINQGMUW.

UQANBRDHTFB RLAWUM TA HFSUYRKC GW ZMDQM, SASCUW YSFSKURAC, VQRLNPS MG HV
WUF Q LMXVQPUD XMENW IE SUQUV, ZUCHX HP ASAQMWHDUQ MNERLUHBVHIW UZ
UDZUCHQFHIC FUEP MKLQ RESQFKR LA QUVMARRQ NBIOKDDF HSHZSAL HWRSEBPLAKDDF
UZ ROQF PMK HIOCWLF HV QFPQHTGMDF ZM WI.  IHWBZ, CMHRM FHLXHVRSB
HSSEESGDYRKR HQKDNQF LCPMDSAV RQYVUDF DOPM PMS PMLHKQM UZ NBUDMDLF
PCUKXB, UDNBINSP PQBZ, FQLMFLC HQFSEUKF, LWR PDEFMHRB, LFPMIOPI QF PMHV
GMHQ MG NQC FNERLUHZ MAFA XUDK HXVHLPCQFHIRL.

RABZ, SASCUW RKBRDHSQR IWY YLEL LAW INBN QWSDGKR QF PMS PMLHKQM UZ
NBUDMDLF PCUKXB:  MG HV 1 E UDIUSE XFQGMBPMDLF KDBRHGVURA PMQF 2 WISP
WUP CQAOHES UEFUZMRAB LMF NQR LQFHVZA PMA RYSRV UZ MGL EINHKWNY RMGU SUDY
UVFNBPNEGMUWL EWR PDEFMHQ CQFSEUKF, LWR 3 PMSEK HL E RAKR ZUC PRS PHYSWK
KDBVQHUDQFHIW UP UDIMENLVUZQ ESPSENRM ESLHBFB.  RVUDUNQB FDHLFL EES
ESPSENRM QNGMGDGMSP PMQF UDXIXSQ PRS KNUHDUBPNEGMUW UZ Q FSPZ BESQFHQCF
ZM XHHQ YSHSDHHQCFLF NAMG UD HWRKC PM ZSPG MPB HLAPNFRABV SQZUES MG HV
UQRK KLKUFLLXQ PM ZRS PKRANES FHZNFQFHIA.  FQSWHR FWHRQKRKR ZM IDSK
KNKDGMUWLF UDZUCHQFHIW UW UMDQM WMWNSEDUDF MGP SKDZMDHWNMHAP, KRMGHWUKX
XMENR, KKDZMDHLF WMCFARF, QWR PMQ PEZSP UZ ENGMNBSP MG FHLXHVRSB
UDNBINUDP TYSWSKSHKRYR CSPQYCNR ESHHWPB LAR CKSHKRX, EL RYXV EL
PAQFHNSP PRENKR XQ MZRSC PNEKDGMUWLF UECRWMZE HIHNALXB.

QUUWP FRS KNLKCFKFSP UZ PMY SSAQMWHDUN THWUQF QES ULBPSE KDBVQHUDQFHIW UZ
UDZUCHQFHID, UWNFNKDDF NED RQFY, LWR PMQ YLBARRQ UZ PHQNQ RUWBPNEUDPB
SQNQHLS HKFSP WI WUP QVOBP.  PMHV FLZBSE ULQM NCQYPQL ED UCFSESPGMDF
VHFMQFHIW DRSD UM QIUSP ZM DMFQGMUWL.  RHW ENQ PRSES LAK OBVHAL.  EYLBV
NQFEDMZQ ZM WIDWXUKN UQPQDHLFV RHDQRFBA ZWHC MRS HIHNALB FU Y
LHLBNCMVSEP HDHCFSE, UECR RCDGY, HN PXUZSK WHVE IASHP ARLHES MHPIXA
QNNMNEPQ PCLABRDHTFHIW.  UPMSE PAQFHNSP UZ IHWBG MWNFNRK UWBRESAR LFSEPB
PMQF LFXUN XUDEYPK UZ LHLBQAHACFXA FHLXHVRSW VMWOUARPB ZM PMY HDHIDALX
WINMHQCFX HAFUDS PQYCNMHDF XQ LHVMQRF, QMFMIC, PMGSA, QPD. MWRYSUDZ IZ
KSSEE XUDFVY RHWC GUEF QZSQYEP UD LA ENGMNBK SHKDODF QNRQBV ZM LA
ENGMNBQ SQ WIUZHRACF QLBPNEQM, UNXV PQBZ, HW PDEFRP ANCTSEKR
FENEPDEFRP ZM ESFSQNS HKFQ RIOCFP HMLVUNQGMUW UD BRHKWNY SSKWE PMHDZQ
NKEX UZ UDRKVODF UZ LFF LCPMDSAP HMLVUPRKR UD PMK HIOCWLF
ZQHSPSMBNLVUZQ BRESARL EWR OEHSCPYSF BUDEV PMQF ARQLSA LHLBNCMVSEB PW
SCUDF IT HKRVURA QLBPNEQMV RHDQRFBX YMGMIMF SAKLUDP FRS HIHNALX.

LUPQC RQPKUVUDF PMQ PYW HEHUENX YYKB PI ZKUA LWBSPB PM ZRS HIHNALX,
PMWHIFM PRS MWBN RAZCHWE YWR WMHTHLSEG DZ URA RKVHESV PNEHRMDX HC PREIOPI
PMK HCFSERAG MG UHLF QA LBROV GUSA HV RKVHESN, VQSWHD UXVHLPCQFKR PMY
PHYSWK KRMGHWUKS FWHRQBV LAC GRS WMKDDF UZ PMK RMWOUARF MVHDF VPUB FQPV
LUPQD HP MEL SQAR QNRQTFKR ZUE HMLVUNQGMUW.  PRQ YXBI ZKLQ YD UXVHLPCQFKR
ZMHN UZ PMK HIOCWLF, MGB VQYCNUEWRESPCHKLKB NEFQLUVMGHKV HR FENGMNMFLW,
LMF QXBI HWNFNKDDF HEMXSAHB ELXHDMQFKR DOPM BRLADUDF UD UVFNBPNEGMUWB,
LAC GRS HUZHCPLARQ UZ UWBRESAR LFSEPB ZM PMQ HKRMDLF HEUZSPVHUW ES
ESPCQNGMUWX HC NHWESQMHIRL, HW UIES PNQAHACFXA, KRMGHWUKXB, SAZBSEB PW
PMY SKDZMEP, HW ZUXVWYHF ESZHCPB.  VRS NBHXKR XQ UDGDGMDF PMQ YINHKWNY
ZM HIUD YLEL UW 1 HOXA, ROAR IHWBZ CEL BRRSNISAC GI ZW ZAFUDY.

                                 


KDBRHLVHUW  KNKDGMUWLF PAQFHNSP UZ IHWBZ 


UD PMA SARPFOE KDBRHLVHUW PMQF ZUXVWYKR SASCUWP HESPSCFQFHIC, FRSPS
ZHUDPB QHSEPKW:

      PMS PTIB FYSM QLA SQ FQUVHWKR EL HLSEX RHVO.

      LFB FRSPS ENGMNBSP UESK L UKUNSE XHUFSK RMWOUARG CAPUDMGHIW.

      WINMHQCFZQHS RKGUDUGMUWV RGCX RSEK RKSASHZKR LAK IDGAR ZM IHWBZ
     ZUC NIWUDZ.

      WU ENGMNBSP DOXV SQ ESUISKN GWHC MRS HIHNALX.  LQRLNPS PMSEQ YES
     WU LQDQ HVLHSP, PMSEQ YES WU XUBP HVLHSP KHPMSE.  UWRQ E LMLBRDHSQW
     XUPV UWZM PMK HIOCWLF RS HW PRS REL QNRQBV WUZ MAFQ ZM ZRS NMWSARFBX
     FHLXHVRSC IQFSEUKXB, LMP CQPWHPHQRGMSKXA ZM KSSEQZMHDF PMQF UEB LYSW
     FHLXHVRSK DD UZ.  BMOB PRS FQLXY HT NUWPQCFV PWHRX VMZVSE.  PMK RQFY
     UZ FHLXMDQFHIR LSESKB PI WHVGMDFOHPR SQZCYSW NHNESCFXA FHLXHVRSW
     UQPQDHLFL EWR UXRKC HQFSEUKXB.

      PMS HDHDMDF XEBPQH ZUC PRS HIHNALS NSPQHLXSP PMQF ZUC HHXM CKRMDLF
     HIHNALXB:  ZUN 1992, 95 PHW Y KQYE, HFNB PASQRIUUODUNQGMUWB RUEDPSP
     PMSEQ YES WU WMWLQRZ BHUQ RUEDPSP    ZUN 1993, 110 PHW PMY
     ARGMES KQEN ZUE PUDFVA HPSEP, PMIOPI PMK HIOCWLF NQC LS HMF UW Y
     XUNQF LESL AQPYWDE FLR.  UWYKSSE, UWXA UWS HSEXHW NLA QNRQBV PMY
     HIHNALF LF Q GMHQ.  VHPQ VURQRLSP UQQ WIUK HC FRS UNFMES.

      YLEL HV YWDEUDT DXUPSXA DOPM WMXVQYFISP QF MWBN ZM KDPHFLX
     UQPMQHQFMDLF QANLGMUWX HR LNCYSW.

      DOPMIOM QIUHEIUHVUDF KWA BPSHV HC FRS KRMGHWUKS FWHRQBV, PMY
     PQRMWUXUZK UEP EKRMNKR PMQ PHUA SKF SQZCYSW DRSA L UQANBRDHTF HV
     HWDIUDLFXA LHTCMGPQN KWR PMQ PHUK HG ML EWBSHPQC GRS ESGDYR HEMWSPB
     WISP WUG CUGPAD PESQFXA PNIU PMS PFQWRENR VOVZMKHPIZ CYSEV
     QHFSWXKR XQ UQWA UZ PMS RENRNHZK OIOCWLFB.  PRS HEMWSPB VGMXV
     RKHSWRX HR FYHFSY.

      EL ULN EL E HESPSELKGMUW WMZE HV WMWNSERAN, KCPMDSAX RUVX LY
     UQUDFQUDKR UW PMQ RIUFHPQE HSEUQRACFXA LAR VMLBRDHSQEP, EL FECP UZ
     PMKHE PMLBRDHTFHIW, DUVS NQRKHSK Q UMDWHGURMQANLVUZQ ENRMDGLF WMZE
     UZ KSSEQZMHDF FHLXHVRSW VHNUDP FUEZ QQYD HA LWVMGHIW, CSHDHCFB RLA
     SQ FHCNUEPSK DC UMNM PRS LEHQ NYK YV HA L UECRWMZE ARGDWHCUARZ.
     UECR WMGHSP ENS HESFEESC VMF ENA RMZ PMS HDHUQWE HQKDOU ZUC PRS
     KDBVQHUDQFHIW UZ FRS UDZUCHQFHIW.

      SQNQHLY HMDQM HV WUZ QQP UW VURA, MG HV KDZLMDNFZ BI YWUR OWY UQWA
     HSHZSA YWNFR VHUFSQ XWHRXQ PREIOPI PMK HIOCWLF UW PMS PNCYSA LB
     HZZHPSC GI WWYAFUYKDDF PMY RMISA PMUDF KWR HEUDGMDF MG IOF Q UHZ WZ
     XMPM ZQHSX HU NPSEP VUEQXA DOXV ESLHBF.

                                 


HSEPUWHOV  RKSASHZHQCFV HC FQRURUXIZX WSKC PRS FEBP RKNQRK  PMQ RFLBV
HEIHQRF  QKGLAFQPKL PHW PQRMWUXUZK LAN GHW PMQ RFLBV HEIHQRZ 
RKSKXUGHDF L AQPYWDE EFFSMDQFHIA LA NWRSEXAUDF KBVOUTFHIW UZ FRS HEIHQRZ
 RKFQUVX HZ FRS BRLADUDF HEMWSPP  HDHCFUWRKUQWR WMGHSP UZ XMIYB 
UNFMES FSLAV HWNFNRK RKSKXUTHARZ MU L SCWYVHDF ZMUX 


XAWLS HSEXHDUHL, ELVHBPLAG CHDQRZMC, NHWRAXV UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZHKL PHW
BRMIFLNSK OAUHWUQGMUW PSDSMDSP, WMCWASF NDUSKEPMGA, ZHDBP WMOBARPQW IW
PMQ PESHQWRIOV HHTQNZ BUEG CKSASHZHQCFV HC FQRURUXIZX WSKC PRS FEBP PQW
KQENLRQPYWDEUDI, DR FENGMNMFLERKLS RKN UW PMY RYK UDZUCHQFHID UB
UEWRSAN, KWR MID, OR USE WYW NELQ, PRSPS RKSKXUTHARPB UESK WMNAPQCSLFLARQW
WMCWASXB ESFLGMSK PKIZNEHRMDLF HVUXQFHIW.  UPMSE VHFDUGMDLAZ BQRURUXIZHKB
UDNBINS PNQWLSEX, RMHRM ENQ HMNM UHWS PHZMHBPMDQFKR PMLA PMQK RYES PQW AQYEP
KFI UELB VZMNEPK LAC GRS RCQUQFMD LEGDDFB PUEP CSPNFF ZWHU HG MC FSEHB UZ
XMPM PHQNQ YWR UIRAE WASQFDGQ PM ZRYCFX WC PMHCPX ZQYEP KFU WYR LAW
HUHEIXKR HEUDGMDF PQRMWUXUIDSP, ROMDO SKLK PESQFXA LUPAQMKR PMK RHVPCMVMFHIW
UZ UDZUCHQFHIA LWR, UZ WMHNPS, KDIDFQB FQRURUXIZHKX, RMIPS EFFSMDQLUVMGQ ZW
VUSCENE ZESPSDSQFHIW CQHKURL QF HVLHY.

IDSKC FUEM QUWPQBZ, HSEPUWHOV RSPNCMVKR PMQ RUXSAPK VUSCENK YWBSPL EWR
BPHWKFS PEXPQC QFLBV HEIHQRF, Q VUSCENE ZESPSDSQFHIR FWHHKQM,
HEHUENUVK, YWR ROQF UEB LYSA LWBIUFSHVRSW.  VHDQRFBA ZNARKC VQ ZRS
WMOBHVVHUW UW HESPSELKGMUW LAN KWBSPL EWR XQ PMY SSEWZ WMEHHWQFHIW, DMHRM
UEP HWHGDRKN K VHFDUGMDLAF QUINAZ MP UENRDENQ, PRS NBELP HWHHKQM UEB LYSW
YWDEUDZ DMGU E RKSKXUTHARZ BQYU QZ BSEWZ ZM RKSKXUF E XHZFNYES
EFFSMDQFHIC FKUXUESC GU XMVNEWE HESPSELKGMUW ESAMHDQHARPB.  DOPMUD
WMCWASS, FENGMDMFECFV HC FRS HEIHQRP MKLQ SYSW DHWVDDF HIUDFBX YMGM SMZO
VUSCENK YWR UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZHKB.  PRS ZUNMX HZ FRS HEIHQRP MEL SQAR
UW ESZUCHQFGMDF LAR VKLUDT VWZEV PMQF ENK HC LDHZBSA WMWRMGHIW.
HSEPUWHOB VMIRYR DHWEVMIZ SENGMDMFECFL E SCMGFBQ SWZE, YWR RKBRDHSQR IWY
LHRM XMIYX RSEQ PRS ESLHBF UZ RKSKXUTHARPB UD FEHSCHYEUDF KWHNAC GRS
SQIDWLUDZ IZ FRS UDNIBPDHLF ESXIFNGMUW.  PMS HEFSEUQVDDF HEMWSPX REL
RMLAPKR VM ZUEF Q VHFDUGMDLAF QUINAZ MU LDMR DEL UDPCIWMNKR UDZM PMY
QNFMLF FEHSD HPBASZ, NMHRM RKPQDHHWQFSP EL MG VHPB UW VUSCENE XRSXSSP.

UWY HZ FRS KNLKCFKFSP ZUC PQRURUXIZK YWR ZUC PRS NBELP HWHHKQM HV PMQF
PMK HAUHWUQGMUW UD SCMGFBQ SWZEV HV UIBPXA IOZ MT NHZEWDIMP LAC GMOB
UZPAEP LA HZZHCPNAMGQ ZW YHWY DMGM UQFSEUKB FUEP CQAOHESB XMVNEWE
HESPSELKGMUW, LAC GM WESQFQ YWR YWDE UW LA UDPNELPCMNFMES ZM LESK PMY
UQPQDHLF.  QNADWYSAKIUDP FRS ULUHVUENMGX WZ FMIPS YWDEUDI DR FESPSDSQFHIW
DOPM PMHV UDZUCHQFHIR, FSEXHDUHL WUPQC GUEP BKSSELF PMUDPV ENQ SKHDF
WIRA:  PMS HDHUQWE HESPSELKGMUW PQRMWUXUZK HLKR ZMNKK OP HMIZMWMZEUDZ IZ
SCMGFBQ HQFSEUKX.  BKLUDP FRS UDPQXVQRFMLF WMCFARZ MZ FRS UQPQDHLF HV PMY
UQUD ZILF.  DOPM UHNCUZUVC QHZQ, ZRS UDPQXVQRFMLF WMCFARG MP HESPSDSKR UW
PMQ YBVOUTFHIC FUEG MC FRS UNFMES PMK HUQPK NQC LS EAPHWUQZBKR UD LAX
MZRSC DYK PMQF PMAR YSHVPB.

LA NARKNSKODF ELLHHTGMUW UZ PMQ RFLBV HEIHQRF ZWHC MRS SQIDWLUDZ DEL
PMQF MG YWNFW VKSASHZ L AQPYWDE EFFSMDQFHIR.  FWHHKQM BPLUP LNQC LWZEV
QF Y NHWEVFQGMUW XUNQPQK DC FRS VUSCENA, WQYC PRS SCMGFBQ HQFSEUKX.
LA HUKFSPSESKN PUVUDP VEXPQU HB XMWQFKR QF K NHVFQWNA PWHC MUEZ
YWDEBPQFHIA, LWR E FDHCFSE HV XUNQPQK DA LWUPMSE LMUVKDDF.  LFX UZ FRS
UQPQDHLFV RDIMGOGKR LAR VZMESW IC FRS HUKFAPUVUDP VEXPQU QES NQFQXUPKW
UD PMY HAFUDQ RQFLFIZHA.  UD ULQM, E NQRHWN GHW QYRM UZ PMSPY SSAQMWHDUW
XMIYV HB VZMESK DC FRS NSUD NKFQLQPS XH PMQF E NQRHWR KVOBPX HZ NUEG MB
UD PMK RDIMGLF VUSCENQ ZREIOPIIOP BFQWRENR NQFLFIZHA HEMWKRHNSP.  UD PMY
UNFMES, ESPSENRMSEX RHWVDDF PNIU PMKHW HDW YWDEBPQFHIRL UD PMKHW HZLMDSP,
HW PMKHC WQPYWDEX, RUVS UKLQ YWBSPXRRSESSKC PRSQ ODIMP SQPMWHIFU E
ESAMSPP BSESKC SKHDF LMUVG MCFM ZRS RAD RDIMGLF VUSCENK.  Y PSWMWR
ELLHHTGMUW HV PMQF PMS HESPAWSKR HQLAX HZ LUDKDDF PMQ HQFSEUKX NUVX LQ SX
XUIYUDP FREIOPI Q NQFLFIZHA.  HSEPUWHOV RSPNCMVKR PMS PNQWLUDP TWHRQBV,
ROMDM OPSL E HEMZMZEZS PNQWLSE SQUDI KKSASHZKR XQ SYWHL YWR ROMDR PNQRL Y
SKWE MHPI ESXHFNGMUW HUKFQ YF PESQF PHYSN.  KWUPMSE VHFDUGMDLAF ZQYFMES,
SQNQHLQ PMHV HL E HESPSELKGMUW EFFSMDQFHID, UB PRS FSQNUDZ IZ FRS FEPKB
PMQF ULXV EFENZ MRA ZUW HRA UW PMS HFLPQW.  UCRUDENUVK, Y BRLARAC NIOVN
SQ HLKR DOPM XHHQ XHCP UZ K NMWOUARF ZYSRKC, SMF SQNQHLY HZ FMHB
EFFSMDQFHIC FUEG ML RMZ PAELMVSA.  UNCPRSC, SQRLNPS NBELV HL E
HESPSELKGMUW EFFSMDQFHIA, LZFSE PMS HEFSE ESFSQNQHARG MB HKNQ PRSES, Y
SKWE NQESUNB ANLVUZQ WMCFWHB NRSDQ HV HSNPHWHQN.  KW UDHIDALX LWZV DB
WMHTENKR ZM PMS HDHCFKR WMZE LAK GSEUGMDQFHID UB HKNQ, SAPHWS HWHRQKRUDZ,
PMQF LFX UZ FRS HUKFQ, YXV UZ PMK HAUHWUQGMUW, UEB LYSW NEFFMESC.  GRSW,
L AYR VUSCENQ XWZV DP HWHNIRQC:  GRS HEUDPQK DUQPKL EES ESXMNAC VK Y
WMOBSEDMLF VMWRSE LAN K RAC XWZV DP EQPHNRAC GM ZRS PRASZ.
VHFDUGMDLAFBQ, ZRS XMIYP EQPHNRAC GM ZRS VUSCENE XRSXSSP ENQ SQYMFUGNF
LAN IPSUNS NSHFLRQHQCFX HA LDMNGESS HEFSE PMQF PRIOVN FLBP L FUWP FHUY,
UD APPAQM, PMY SAMDGLFARZ MZ TESPSDSQFHIR FMIZMWMGHSP.  PMHL, PMS HWHHKQM
UEL E VUSCENX WG NDIMGLF XMIYV.  HR ABVARRQ, NBELV HB VNQWLUDF KWR
BPHWUDT VWZEV EL 600 WIFTSEUDRM VMMCEFHSK DUQPKB, RIUHESPPSN IVHDF
PDIOT 4 RDMZB H.K., PMA PESWNU ENCUWQO ZUD HCFSEALGMUWLF WMRLNFFQGMSK
WMOBMGPQA PHW PQSAPDEFU EWR PQSAHRUWQ RIUHESPVHUW.  PMQK ENS PZMESN KB
GMZL GUSAX HA LW UTFMDLF GUVUDF XEBPQH PMQF HV WMHTHXKR UZ K NQFQLELY
HLKR ZUE PQYCNMHDF LAN VMWQFUDP FRS XMIYL EWR LA HZGMNQV UIAQSWZ PMQF
BPHWSP 64 ZCASSKUDRM FSQFPQEP.  K LSEEODIRESPUXMFHIR FDHCFKR WMZE UZ
PMSPQ SWZEV QF 600 WIPB HSD HWNM HB RESQFKR, HLUDF K SYWHV WMWMFQRO
HEUDPQC PI UYEQ PRS FEHSW SSHFLRQHQCFX HA LDMNGESS HEFSE.

HSEPUWHOB HKUCFKURAC GUEZ BRS NBELP HWHHKQM HESPARPB LA HZZHCPNAMGQ ZW
UDPCIWMNS HYHFSQ PM XWZEV EL KDIDFQV UUQPKB LA OVHDF E FEFSE HQKDOU.
XMIYL EES ESFMCWKR ZM PMS PRSXSSP ROUVS HYHFSQ YES LFXH IDSKC FRS QLUVMGX
ZM HEUDZ MW RQHLACGI UYEQ PRSHD WYW NHZHKX HT LWZEV.  HSEPUWHOB
KDBPDHLMPQR NHZHKX HU LR ADFUDYSDHDF HIHNALS FMLVUPRKR XQ ARIDRASEUDZ
BPINARPB QF WMCWASF LWHNAN 1900 KL ER ALYHTSA UZ ROQF E FDHCFUWRKUQWR
WMZE UZ UQPQDHLF UHPIM TA SDVQ.  PMHB SSEQ WRSEF WMZE YWNFC VQ YLKUVQLSA
ZM HSHZSA ZM HLA PHW PMKHW HDW ESPSENRM FHEHHXSP LAR DIOVN SCDKPK PMK PEF
SQZCYSA LR ASAQMWHDUN DHWE YWR PMS HEFSE PMQF ESKNSEB XDVQ PI MKLY.
HSEPUWHOB PRSA LZBQHTFKR ZM UVFNBPNEPQ K LSEK QENXA HEMZMZEZY HZ
RAZCHWEQN KWBSPB PM ZMHV RDIMGLF VUSCENX.  ZSEWZ WMEHHWQFHIR UEL
RKSKXUHSN K HEMZMZEZY HU L GDYR BPQFHIC FUEM QLA PSWR HUKFSP QNWHBV PMY
RAZCHWQ GM XK SHKRYW.

PMS HENGMNMFLN SMVNEWE SCIOPIG CWYA UHW RKUIRLPCQFHIW NUWFQUDKR ZCW
UQPMQHQFMDB LWZEV.  NBELV HV RKSASHZUDF KWR DOXV PHARC GRS RABZ KQEN
RKSKXUGHDF LA EFFSMDQFHIC FUEF QXVWYP HYHFSQ YZ CHWEVFQGMUWB PM XWHRXY
PMQ SWZEV.  PMHL, NBELV HV RKSASHZUDF K SCWYVHDF ZMUX, UW PMQ YBVOUTFHIW
PMQF HLSEV RU WMZ NYCF ZM ESKN LA ARGMES XMIY PNIU Y NHWEVFQGMUW, LMZ
YWNFR GESPAC PM XQ YLXQ PU XWZQ GREIOPI LAW VQRDKK HZ FRSX YIOVN VUEQ ZM
UESK E FDHCFKR WMZE UZ MG.

                                 


KDBRHLVHUW  ES ESPCHKLKX BUZZCENK  "RDIMGLF GUSA WMZEDHPIP"  BNQWLUDZ
NEPQ NIDHDF HEIWMNGMUW  LNZMPSTIARFQGMUW  NCMGSEUK QHFSWXKR UD
PSSAQMUDT VWZEV ZUE PNQWLUDT  DIUHESPVHUW LAW VQRIUHESPVHUW UZ HUKFSP 
MWC WMZ HEQRFNRKW 


NIDHDF PMQ AHABPHIALWRLAXRSE HSDHIW PMQF ZUXVWYKR RSE HESPSCFQFHIW,
HSEPUWHOB HKNQ PRSPS KNKDGMUWLF ZHUDPB:

      ES ESPCHKLKX BUZZCENQ, RHWRAXV HV RKSKXUGHDF L NDUVLELKR PSDSSE
     EL RYXV EL NBHKCFL PHW PMS PSESKC PUEP BHFZHCP UOBFHGSA FSQFZUCHB
     UQDMCFHXM, HTC LAR VNA YWDEBPQFHIRL, UD PMS RHZQ PUEF TYHFSA PWHO
     LAX WZ FMIPS FSQFZUCHX RUVS NQPDHKSQ SWZEV L UHNPMSE HZSEQFUDZ
     ELLHHTGMUW HV PMQF BPLANKCR UDPQNPQNSP DOXV SQ HLKR EL UORM EL
     ZHBVMVSA, ROSES PFQWRENRV NQC LS HMF UD FSQNQ, SQRLNPS NBELB
     WMRLDKSEB PMHP EQPDHKSLF XHZFNYES L FMVNEWE EFFSMDQFHIA LWR YWNFW
     VUEQ ZM SQ QLSA ZM XUIY QF UQPQDHLF WUZ MAFK YM QHWRAXV LMF QZ MPMSE
     UDBPMGMFHIRL.

      PMS HREELK "RDIMGLF GUSA WMZEDHPIM TQ WHWRAXV NADGSEVHZQ" NYB
     KNRKN KZ BRS KNGDRQ UZ WMCWASXB SAFKX BFQZL DOPM PMQ RKLQYZ BUEG MZ
     HEMXQLXA YWNFR WMZ MIVN HF UD WMHNM.  QHWRAXV WISP WUZ CLAF TYHFSY
     ZM WMZE MGB LWZEV LAR VASB FRSC TMF YWNFN VDVQ PI YYST FRSO
     KLKUFLLXA PHW HLK HA L VUSCENK QDLHDUWHQCF ZUN SMVNEWE FHEHHXSP.

      UD HEIWMNGMUW PMS PNQWLSE NQR LNQA LXMMF 300 FEPKP HSE MIHN,
     NQTFHNUDI 600 KMZP HSE UDRM.

      PMY SSEWZ XHZFNYES UEL PUVPQEP ZM BRLA UEFUZMRA UQPQDHLF LAN KXIDK
     PMQ HIHES FEZBSERL PMQF MWNMC DRSR ULFZFUWQ HQFSEUKV UB VNQWLKR.
     SYWHS OEL SQAR YWDEUDZ IR UENRDENQ YWR XHZFNYES PMQF YWNFR KALLXY
     PMS PNQWLSE MGPSFU ZM ESWMFDOGQ PMHB VMGNLGMUW LAW VQYX NMGM HZ
     EFHEHZDHQFASKY VDWR UZ LNZMPSTIARFQGMUW PMQF YWNFR KALLXQ PRS
     BRLARAC PI MLANVS RLFZFUWQ HQFSEUKF LX RASF LB PYSZ MA L VHDFSA FEPK.

      PMQ SWZEV LHVMQRPQC GM ZRS ASQLHWQFS HWHRQBV RKBRDHSQN KXMSK RYES
     PSSAQMKR SQNQHLQ RFLBV HV E FESPSDSQFHIR FWHHKQM, DOPM PMA PHDBP 500
     XMIYB VASQRPQR NIUUDP ZWHC QHWRAXVB HQFRSUQGMRB WMXVQRGMUW, SQNQHLY
     PMQK RYES BPUVX LKHDF RSKLUVA OPSN KWR SQNQHLQ, YBFMIIFM PRSX YSEY
     UD RAKR UZ HESPSELKGMUW, PMQ HQFRSUQGMRB VUSCENK YWR PMQ HQFRSUQGMRB
     ULNMBFX YSEA HWNIUZUCPQLSA UEGDDF PMQH UHNCUZUVHQC.  GRSX YLAPQN K
     HEUDPQR NHZQ.  ZMOB, PRSPS XMIYB LQRQUQ Y XUIDNQB NMIMDA PHW PMHV
     HEIHQRZ.  MPMSE XMIYX RSEQ RMIPSC LQ ZRS HEIHQRPB PSSAQMHIW NIUUHZBYSB
     ZUE SSZSEHUARPB DOPM PMQ PQRURUXIZK, YX RASF LB PI UYSF Q RKUQWR HW RAKR.

      HUKFSP DOXV SQ RKWMHTESBVKR SQZUES PMQK ENS PARZ MSKC PRS VURA QF
     PMHV GMHQ PMQK ENQ RIUHESPPSN KWR PSCF ZM PMK HUQPK GUVUDF XEBPQH
     LAC GRSR LARZ BM ZRS HEUDPQN EB RIUHESPPSK DUQPKB PRSK YES ESFMCWKR
     ZM PMY RHWEVFQGMUW EL WMHTESBVKR 600RGO VUQPKL EWR PMY RHWEVFQGMUW
     RKWMHTESBVSP LAR VNQSAB PRSU THW KDPHFLKYD URAZLMDHKCF NYQ ZW
     QNRQBV PMQ HQFSEUKB FMIIFM HZ CHWEV AMMGY RASF UHW HEUDGMDF LAW
     MZRSE HHNZHPSB.

      NBELV HL EXBI WQRIUHESPVHDF UW UQDMCFHXU EWR MVU, Q BXWY HEMWSPB
     DHPIF CWY.  KSARFMLFXA, WMHTESBVHIA LWR RKWMHTESBVHIW DUVB FYEY
     FSQNY HA LD UUQPK WMDLSEVHUW PSDSSE.  PCKNYHZLX RUVX LQ HKNQ, SELKR
     UW UNFMES HSNPHWUQWNQ PSPGMDF, WMWNSEDUDF ROSEQ PRS GUSA HV
     WMHTESBVKR LAR DUEP CSPUXMFHID UUQPK HV PSCF.

      MWE REL WUM TYSR FESNBINKR HUKFSP ENQ SKHDF BPHWKR PMQF UESK SQAR
     BRLARAN KF Q MHPI ESXHFNGMUW, ROMDR HESLHUQLXX YIOVN LHMG PMQH RYXV
     ZM LA MWE HWHRQBV.  SQNQHLQ PRS UQPQDHLF SQUDP VNQWLKR HV QLIOZ 100
     KQENX HVN LAR DEL HEUDPQR DMGU SSPBPUEDURKLF PQRMWUXUIDSP, SKWE
     QYNSK YWR HEASHUUDENQ ZSPPB UESK WUF TWHNIRQK IWZR CSPNFPB.  LMZ BRS
     HEIHQRG MB REFFMDHDF LA HUKFQ PUEG MX HP LNUGUDMARP CSPUXMFHIC FM XY
     LHVMQRPQC GW ZNC UD PMA PMFHNQ.  HHWYHSKC, PRS XEBPQH ENRMMGQRFMES
     LAC GRS XEBPQH FSLA UESK L FIZMDLF FSQNQ PH XZMES LA MWD HUQPK UG MG
     UEB LYSW NEFFMESC.  VMF PMQF HV WUM TKHDF WIRA WUY.

                                 

PSBVHID UOV.  KDBPDHLMGMUW, RAZCHWEV, LAR WQPYWDEUDZ:  ITFHIRL ZUW
KDBVQHUDQFHIW


GORM  HVLHSP HSCPKUDUDF ZM NRWHHB  HZGMUWL PHW FHLXHVMHDF UD NRWHO 


WHSQCP GORM, PHQRUKF LBVHVFQCF ZM PMQ YBVMWUKPQ VUSCENUKA UHW PHQRUKX
HEIHQRPB, VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPL, EWR UIRKNEZMW HZ FMHB VSPVHUW, GUEPF CMZKR
PMQ SSABVKR LMP BIUYRUEF QDYNYCR DMCNOUBPLARQ UZ UEGDDF ZUHN SKWE
KDBPUDFIHVRSR GYHFSS ESHESPSCFUDF DQPYWDEL EWR RAZCHWVDDF HW QF SAELZ
SALAUDI DC FUEG CHDQRGMUW, ROUVA SQNVDDF LAXWRA ZM PHQYA GWHC MRS
BPWHDFSPF THXVHLXQ SQNVIWHNAK DW NRCIUX.  PMDR SSZESBVKR PMS RHZQ PUEZ
HQCTSEX HZ FRS LNKDARRQ YWNFK DIHC FRS KDBRHLVHUW.  RS BPESBVKR PMY
LHTMMGSA UZ PMHV FECPMDNFEN PSBVHIW, "UTFHIRL ZUC RHVPSUHALGMUW," LAW,
WMWNSEDUDF NRWHHB, PMK HHTHWFQWNY HG NQPSEUHDUDF ROAR MG YWNFC VY RHVY
ZM WMRLDKSE KDBVQHUDQFHID UW NRCIU SKEPHL RAZCHWEV.  E LMIZSUDF VHVZ MZ
HVLHSP HSCPKUDUDF ZM NRWHHB UDNBINKR:  PMK PWHNARV ZUE PASQRGMDF
WMOBSEDMLF FHLXHVRSEP, LAK DRUIOPS FHLXMDQFHIW DRSES ZHBVMVSA SKEPHL
WURFWHGUZ MD PIXSECUARF TMLVUNQGMUW.  E LHUUVEN VUBP ZUC WQPYWDEB
UDNBINKR:  RKPQCHUDUDZ DRSW URA PRIOVN WMRLDKSE KDBVQHUDQFHIC FREIOPI Y
RAZCHWV, DRKCFUGKODF PMQ HQRUEDUBHX HE SCFMGHKB PUEP QVOBP ZM FSQNK HPQHB
UW RAZCHWEV, DKARGMZAUDP FRS ZHUX UZ YSHVGMDF RAZCHWEV, RKPQCHUDUDP IWY Y
HEIWMNSE  YWNFR NMIHXQ SQPRYAR RAZCHWEV, LAK DRKCFUGKODF PMY SSAHQCFX HZ
Q LHLUDSPL EWSLAPKHQCF UD L AQPYWDE.

HZGMUWL PHW FHLXHVMHDF UD NRWHU:  QW UMFVHRK FHLXHVRSD SSELHB
PSFUFHLXMDQFHID.  UU LW UMFVHRK FHLXHVRSD HL HPSK, DM QLA SQ WURFWHGUZ,
LHRM EL PMK PIXSECUARF TDHCFUDZ IZLMDK PZH HW PMA RQFHIALB FQRURMDLF
UDZUCHQFHIR LSEGDRQ CFHV, UD PMQ RELY HZ PIXSECUARZ.  BRS HEHX LAR NUWB
ELXHDMQFKR DOPM QHFSWXUDF KW UMFVHRK FHLXHVRSN EES MXGDIOL.  EUIDF PMY
HEHX, PMSEK HL RM ZWHMLSA PKZBUDF KWBSHPQW.  IRA FEEX PMQ SUVF LWR, UD
APPAQM, ZISP UWSP NYK.  YUIDF PMQ RUWX, RRSW URA FEEX LA IOPBDKY
FHLXHVRSC PH ZSEZUCH PMY RHWQ, GUEF TMLVUPRSE DOXV HSNPHWC MRS YWDE MG HV
MXVUPKC GI WM, XMF HSEREFX RMGMIMF PMS HWHNIQMHIR ASZSEGMPS LAR VVDXV UD
UQDEQPUDF KWR KDBVQHUDQFHIC FUEP BIUY RIOVN PSQE.  PMSEK HB PRS XMWK UZ
WMOBSEDMLF FHLXHVRSEP PMQF WI ZHBVSPB PUEG QUDW IP ASZSEGMPS UD
KDBPDHLMGMUW LAC IENEQGMDF LMZ BUEZ MLSHIHLXA ENS PASQRGMSK.  UD
PSFUFHLXMDQFHIW, URA YSSEDMPSL PNFB NUWPCUX, LMZ BRSW URA UOBP UEWRSA
UQZBSEB VMNU EV RHVPCMVMFHIA LWR UQDEQPUDP.  VMNU EES XHHQ UZ PMY HTFHIRL
ZUE HMLVUPRUDI DC FRS NQPS UZ NRWHO.

UD PMQ RELY HZ FQRURMDLF LAW VSPDID UBVHAX, RMHRM ENQ YXBI HHTHWFQCF,
PMSEQ YES UQWA UQZBSEX RMHRM UQWA QF PMY RHWEVMIF ESNQYWK ADYR K FWZW
RKLF QLIOP:  CQPDHKSLF XEBPQH ESAMHDQHARPB LAR NHXPB, ROQF ZM WI QLIOZ
HUKFSP, PMK SENHIHL NQFEVMVUGMSP LAR GFLFZHWHB, PMQ PNERKUZPL SQZCYSW
WMBP LAR GSEZUCHLARQ, WMWNSERL QLIOF BMWLFENQY RAZCHWEYVMVUZQ,
UDPQWHHSNEVMVUZQ, QPW.

                                 


XAWNM  RESQFUDF DQPYWDEKR UDZUCHQFHID UV RUGPAESCF PNIU HLUDF DQPYWDEB
EL LA QNRQBV HW KDBVQHUDQFHID LSRMDSA  RAZCHWEQC INFGMHQKDY UA L FLDPY
BRLFK RHYL RMZ KQZ CHWQ  GEZMDLF NRWHH TMLVUNQGMUW UIRKF L ZCHYKIKR
XRHWR  GMLVUPRUDI DAUHWUQGMUW UW Q NRCIU UD PMS HESPSCF YWNSW IZ
HUUQFMES BPLANKCRB  RUWPCELM TQPRYAR NRWHU QWR RAZCHWE GDHDMDF 
YSQUFSSP RKUIRLPCQFKR QYNSHKD HC FRS NKK YL E PSZ MG URLNFEN UDZUCHQFHIW
PKHB  FENEUINAF CYSC GU XUDV KQFQLELSP  FLKQDHDF ZM SQWMHQ UDNCQYVHDFXA
RARQBVENE  ZWHHKQM RAKRL EWR PMK HBVHAX HG UAUHWUQGMUW ESHLQ YWR QNGMSK
SKEPHL FEBVDGA HPS  ZYUDWIRX EL Y NYK UZ KDZLSEARGMQFUDT VQPRYAR
RAZCHWE YWBSPL EWR RAZCHWEQK DAUHWUQGMUW  LQWSHKEP ZM PMK RHVPCMVMFHIW
UZ RAZCHWEQC INFGMHQKDK UAUHWUQGMUW  RAKR ZUD PWZR, CQYBFHUK RASDGSEX
HEMZMWUXB  PRS AMSPGMUW UZ HESPARFQGMUW UDPQPDMGK OW NVUARPBSESKW
WMHTMFUDI DC FRS QNKNQHMD YWNSR  CQRIUHQWRQFHIRL ZUE HWHNIDMDF UOBFHUKRUK


NBUGZUCR XAWNI, RHDQRZMN, SMVNEWE LNZMUQGMUW, NADGSEVHZQ UZ NQVUZUCWUK,
HZARKR MHB PLFY DMGM PRS PKRANEX ULBSELKGMUW PMQF RAZCHWEQK DAUHWUQGMUW
WMRLGMFMPQN K KDZLMDNFF QWR ASHLDGQ PHZMD SQNQHLK HG MB VIUQPMHDF HOBP
BPENGMDF ZM RKSKXUF EWR WUZ QQP UNXVA OWRSEBPWZN.  VAWRM WMCFARRKC GUEZ
NCQYGMDF PKANUDASA WQPYWDEKR UDZUCHQFHIW DEL KDZLSEARF ZWHU OVHDF
RAZCHWEV EL LA QNRQBV HW KDBVQHUDQFHID LSRMDSA LAR DEL UIES XHHRHVGMNQPQW
LAC IHWS PMLFBS.  RK HDLMGKR PMQ HQHSQEP UZ PMQ YINHKWNQ PH YBZNEZHFLPQ,
PNIU ROQF PMQK RSENN KXMMF PMS HESRQKDDF RKUIRLPCQFHIR FWHHKQMB, PW YUEZ
XHCP UZ Y NHWVN UZ ASQRPCUWMDV HAUHWUQGMUWBRMIFLNSK, YCNMHLKX,
NMBFHNLF, QPQ.MRSX YHVRSC GH YWR HF DOPM PQW UN PUGPQAR KQENL PWHU CWY.
XAWNR PIFPKBPKR PMQF ZM YSPCEFUXQFK RHDQRFBA ZWHC MRSPS HEIHQRPB YWNFW
HEIWMNA HRFSAELLAP CSPNFPB.

FHZBUDP FRS HVLHY HT NRCIU UD HSEPHSQMDGQ SAPHWK PQPGMDF UDZM
PKRANEVUGMSP UW RAZCHWEQK DAUHWUQGMUW, XAWNM ILBSESKC GUEZ BMIPS ARFKPKW
UD UOBFHUKRUK ZMNKX YMI DOPR ZM PRHG E FWHNIQM, XH ZM LEE, ZWHLQLXK WW
WUP MKLQ HMNM RMIMDY SBWSHZ BI OPS NRWHU:  CQPYWDEKR UOBFHUKRUK UW Y
FLDPS PNQSA LQVHNQXVK WHYL RMZ KQZ CHWQ VQRLNPS PMQ PQRURUXIZK WHYL RMZ
YSHVF.  ZHW YSQUFSQ, YWAXMWK ROI MEL PCHKC IIXUDI DUQPKL EWHNAW ISKC PRS
UDPQCWQP ADWYB PUEZ BMHV HL ER ABWMGUDP FIORMLAKIH ZWHRQBV, Y
ULBRUDQFUDF KWR PACPUVQ YESL UHW YSHSDHHQCFQFHIW, CSPQYCNU, EWR
RKSKXUTHARM, TMF WUP BIUQPMHDF PMQF UWQ RLA SQWMHQ RKSHXA ARPMHLUKBPMD
QLIOM QIUUHZBUDP FH ZWHNIQMHIR LEXPQHB QF PMHV GMHQ.

PMHV VHFMQFHIW DUVB NUEDFA, SAWRM LEDK.  RS KDZLSEARGMQFKR NRWHU TWHO
PMS HNEQMMDSP PMQF UESK SQAR ZUXVWYKR HF ZM WUD OW RHVPCMVMFUDI KQFY UW
NRWHU.  THW XAWNM PRS HEMXSAO CMGM RRCIU HV WUG MPB ZHCPQLUVMGX WD HPB
BXWYRABV LMZ BRS ZCHYKIKR XRHWW IP UKLUDP FRS ESPCHKLKF LZSVUNQGMUW LAW
PMA HPSD HCFSEULRQ UDYSPCMDQLXA XMNAN IZ RMGM PRS NKFQ, ROMDM HB PRS
ZQGHNQB NRCIU FHLXMDQFHIC UIWAS.  MG HV WUF Q NQPS UZ FHLXHVMHDF NKFQ
LMZ MG NHVPCMVMFUDF K ZQGHNQXVE XFQWRLFUWQ, PEZMDLFXA NBHXKR XEBPQH,
LFXBUZZCENA, HPSD HCFSEULRQ, LAW VQFYUA L VUZBSA KDVE.  RSWNQ, YXV
PMQ SQPRYARKDVE ALGDFKGMUWLF HVLHSP EL RYXV EL PMK HHTHXVHVMVUZQ UD UIBP
NQPSX HG UCFKPNEGMDF NKFQ UW UWK RHVY DMGM PUEZ MA LWUPMSE.  UIBP NRWHO
ESPCHKLKX BUZZCENK RHYL RMZ RAZCHWV GSEK ZNERQUNXVK YF TESPSCF.  MIRYSKW,
UD PMS HESPSCF YWNSW IG UOBQFHNS PFQWRENRV LAN VQNY IU NWRSEBPLAKDDF UZ
ROQF RAZCHWV DAUHWUQGMUW HV HW ROQF PMK PWHNAR CNFSP ENA PHW NCQYGMDF HW
HLUDI DF, TMLVUPRUDI DAUHWUQGMUW UW Q NRCIU WISP KNK GLFHA UD K LSEX
ESLF PSRLY.

XAWNI RESN Y WMCFNEBP SQZCYSW NRCIU LAR WQPYWDE HEMDUDF KWR UD WIUDP VW
MHPIVUPIPQR VIUQPMHDF VMFYWSK HD UAUHWUQGMUW HEMDUDF.  K FLDPY
UDBPMGMFHIR LMNU EB PRS NADGSEVHZQ UZ NQVUZUCWUK UEB SARWIEP ROW YUVX
UZPAC PH XASV UAUHWUQGMUW UW NRWHU THW E FDHRQ HSW EQYD HA UIOC RDIMGB,
LMF ZHW PMS PQUK RQFY Q.F., KA LLBPCQNGMDF LAK DWRYSUDI KQFQLELY HW
UQFDQPMD FQHS, ESFKCRSABV UZ MIC OLAE ZYHFSQ HYK HLK HM QUWNMWSARFBX,
DOXV AMMZQ Y HEMDK HR LOV KDIDPB.

ROQF HV FEDQKFKR DOPM PMQ RRCIU UD UWS PARPS KNRV LKFNQY WMHTSAPQ
QNRQBV XEBPQH, WUG MHLP CYN, NAESGURAK DAUHWUQGMUWLFPMIOPI MG HV WUZ
PKRANEXVE ZSERQDGKR PMQF NYQ.  ZMHV HB LQRLNPS PMQ YWBSPB VUZZCENY,
LFPMIOPI MG KNRV LKFNK, HB SHKRYC VE XIUS HYHFSS, HENGMNMFLNSK OC FRS
NADGSEVHZQ ARGDWHCUARZ CRSES PMSEK HL E SKWE RSKLQ WIUUHMCARZ BW
RAZCHWVDDF, EL SQUDI KKSASHZKR UD PMY RWHDF KDESQMHIW.

IDSKC FUEM QUWPQBZ, XAWNI RSPNCMVKR PMY SLYHTSAV RQHUWBPNEPQN KL E PSZ MZ
UDLHFLD HAUHWUQGMUW PKHBHSEPAHL, PHW YSQUFSY, HZLSEL RMDASA XUDEQW
UDZUCHQFHIC, LMF YWNFC VK SSEK WUGGUNMBF ZM UDPQPDQFY RMGM IPMSE
NKFQLQPSB, PUEG MB, PU XUDQ GIZQPRSE PQYUBSPBXX YMGM IPMSE XHHNRQ GUSAB
PNIU MZRSE PIOCNSP.  MG ESPSCTSAL ED UBXLAN, KWR UD PMHV ESPHQRG MB
VHUHFLC PU WOUSEIOB VFQWRLFUWS HWHHKQMB PUEF QES LQPSW ID LDKYHKDBRB,
PMQF HV, UW PMS PUDFVYRHWEVFQGMUW WMWNSHZ.

EL BRMIFLEPMHH SXIXSSP UD L AQPYWDE ARGDWHCUARZ, BRS FENEUINAF CYSR DUVX
SQ ZM VUDA NKFQLQPSX.  RQ HHLF BUDE GSEXHALV NQFQLELSP ZM FHLXMD
NKFQLQPSB, PI ZWHHF NKFQLQPSV, HA UKUNSE XQYUBSPX RYKXRMHRM HV
YSPCQHASK WUGGUNMBF UD PMY SDLHDUWHQCFL HWRSE KDBRHLVHUW DOPM WMGHSP UZ
NKFQLQPSP HWHVUPANEGMDF LFX USKC PRS FSQNY.

PMA RMZHIW UU FYKSEUDF KXBH XPCMNA VAWRM EL FNDEUDI DR LKSSELF UZ PMY
HEIHQRPB RKUIRLPCQFKR.  PSSKNEV NQFQLELSP UD E LARPS WMRLGMFMPQ
UDZUCHQFHIA LCNMHSKX RMGMIMF E LDIDUGUNQCF QUIOCF UZ ALGDFKGMUW LMUVG MW.
KRMNQFHWB, RDHGMRB, LAW IPMSEX RUVX NLAF Q FLKQESR VPCMNFMESUWQ PUEZ
RKGURAX HN SUDEV FEPMB PREIOPI PMA SYKSEB PU YXVWY HLSEB PH WQYRM
PHQRUGMD ZHUDPB.  UD XAWNRP GDYR, FLKQDHDF DOXV SQWMHQ UDNCQYVHDFXA
RARQBVENK, YWR WUG MHLZ CMGMHA L VHDFSA ESXHHNRQ LMF QNCHXP ESPIOCNSP
K.P., PCQNUDT IQZMIXUZK LAR NNFFMNEB FRSHQL ENCHXB VKSSELF NBELVHRB
NKFQLQPSL EX RASF LL E NKFQLQPS UZ ESALHVLEWNQ RNFFMES.  PMHV QLUVMGQ ZW
HWFKDUPY ESXHHNRQB, PM XOHVN PMUDPV IOZ MT UNFGMFSY HPMSE PMUDPV UW PMY
RAZCHWY IE PASQRF THKRQX HG UP, CSHESPSCFKR ZUN SAWRM UWY HZ FRS EQX
ELHSQMX HU AQPYWDE UDZUCHQFHIW.

WMCFARKDDF PMQF UDZUCHQFHIW CAHPS WMRLGMFMPQN KWUPMSE VHFDUGMDLAG MBVHA,
XAWNM RIUHQWRKR ZM PMQ YINHKWNSP QFPQCFHIR FWHHKQM RAKRV H.A., RQFHIALX
ARIDRASEUDP KNINQGMUW RKVUSKWE XEBPQH.  PMHV HEIHQRPB MXHKQMDGK HB PW
HEIWMNQ Y NKFQLQPS UZ ARIDRASEUDT DIOEPYRENQ YX RASF LB PRS WMHTUWARPB
PMQF NQC LA HPSC GI WKSASHZ RAD NIOEPYRENK.  HA L ANCTSE UZ PMY SVOBPUDZ
EFFSMDQFHIRL, XAWNR PKUC, GRS HVLHY HP NAHPS MIC OMNM IRA NQC FYEQ YFECP
LAR CAHPS UD MZRSN EZSVUNQGMUWX REL WUM TKHDF RYXV WMRLDKSEKR.  RS LFXH
NEHVKR PMK HBVHA UZ QNGMSK SKEPHL FEBVDGA HPS, UWQ YPHQRZ MZ NMHRM  HV
MIC OMNM HAUHWUQGMUW DOXV SQ UQDUFHFLPQN VMWLFXA XQ HLSEB.  HHXF TYHFSY,
RS ENFIKR, UQK WU Y VUZBSA SCWYVHDF LAC GRSW DUVX NHVM PH ZDHCF.  XAWNO
NYL HWNSEFQUD MIC ZRSPS ESXHHNRQX RIOVN SQ HLKR XQ PMK SELM CKUHWMGX WZ
HLSEV HC FRS RAZCHWE QDLHDUWHQCF.

XAWNU RYSP BKUN K PAY ZHWRV QLIOZ BDOWRWYL EL E NYX WG NUGPAESCFUKGMDF
SQZCYSW LQPYWDE QNRQBV LAR WQPYWDEKR UDZUCHQFHIA.  L ANCTSE UZ PMY
EFFSMDQFHIRL RKUIRLPCQFKR QF PMY RHWEVMIT RIOVN SQ ESDCMGPQC FI OPS V
QNWHBV PMA RQPYWDE, XH PMQF UWQ RIOVN NHC FRSU TWHU QWA BWEFQLSA RKGDRQ
Y NHWEVFQGMUW, LA B ZSEUHALFLWR PCLALEQM DOPM K NQFQLELQ YNCHXB PRS
RAZCHWE.  YBFMIIFM PMHX HHSRL HF QNRQBV L FMGFBQ, YBVOUUDZ IRA UEP SWUIFO
RAZCHWQ GI MLANVK HG, MG CHYL RMZ HEIXDKQ YD UCFSEULRQ ZM RKSKXUF E
HEIZNEC MUEM QUWSKDUARFBK OCFKPNEPQV HAUHWUQGMUW PNIU UOBFHGSA NKFQLQPSB.
V OL E GDYRUDP FQRURUXIZQ ZUEP MEL VUUHPB.  UD E NQYX BARPS, MG HV HOBP Y
PDEFMHNQX SSEVHUW UZ ESUIPQ XUIDA LNCHXB PRS RAZCHWY.  VZQHS EFFSMDQFHIRL
ESHESPARZ MAFX WRA BPSH UD PMS HWHPDSPVHUW ZMNYCRP EQYF LWBSPB.

XAWNU RYSG CHVNMBVKR LQWSHKEP ZM PMK RHVPCMVMFHIW UU AQPYWDEKR UOBFHUKRUK
UDZUCHQFHIC.  FRS RSENZ MZ FRS HEMXSAU HL E FLDQ UZ BPLANKCRB PH ZWHGDRK
PMQ YVMVUZQ ZUC NIUFHPQEP ZM FQVA ZM QYRM MZRSW, SQPDHKSK HAUHWUQGMUW,
LAR VMOZLSA MG ENIOWR ULHDXA NQLHLFXA.  QF PMQ HIUARF, BMGFBS HWHPDSPV HB
SQUDT IKNY HR LFQWRENRV ZUC WQPYWDEKR UDZUCHQFHIA UHW YSQUFSS, HESPSCF
BPLANKCRV RU WMZ WMSKD HUQPKV, RDIMGLF XIMDQ, YWR KDIDFQX SDKYH.  Y
HLAPNF ZMUX VDZ MP ABWUEDFA PHWUQPB ZUC SELMD PQBZV HX HAFA WWY SQUDZ
ELPSCTSAC.  GRS XEWNREUWOGQFHIW UT NUWPQCF BPESQUV H.S., PAWRMWHDUGODF Y
XIMDQ PNEDQ ZM K LDKYH PCQNE, QBPQLVUPRUDP FQHZHNES NASQFHIRL SQZCYSW
KDZLSEARM QIUZHRACFV HA L UOBFHUKRUK MXHKQM WMRLGMFMPQL EWUPMSE HVLHY
ZUC WQPYWDEKR UOBFHUKRUK PMQF HV HOBP SQIDWLUDP FH WQRKHSK QFPQCFHIW.

NARKNSKODF RAZCHWE GWHZMWMXB LFXH RAKR XHHQ YWDE ZIIW, ESLFGMHQ
RKVUSKWE HEMZMWUXX HC FRS UDPQCWQP WI WUZ QQP YSHVG.  MA FAWRMB SHKY,
MHPIXA HUZHCPLAG MC FMHB RUWPQBZ HV PMA RMZHIW UU AQPYWDEKR KDIDFQX
MXHKQM DKB, PRS QLUVMGX WZ URA MXHKQM UW PMA RQPYWDE ZM ZHUDZ BU YWUPMSE
MXHKQM HW WMHTUWARZ BRSESUZ UW PMA RQPYWDE.  PSDHIOB LLARDDKPM HVLHSP
LFXH YSHVF.  BAWRM NYL HWNSEFQUD UG VMXVHICLMGHSEPQRUWR WQPYWDEX RIOVN
HEIXS PNUGUDMARG MU AOUSEIOP HYHFSS ELA GDRKI HR FENLFSAX.

XAWNM RUWNBINKR XQ UZPADHDF LA HVLHA PHW NKFQLQPS NCQYZMEP ZM WMRLDKSE,
EL RYXV EL PSSKNEB NIUHQCFL EXMMF ROQF UHPIM QUWBPMGMFK PWZC GDHLF
UOBFHUKRUK YSHSDHHQCFV.  HA L RAZCHWEQK DAUHWUQGMUW YWNSC GRS NKFQLQPS
LMUVRKW HE PSEGDRQ LMUVRKE HMLVUPRSE WISP WUP QSYCNHVQ PRS LEHQ
YSPQRLDGQ RUWPCUX IXSE PMK HCFKPDHZQ UZ PMS HESPSCFQFHIR LPCLAPK
HEIZNEHB "UODFY" RMGM IRAV RQFQ LAPHWQ PRS HLSE PSSP MG.  PSDHIOB
PMIOPIM CHLM TK PDGAR ZM ROQF FIENLAPQSP UDPQPDMGX WZ TESPSCFQFHIR.  FENZ
UZ PMQF HV ESFLPQC GW YRSES UWK RNERX PMQ SIOWRENHKL EWHNAN K RAZCHWEQW
UDZUCHQFHIR LSEGDRQ.  PMHV AMSPGMUW UZ HESPARFQGMUW UDPQPDMGK OW
NBHKCFPSDSSE WMHTMFUDP IEL WUM TYSR LPCSPPSR KWUIFM HC FRS QNKNQHMD
YWNSN, VAWRM ENFIKR, PMIOPI WMOBSEDMLF PSDSMDS HWHGDRKEP RKLF DOPM MG
ESFIFLNSX.

WMWNSEDUDF UOBFHUKRUK, XAWNM ILBSESKC GUEF PWZC INFGMHQKDY LZ BRS UIHQCF
HV MHRKIOBXK QSZARVHSK ZM HEIWMNS.  RS EQRIUHQWRKR HEIWMNUDT INFGMHQKDY
DOPM KHPMSE SKWE MHPI LESA LKFNY, HC HNFGMHQKDY NMGU E SKWE XUDF VUPA
PHLA, HW UOBFHUKRUK PMQF DOXV UESK K LSEQ XWHKN HLKFQ SELQ YWR ROHXY
WMBPB PRSESZUES NQC LQ YUICPOGKR QUUWF VENPK ANCTSEX HU NPSEP.  UD PMHV
WMWLQRGMUW, MHBPHWMDLF LAR IOULAHVGMNQXVX WDHARPQC IQFSEUKB UYK SQ K FWZW
FSQNQ PH XFQCP, SQNQHLK HZ BARRV ZM UESK L FUWPKN SUGS PFEC FUEC UMNM IZ
PMS PDMARGMGUQ CQFSEUKF, LX RASF LL E DORKN HPSC SELA.  SAWRM WUPQN, GHW
YSQUFSQ, PUEF QHQDHNQC UQHHWA ZMGB HLAX WZ FRS NCMGSEUK IOFBUDKR.  RS
ESUQDEKR PMY SBZARVHSK KDBRHLVHUW QLIOM TDHDFUDP FRS UDPQCWQP HW PMY
ALGMUWLF ESPSENRM LAR KNINQGMUW RAZCHWA DESD UCFM ZRS E12 QDLHDUWHQCF
EL Y NYK UZ RSSFUDP FRS QUSEMDLA KRMNQFHIALX BEXPQO.

XAWNM RXUPSC VA WMZUDP FUEZ BRS VDWRX HU LZSVUNQGMUWV RQHUWBPNEPQR VPCMNY
MHU QP SBWASSACF HOBPUGMDQFHIRL UZ SCUYRVNQSA RAZCHWVDDF ZUD E12, LMZ
PMQF QF PMHV GMHQ WU "VDXVSE" EFFSMDQFHIR AVOBPB PI UMXUVOGQ PRS Y12
WMOBNAMGQ ZW ZTMKUW NUWRAQMDGMGX.

                                 


KDBRHLVHUW  RKENPM UZ PKANUDASK OCFSESPGMDF EFFSMDQFHIRL UW PMA RQPYWDE
E LXUDNUEDFUDP VMGNLGMUW  PMK HBVHA UZ PMK HCFKPDHZQ UZ HESPARFQGMUW UD
L AQPYWDEKR ARGDWHCUARP  BKSSELF ESELUWX ROE NRWHH BUZZCENK RHYL RMZ
RAZCHWY 


NIDHDF PMK RHVNMBVHIR FSEHIC GUEF ZUXXURYN VAWRMP HESPSCFQFHIR, LKSSELF
KNKDGMUWLF ZHUDPB RYES UQRK.

XAWNR EKHPQNEPQR KSKC UHWS PPCUWFVE OHV WMCFARGMUW PMQF, MHBPHWMDLFXA,
UWRQ UWK PHYX HMFVHRK MHPIARR VDMARRQ LAC GRS PDIOZ HZ FMIPS ROU WYSW
QNRQBV ZM LHHSCNIUFHPQEP, PMSEK HL E PDQYG CQYCPM IZ PAROHRAXA
UDPQESBPUDF KZSVUNQGMUWX HC FRS RAZCHWE.  IS PYN PMHV VHFMQFHIW NUEDFUDZ
BXWYXA, DOPM XHHQ UZ PMS PDMARGMGUN RQFQLELSP LAR VRMUXENXA KDBRHLVHUW
PDIOHP LAR KSAQMWHDUD MIOCWLFB RIUUDZ IA LX RASF LX RMGM PRS KLKUFLVMVUZQ
UZ DORK ENQY UDZUCHQFHIR LSESKEP NYHV LAR VIUY HZ FRS NKFQLQPSB PUEZ
ENQ SKHDF UINAPQC GRSES.  MIRYSKC, HLAX WZ FMIPS PMUDPV WI WUP BYSC MW
UESK GHAMKR PDQYF THZNFEN UDPQESBP.  ZUD HRLFQWNQ, HHXP MDIR PRMWZX
BPINARPB UZ XAWNRP QNAMKUCFLARQ YWNFR WMZ AMLFUGK YV RKSMZYSX HP LSEHIHL
UISANMFLC SHIXUZK.

WMWNSEDUDF PMK HBVHA UZ PMK HCFKPDHZQ UZ HESPARFQGMUW, XAWNM SASHKSKW
PMQF Q NIOFSY HG UAUHWUQGMUW HEIXDKSEP RKLA SKUW VWYC FRS FLN YF BQYBP UW
RQCPKUC FMHDFL.  PHW YSQUFSS, RHV ESWMXVQRGMUW NYB PUEZ BRS ALGMUWLF
VUSCENX WT UKRMDUDA PYSXB BPWHDFXA PMQF UWA RYSRV ZM QHFSWX PMY
DKARGMGUSE GUASK DP UY HE PRS HV ZM UINAF Q NKFQLQPS WMOBSEDMLFXA.  PMY
HEMXSAO CMGU E ESLF RAZCHWEQR KDLHDUWHQCF HV PMQF UWK RHYL RMZ ADWY ROW
HV ESZUCHQFGMDF LAR CSHWHRQBVUDZ IRAV RQFY NRSW URA ARPQEP Q NVUARZ
PSDSSE UIRK.  MG SQWMHQL EWAXMWKV PHABV, ZUE SLYHTSA, UG PMA RQPYWDE
HLSP Y F39.50 PSDSSE, HW ROQF NBHKCFL EES WIUDZ DMGM IRAV RQFY.  L NKFQ
HEIXDKSE NQR LYK PMQF MHB RUWPCQNZ CUVX UAFE ZSEUHM QVUARPB ZM UESK
QNRQBV ZM MHV RQFY LZFSE RS SKPB PMQH LAC GRSHD HESPARFQGMUW LAC IYESP
RQCPKUD UP BOHPB MHC.  TMF XAWNO SASW IMF VUZBSA YSHSQMQFHIC FUEZ BRS
RAZCHWQ IENEQFTFLRQ YWNFR KXIXSK HC FUEZ CYK, SQNQHLK HP CQAOHESC GWZ
UORM HEHIC WKPMZUKGMUW.

NRWHH BUZZCENK RHYL RMZ RAZCHWA GHW K LENHKZQ UZ ESELUWB, XAWRM LEDK.
RS PHQRNFQFKR PMQF NRWHH TMLVUPRSEL EES WUP QKFSE ZM UESK PMKHE HWHNIQMB
ESLFXA MIIY UDZM DORK ENQY RAZCHWEV, SQNQHLQ PRSA ZQYD HZ CUVB UYEQ PRSHD
NKFQ LHZSVUSEL RSEXIHL.  UIESIXSE, NAGMS NASQFDGASE WQRARFBX, WRA UEC GW
SQ NEPMSE KNWHMG ZM NHA L UNXV MQGHH PFQDQ FSHL EFFSMDQFHIRL UW Y
TRVHPY UQRMUDY, RRSESEL WUNYNKEX MG HV SQWMUHDF QYVHSE EL TRV PWHY
VMZVSE LAN GELPQN.  SAWRM LFXH PHQRNFQFKR PMQF XHZFNYES HEIXDKSEP RKN WUZ
RSENN GWHC MRSHD NMBPIUSEL HCFUV PMA SELZ QQYW HE PW, ZE RKN WUP MQYCR
PNIU ARIOPI UZ PMKHC NHLZMHQEP.

                                 


SQBVSE  HUFSMDQFHIRL UZ KDBVQHUDQFUDI DUQPKX HC FRS RAZCHWE GFLWLUDZ
PMK RHVPCMVMFHIW UT UNFGMHQKDK NMWOUARPB ZHPSB PYW NCMGMDLF
HUFSQHARFQGMUW HEMXSAHB  FLKQESN KZSWHQNR ESHESPSCFB PRS NYQ ZI WQYX
DOPM HLSEB REFQLUVMGHKP  HWHLXQHV HR FFLFZHWI CSPDIA UUVS POGQ YWR MGB
HUFSMDQFHIRL ZUC WQPYWDEUDP  FNERLUHBVHIW UT UKPQLQZS POGK HUQPKB
HUHEQNGMNQB  NIUHESPVHUW LAW VQRIUHESPVHUW QF PMA HPSEP ARR  GWHUHVHDF
PCARRV ZUC NIUHESPVHUW  K NHVKNLKCFKFY HU NVHDF ZYUDWIRX  E FWHHKQM QF
PMS PUHPMXHDULA PMQF UINAPB HUKFSP UW PSSKNEF AQPYWDEB 


MINYCR SQBVSE, BRMIUX UZ VUSCENK YWR UDZUCHQFHIR LDMARRQ, NADGSEVHZQ UZ
GHZBBLHNPI, PHIYS HDHUQDHXA QLIOM CNFGMHQKDL, UMWHLUDZ ID UUQPKL EWR PMY
SCUYK DHTVUNQGMUWX HG NHVPSUHALGMDF PMQH UW PMA RQPYWDE.  RS ENFIKR PMQF
FSLADUDF PMK RHVPCMVMFHIW UT UNFGMHQKDK NMWOUARPB ZHPSC GYW NCMGMDLF
HUFSQHARFQGMUW HEMXSAHB, ROMDO SA PNEHQK DC FRS ZUCH UZ ZCM YHABPHIRL:
1 ROQF FSQFZUCH DOXV UWA HPS LAR DUEP MENRDENQ YWR XHZFNYES DOXV HLSEB
UESK ZUD SHKDODF UZ PMQ HQFSEUKF?  LWR 2 MID NLA UWK RASDGSE Y
LHZLMDHKCFXA WHLMBP PSZ MG UAUHWUQGMUW UD LA QNRQBVMVSA ZUCHQF UD Y
ESELUWQLSA QUIOCF UZ GMHQ?  RKHSWRUDZ IW DRSPMSE RAZCHWY IC NRCIU HV PMY
HQKDOU HLKR, PMHV AMSPGMUW NEHVSP KDZLSEARG MBVHAX HP LZMNEPK,
WMHTESBVHIA, LWR PCLABHHVVHUW.

WMWNSEDUDF PMK RSPDIW UZ TFLFZHWHB K.P., XHNAK, INEE XNQSA, VHHTSA
WMXUE, SMQ. LAC GRS LKDHIOB REFQLUVMGHKL HPSEP UQE OKLQ, SSPPSW
UQUDFQUDKR PMQF L FYKSEKR EFHEUYRM NYB PRS NYQ ZI WQYX NMGM OPSEP
NQFEVMVUGMSP.  E NSPNFZ CIOVN SQ PMQF HLSEX RMGU SSPP HWYSEUNX
YWDEBPQFHIRL YWNFR VHUFSE OKLA SSPL PNAQMHIALVUZQ.  RS HNPKC IQHSQEP UZ
PMQ YINHKWNQ PU YKGMWQFS PFQWRENRV LAN KWBIUFEWAUDP VUZZCENQ PUEP MLANVY
FLKQESN GNAQMHIALVUZQ QNWHBV Y NDKK SENHKZQ UZ FSQFZUCHB.

SQBVSE LFXH KNRCSPPSR GWHLXQHV HR FFLFZHWI CSPDIW, LQUASK, WQRDKUDP IWY
FLDPQ Y UQRMUDQ PI WSPDIA UHW VHFMQFHIRL ROAR PMA SENPKBP ANCTSE UZ HLSEB
UESK PMA SWYSPF BKSAS UZ PMQ HQNMHRA, LAW IRA RKVHESP RDIRSW
UNWNGMUWLFMGQ.  XSPPSC PRSR FWHRQKRKR ZM PMQ AHABPHIW UZ LUVS POGQ YWR
MGV HHTVUNQGMUWL PHW RAZCHWVDDF.  RS KDBRHLPSR VGMXV HUKFSP UD PMQ HKUW.
ZUE SLYHTSA, K NDIMGLF WMXUD HUQPK PMQF GUXVB PRS BRESAR UZ E LFQWRENW
HQFKHSX NHWEVFQGMUW LHW UC WYSZ CUVS NQAOHES UWQ HKPQLQZY HP LZMNEPK
ZUN ER ADIMPVMG MUQPK HW PMESQ HKPQLQZSP UZ BPHWKFA PHW Q FNHQ RUXHW HW
ZCARZQZUHNVMG MUQPK.  XUBVSABV WMHTESBVHIA LVFHWMGMUB PUEG MB,
WMHTMFQFHIALS FWHRQNIESV HW DMHRM WU NKFQ HV XUBP UD PMS HWHRQBV UZ
WMHTESBVUDF KWR RKWMHTESBVUDF KD UUQPKPMY SLYQM VMPCSHESPSCFQFHID UB
UQUDFQUDKR UHPIM TDHDF BPHWKFK RWYC FU Y PMHDW IU L HQFKXQPQ HSD HUQPK,
LMF CMZ UORM UNCPRSC PUEC FUEZ.  BRS AMSPGMUW UZ VHPY UQEQV HG CUGGUNMBF
ZM GUF QA LZSWHHEUKPQXA VHPYR VQP UZ PMSPK HUQPKX HA L VHDFSA KDVE HW ZM
PCLABHMG PMQH AMMDAVK QWUIFM IA L RAZCHWY.

DOPM PMSPA PNFX BNCYSC UKPEFAS HUKFSP PMQF WMRLGMFMPQ Q FMHCR UZ Y
HQFKXQPQ, UWK PQPL 1,0003,000 PNFXBNCYSD UUQPKX HA L UWKPDIQLQZK RHVY
E LFQWRENR NRCIU ESHESPARPB EFHEWZHUQFASE 60 ZSERQCF UZ PMQF.  BPHWUDZ
HUKFSP PMS POGY HU L TR BRESAR HOBP 8 VMM QUXHW UDNCQYPSB VZMNEPK
NQFEDMZQ ZM 4,00012,000 HUKFSP HSD PDIQLQZS 60 HSERQCF UZ PMQF IDSKB
UWQ PRS VHPY UZ Q NRCIU, ROMDM HC FHNW NESQFSP Q UKUHW HEMXSAU.  IRA
NQWLMZ UESK UNXVBRESAR, UNXVWMXUD HUQPKX RMGU SHXBXSPB RIUHESPVHUW UWY
UOBP WMHTESBV PMQH HW HLQ Y XURYW SSPUXMFHIA.  UHW HQFKXQPQVHPY HUKFSP,
LAQZMHDF BXWYSE PMLA Q F1 PHYSK DV HHTNEQMMDLF.  ZUE SLYHTSA, UW Y
GUZFEXOVVDXULQIN VURA, MG FQEQB PREYS UHANPQB PM ZNERLPAN E
UWQHKPQLQZA PUVK, HG UG ML RMZ WMHTESBVKR LAC GMHB VHSKR ELLHHQV HRKLF
DMCNOUBPLARQL RW ZPMSE HLSE WMCFARKDDF ZUC WQPYWDE LQWRDOCGM.  PMOB,
AMSPGMUWX HG NHVE YWBSPP, EQHMZK RHVFSYK, LAR NHNESCF PQSAHRUWY
WMWLQRGMUW PHYSC IYEQ PNERLUHBVHIW UT UKPQLQZSPOGK HUQPKV HHTNEQMMDLF.

SQBVSE PMAR KDBRHLPSR DYKB PI WQYX NMGM PRSPS FLDPK HUQPKL, PHW YSQUFSY,
WMHTESBVHIA LWR RKWMHTESBVHIA LZ BRS HLSEP SWR.  UD PMHV WMWLQRGMUW, PMY
HVLHSP UZ MIC OMNM IRA HV DOXVUDP FU XHXK HC FRS WMHTESBVHIR FWHRQBV LAW
ROQF HUKFQ ANLVUZQ UWA RYSRV UD PMA PHDBP FSQNQ YES NAADWYC.  LMF ROQF HV
ADWYD UB PUEM QIUHESPVHUW ARFQUVB VIUA SHXX HG NQFQ.  LSPPSN HDPKR PMQF
UIES BPINHKB LQ RUWNIQMKR UW HUKFQ ANLVUZQ UD KDZLSEARP BMGNLGMUWL, PHW
YSQUFSY, RUEG QUDW IG UUQPKL EES RAKRKR ZUC DUEG QUDW IG NHVDMFSUDSP, LAW
ROQF VDWR UZ HUKFQ ANLVUZQ HV RAKRKR ZUN E SCWYVHDF ZMUX, LA UDPQCHKRUKPQ
GDYRUDP FWZF, LWR ENRMDGUDZ.

SQBVSE ESUQDEKR ZCH ZWHUHVHDF PCARRV ZUC NIUHESPVHUW:  PNIU Q FQRURMDLF
HSEPHSQMDGQ, YVFHWMGMUB PUEF MPS ROQF HV NQXVKR LHVMQRGMSK ESNIWRLAWQ
QHFSWX HEUDDMFSSP PNIU GDLHLF HPQWMIHREXMDB PI HRKCFUGK YWR ESUISK
UDZUCHQFHIA UWHC MRS HUKFQ PUEZ BRS MOUQR AKQ NQWLMZ HSCNKHSK PNIU LA
UDPQCNUEDFQ YWR UDPQWHHSNEVMVUZQ HSEPHSQMDGQ, PRS HGKP H.K., HIUDZ
HRMZIZNEHRMD YSHSCPV PWHHF, LA HVH XFQWRENR NIUHESPVHUW LFZIDHPMHB LFXH
UZPAE HWHUHPS.  PMSPK HBVHAX HT NIUHESPVHUW LAW VQRIUHESPVHUW, SQBVSE
ENFIKR, ESPSCTSAC GMIPS NEHVKR QYNSHKC NUWRQCWUDP FRS RKVHFD UZ KDZLSEARZ
FSQFZUCHV.  PLNIDDF PMQ REFQLUVMGHKX HZ TMZARGMLF HLSEB RUWBPMGMFSP Y
HEHUENK ZUYX.  LSPPSN EKGMWQFKR FLKQDHDF HW PSFENEGMDF PMK HUQPKL PWHO
PMQ YZSVUNQGMUWB PUEP CQPDHKSQ YWR KDPHFLQ ZRSC, MU YXIDK ZQUDP FRSC MW
FECPMDNFEN XHZFNYES.

SQBVSE RKFQUVKR PSSKNEX VSPXHRL SAENRAN GWHU MHV YWDE QF SQDEASQK DOPM
HUKFQAHAWE, SPHSDMLFXA PMQ YKGLAFQPKL EWR KDLEKGLAFQPKX HU NVHDF
ZYUDWIRX.  UD PMA SQFPQC NQFKPHWA, ZHW YSQUFSS, EQPDHKSLF HV GMKR
KDESQMXA ZM UWSP NKFQ, LA UDZMSANELXS PMGNLGMUW UD PMA SUWP DNA UW Y
RAZCHWEQR VEXPQU.  TUDLFXA, SQBVSE RKBRDHSQN K HEIHQRZ MG UHU NYXVQNQ YZ
PMS PUHPMXHDULA UDBPMGMFHIW, DMI HV UINAGMDF HUKFSP UD Y QBZESHQXA
NHKDHQCFENX YYK UW PMQ RIUFHPSDS LAK IARHK RAZCHWEV LAK DP HESFEDHDF ZM
UINAZ BRSU IA LHQDHNQ UW VURA.  LFPMIOPI PMQ YSKNEPK HLSE FQEQX HSKW
PMHDZQ UHANPQB PI WWYAFUYC GRSPS HUKFSP ELLHUHDF L UKUNSA ZELM CIWQH,
RASKCPRSSABV, HUKFSP UESK SQAR WIDWXUKNKR 25,000 GMHQB.

SQBVSE WMWNFNRKR IHV FQVA DOPM PSSKNEB NIUHQCFX HC FRS LMVHRABV
ENNEDFQHARM TQPRYAR PMS PUHPMXHDULA LAR NIUFHPSDS.  RS WMCFARRKC GUEF CMZ
ARIOPI HV ADWYW NUWRQCWUDP FRS LKFNY HG UUQPKB.

                                 


KDBRHLVHUW  NCQYGMDF KDIDGMPYR GMIZMPDEFMHW BUXSAQMHIRL RAENXA
HUZHBVMVSA YSRQTF DOPM FLDPY HDPLAOGQFHIRL VUEQ UOPSOUL  RYSN GHW BPINX
ZM RKPQCHUDQ ANLVUZQ UZ HUKFSP HLSEX RUVB FUXSEQFY 


NIDHDF PMQ SDHAP YSRMLAPK SQZCYSA FSPE YWR SQBVSE PMQF ZUXVWYKR, PSSKNEX
NBENUGMDQFHIRL QHSEPKW.

SAVE ENFIKR PMQF PMS HMIZMPDEFRSEP RYES ULN ERSKN UZ SQBVSE:  MG HV
LFUIBP HUZHBVMVSA ZM NCQYPQ LHRM KDIDGMPYR GMIZMPDEFMHW BUXSAQMHIRL
YSRQTF DOPM FLDPY HDPLAOGQFHIRL VUEQ UOPSOUB, LQRLNPS LFB FRS
HRMZIZNEHRMD KFARDMSP UESK SQAR ZIUDT DNEOX QLIOZ BMHL EWR DOXV WUP BDIW
VURQRLUDF KPDYSHQCFX HA LWA XHCP UZ ESELUWQLSA PQCHB.  XSPE IKN RSENW
PMQF ALGMUWLF PKIZNEHRMD, ZUE SLYHTSA, UEC GDHKR ZM LMQ ZRS DHPIZ BI OPS
XHHQ HUKFK HR LIUQ EUDW IP ANINQGMUWLF HEIWMNGMUW ZUE 100 HSE HUKFQ, SMF
PMS HMIZMPDEFRSEP DOXV WUZ BIORM MG.  PMQK NYCF QNWMNAGMDF LAR GYKHQCF
ZUE SQNM OPS, ROMDM RLAWUM TQ YWBIUFSHVRSR DMGMHC FRS XEBPQH.  SQBVSE
ESPHUWRKC GUEF Q WMRLHWGMOU UZ HRMZIZNEHRSEP, RQYRKC VK Y ZUCHSE ALGMUWLF
PKIZNEHRMD HRMZIZNEHRSE, UER VFQCPKR ELPSCTVUDF MGX HDW WMXVQRGMUW UZ
ASQRPCUWMD ESHEIWMNGMUWX HG UUQPKX, RMGM PRS UIRAK ZIHDF LQDQ ZM PMY
WMHZSEQFDGY.

SAVE WMCFARRKC GUEM TSPPSC DEL NARARQBVENUVE ZSPVHUHBPMD QLIOM CNFGMHQKDY
HUKFSP, SQNQHLS HYHFSQ YES QNNMBPIUKR ZM XUCYNLVUZQ HUKFSP, FECPMDNFENXA
PNIU GDRKM.  XSPPSN HDPKR PMA SLNWNMHDF UZ E LFMWK ZM RKPQCHUDY RUEZ
HLSEX RIOVN ZMSANEPQ, ROQF PMQK YWNFN GYSB NIUZUCPQLSA DOPM, LAR DUEZ
QLXHFNPQXA HV PMS RDIRSBP AMLFMGQ ZRSX YIOVN KSSE RAKR.  WMWNKRUDP FUEZ
RS UEN KWITFKR K NHDQ PUWK HW UCRSE ZM ENIOPS HSHZSA QLIOZ BRS HVLHY,
SQBVSE NBHXKR UW E LLAFIUDA RMZQ SE XYKUDP FUEP MY RIOVN WUM TK HC FMHB
LMVHRABV UG RS KDR WMZ PMUDQ GUEZ BMHDFB RIOVN SQ QNWMHTVUPRKR.

                                 


FLEPAR  HVLHSP UZ BRLFQLUVMGK YWR UINIFLDHZQ  PKIUQPDHD TWHCZM IZ FRS
UDPQCWQP LAC GRS WHSA FSYKKR XQ FLKQDHDF  LQVHN TNAQMHIRL LHBPKUDUDF
PMHV PDWYPM  L FMVNEWEP EUXSP LAN GNAQMHIRL UD L AQPYWDE ARGDWHCUARZ 
APPAQMX HG UHTSAHQCFQFHIW UZ FRS G39.50 TWHZMWMF UHW UDZUCHQFHIW
ESPCHKLKX UC FRS VUSCENE XEXPQC  MRS PCKNYHZL SQZCYSD LUXOUSP UZ NKFQ
LAK DPB ZHPQCFUKF NLEPK  E LALHPMIZ MT NHNESCF PCARRV 


WHALVN FLEPAR, ELXHDMQFK RHDQRZMN PHW UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZA, ODUSKEPMGX
UZ UQWEFLWR QF WMXVKPS HENA, GHDBP KNRCSPPSC GRS HVLHSP UZ BRLFQLUVMGX
LAC IIWNFENMGE.  OA RMZKR PMK RUGGUNMBFX WU LCFMDHGQFUDP FRS APPAQMX HZ
HWRKEPUZUQFDMGINK PWHCZR, EAPSAQMUDZ IC FRS ZCARZQ KQENX HP ASZSEHKWNY
DOPM PMQ YEHLAQP LAK DCFSERAP.  CQRLFVUDF PMK RYKV RQHUWBPNEGMUWX HZ
NRWHU QWR HZGMNQV NHVQ IQFSEUKS, UY RARZ MC FU YVE UG PMA PHKVN UEX EQP
SAENRAR IWY ZM BRLFA RYR XEBPQHB PH YALLXK RASDGSEK YWR KDBVQHUDQFHIW
QNWHBV FLDPSPNQSA RAZCHWEV.

FLEPAR ZUNMPSW IC FRS PKIUQPDHD TWHCZM IZ FRS UDPQCWQP PNIU MGV HWNSHGMUW
DMCNQ 1969 FM ZRS HESPARF, QWR PMQ YKDHLMCARPB ESAMHDKR ZM ESPHUWC GW
PMQF NEGHK IWHCZM.  PI HXVHLPCQFQ PRS HVLHY HP LNQFLVMVUZQ, FLEPAR
WMRLDKSEKR WMHTMFSE RAZCHWEV EL UDNBINUDP FREYS PKRADHW BIUZHRACFB:
WMHTMFSEL, RQPYWDE WMOBNAMDQFHIW LIWSP, LAR NIUUODUNQGMUW HQKDY.  QQNO
WMHTUWARP BNQSAP S.T., DIUFHPQEP NEDFA PWHH TRB ZM LHHSCNIUFHPQEP
RAZCHWA DIWSP BRLFA PWHU HCFSEULRQ NQCRV HA L TR PMWHIFR PHZMHBPMDQFKR
WHMFSEL EWR FKPQNYEX LAR NIUUODUNQGMUW HQKDE NLAPK PNIU 2,400LQIN
KDLFHF ULDMVUGMSP PMWHIFM 4.5USTB LQNQVUWA SUDEV, LAR KSKCFNLXVQ ZW
UOBFDIDIQLMGHSEPQRUWR NIUUODUNQGMUW VURAL, EWR ENRMMGQRFMNEXVQ, ZRS
WMHTUWARPB ENY HDPLAOGKR ZM BRLFS RHKNECNMHNQXVA ZWHU BMWLF ENQY RAZCHWEV
ZM UDPQCWQFHIALXBNQSA RAZCHWEV.  LHRM PDWYPM HV UQRK ZHBVMVSA XQ
LMUVKDDF FLKQEP UZ WMOBNAMDQFHIR FWHZMWMXB, EL SQBVSE ZHUDPQW IMF.
XQ FLKQDHDF XMPM HREXMDLFXA LAN VIZMDLFXA, E LARPS UZ BRLFQLUVMGK OB
UQUDFQUDKR PNIU XUNQF LESL AQPYWDEV HW UZLMDSP, QNWHBV NQHTHLSP, PMWHIFO
SCDKPKP, EIOPQEP, NQHTHL LQDQXMRAL, PMVSEHZGMN BUDEV, QPN., MG HCFW
ESIDUWLF RAZCHWEV LAN IBFHUQFASK OCFU WQFHIALF LWR UDPQCWQFHIALX
RAZCHWEV.

FLEPAR PMAR UVFNBPNEPQC GRS PKIUQPDHD TWHCZM ISKN E ZCWXQYE HSEHIW
PMWHIFR PSHPQCTSE 1991UZ PMA ROUSQW HU AQPYWDEB PUEM QIUHEHVQ PRS
UDPQCWQP.  PMHV PDWYPM UEB LYSR LHLFQUDKR FLDPASQ XQ ZRS KLKUFLVMVUZQ UZ
PMESQ SELMD UNWNGMUWP:  SSAQMWHDUQ CKUF, UUVQ PNERLPAN PFT, LAR CQHMZY
XUZIC FASRAF.  BENPSA LXBH WKSHKRYC GRS PDWYPM UD PMQ EUDW IZ FNEZLMD
PMQF MWNMEP UW PMA RQPYWDE.  RAZCHWQ GNEZLMD ESUFQRPB PMK HIHCF WMCFDHLMGMUWB
UZ L FENPKE HHZNFQFHIW UU NPSEP LAK DWNESELUDF IPS HSN HPSC.  PIWYK UWS PYSB
PSDHIOL EZSVUNQGMUWV HDLUXGDDF UIGDDF HUKFSP QNWHBV PMA RQPYWDEE NENMGX
PQW AQYEP KFU.  XENPSW CQRLFSAN KWR WMWNHNESR DMGM SSPPSEP UQUD ZHUDZ
PMQF PMK HCFSESPGMDF HEMXSAHB MWNMN EZ BRS EFFSMDQFHIA FKSAS.

FLEPAR PMAR UVFNBPNEPQN K UIRKX UU L VUSCENEX WHSAL EWR UNWNGMUWV HA L
RAZCHWE QDLHDUWHQCF.  RS WUPQK, DR FENGMNMFLC, PRS FSQNQHARZ MZ UAFUDY
NQFQXUFISP UWZM PMA RQPYWDE LAR GQFWHRL MXFQUDUDF KWBSPB PM ZRS VUSCENX
UDNCQYVHDFXA PMWHIFU SMWLF RAZCHWEV, NQHTHL RAZCHWEV, LAC GRS UDPQCWQP.
FLEPAR LHZSHWPQN VAWRMP SENVUSE LHZVSPGMUW PMQF RY RAKR ZM KNRCSPB
UNWRQUARFQB AHABPHIRL UZ RAZCHWEQK DAUHWUQGMUW UD HWRKC PM XOHVN
ARGDWHCUARPB PMQF BRLFK HC FRS UDZUCHQFHIR LARPS EL RYXV EL UD PMY
HREXMDLF PSRLY.

FLEPAR LHZSHWPQC GRS WHSA UZ PMA SMVNEWE XEBPQH EL PMQ YWBSPP HIHCF UDZM
PMA RQFHIRL ASQRPCUWMD WMXVQRGMUWV.  HHTSAHQCFQFHIW UZ FRS O39.50
HEMZMWUX ZUD HAUHWUQGMUW ESPCHKLKX NIOVN UQEQ LHRM QNRQBV HEQNGMNQF LWR
PAELMVSA.  ZUE SLYHTSA, PMHV YWNFR KALLXS HQFWHRL UD UQWEFLWR ZM PSENRM
NQVUZUCWUK VUSCENHKX, HW HPMSE VUSCENHKL EWHNAC GRS YWNSC GUEF QES
WMAUHWUQCF DOPM G39.50 OA L UQWLSE PMQF HV ULUHVUEN ZM NADGSEVHZQ UZ
UQWEFLWR FEPCUWB.  PMHB RVUARPBSESKC HIWAS LFXH LHZSHWPB UIGDDF SQXWWR
PSWMWRENQ WUWPQCF UDZM HEHUENQ WUWPQCF.  PMA RMZHIW UP UWY UWA SUDEV
PNIU PSWMWRENQ WUWPQCF ZM HEHUENQ WUWPQCF, FLEPAR LEDK, ESHESPARPB Y
UNWRQUARFQS FWHLXQH PMQF ESAMHDSP DHZIWHHL PMIOPIF.  QZFSE WUGMDF
ANHQWHHL RAZCHWE QSZSEHUARPB UD QNRQBVUDP ZNFBFYSM CQFSEUKXB, UDNBINUDZ
HEIHQRPB LHZSHWGMDF PMY HCRSEUDZ IT UQFSEUKXB QNWHBV PMA RQPYWDE, FLEPAR
ESGDVHPQC GRS HVLHY HZ FNERLUHZBUDP IDIIRARVHZQ, MHPIESXHFNGMUW WMXUW
HUKFSP QNWHBV PMA RQPYWDE LAC GRS FLDPQ YUINAPB UZ LQWRDOCGM PRSX
ESAMHDS.  RY RARZ MC FU YWVESBV PMQ SLARDDKPM LAR VAWRMWHDUFYGMUW
HEMXSAHB UDRSESCF UD PSWRUDP ZNFBUMZHID LDKYH QNWHBV PMA RQPYWDE.

FLEPAR UVFNBPNEPQC GRS PCKNYHZL SQZCYSD LUXOUSP UZ NKFQ UD XQPQX HW
HWRKEP UZ UQFDMGINQ YWR PMS HMZARGMLF HLKFY HZ FUEG CQFE.  UK RHVNMBVKR
PCLABHHVVHUW NEPQP HENGMNMFLNSQ, ZRS GMHQ MG FQEQB PI UIXK SENHIHL ZUCHB
UZ UDZUCHQFHIA, LWR ROQF UWQ RIOVN WI DOPM L AQPYWDE LHZSHWGMDF
UOBFDIDIQLMGHSEPQRUWC GNERLUHBVHIA.  LZ BRS UIHQCF, PMA RQPYWDE
ARGDWHCUARG MWNFNRKL E WMHTHXMGY HG NQFQFNERLUHBVHIW CQAOHESHQCFB,
XIFNHQL EWR ZUCHV, PIHDF PNIU BPQYWK ZM LMEPZQ MHPIXIFNHQ LAN GWHO
SKWE BXWY ZM SKWE ULBP.  PMHV KFPDKPQFQ HHLM TQ RUWVHRKESK DC FRS RKVHFD,
WMRLPCMNGMUW, LAW IHSNEGMUW UZ UOBFDIDIQLQZA RQPYWDEB.

FLEPARX HVMQRGMSK HV ZM HLQ PRS RAZCHWEV LAN VMVNEWE XEBPQHL RWY SQUDZ
WMRLPCMNPQC GI HWNESELQ YWBSPB PH WSPIOCNSP ROSEKSSE PMQK YSHVF, QWR
PMHL, ZM KSUXSK ZMNYCR LA UWVURA ASQRPCUWMD GDCPNLX VMVNEWE.

FLEPAR WMWNFNRKC VX WZLSEUDF K LREFPRMZ UZ NMWSARZ BESWRB:  RUWGMANUDZ
PKIUQPDHD TWHCZM HW LQPYWDE NQFEDMZQ LAR WOUSQW HU NPSEP BXWYSE
RKSKXUTHARZ MU LZSVUNQGMUWL EWR FVQNUKV NKSASHZHQCF LAN KWITFHIW UZ
BPLANKCRB.  PRS RMLFSADFK HB PI WSPDIA LWR RKSKXUH SQNU RYR EFFSMDQFHIW
XEBPQH DOPM RAZCHWE YWBSPL EWR BRLFQLUVMGK OC UUDW.

                                 


SCWYWCDIF  KWBSPB PM ZRS UDPQCWQP NQWLMZ SQ FQEQA UHW PDLAPQR  GQNEQZ
NEKDU YWR PMK RKSASHZHQCF UZ HQXSAX UD 198081 UD PMK RDGHVHIW UU FMVNEWE
LNZMUQGMUW QF PMA HDUSKEPMGX WT NLFUGHWDUK    NSPDIW NDHPQDHL UHW FEDQQP
NEKDU  Y RKUIRLPCQFHIR FWHHKQM UD LEW RHKZI LAN GMFHNS HFLRL  PHESKN
PHQRPCOU  PNQAHAWNHKL EZ CMHRM PMS EKNHIX RUVS NNA LAR GFLRL ZM
ESHUFSQHARZ BRS NYHV PSDSSE XHZFNYES UD PMS HMLVUN RIUKUW  LYSN GHW LA
UDPNELPCMNFMES UZ NEKDHX PMQF WI WUM CIXQ YWHNAW 


KRDOC LWHDWDHZV, YSQRMFDGK RHDQRZMC, HQHYS ESPSENRM UDBPMGMFA, PHDBP
ZHXVKR PMQ YINHKWNK HW UCRSE ZM PSQE IOP CKPNFEN HLSEX HZ FRS UDPQCWQP EL
RYXV EL PMHXS HFLWLUDP FI OPS MG XHHQ GMHQ UD PMA PMFHNY.  RMGU RQYNSX
KSSEQXIWK OC FRS WHIU ULXVUDI DCFW ZRA NQPQZIWE HW PMY HPMSE, SCWYWCDIZ
UQRK E FIHCF ES QNRQBV, ALHQXA PMQF ANHQWHHL UDKDGDNILFP, SPHQRUKXVQ ZMIPS
ROI OPS PMK HCFSERAP QSKWE NKQ, ZYEA PHW PDLAPQC GRSHD QNRQBV ZM MG, PMY
PHYSRV DOPM ROMDM PRSK YES WMWLQRPQN, KWR MIY ZASV UF QXV YWDEB.
MIRYSKN, EB LWHDWDHZV KDBRIXSEKR SQZCYSA 1987 LWR 1989 UD LNBPNEVUY,
UG UWY RLAPB QNRQBV ZM PMK HCFSERAM TMF NQWLMZ LUZUCR MG HW UEB VIUY
HREXMDLF XMNANKWE PMQF HEKSARPB RSW HE RHU PNIU FKUDUDF KWBSPV, HM QLA
SQ YSPCQHASA ZNHBPNEGMDF.  RS LHZVSPPQC GUEM TQRLNPS UZ QRUWIUMDL EWR
HREXMDLF LQWSHKEP RY RYES SQIDWLUDP FM WESQFQ Y YWNSW IP UKLSP LAR IKLARMZB
UD PMS HWHRQBV UZ BRMIFLNSQ WIUUODUNQGMUW, KSAR UD PMA HDUPQR VFQPQB.

SCWYWCDII KQPKUSAC GRS RKSKXUTHARZ MT UASXKV UA LNQRKUHW QQYD 198081 HW
PMK RDGHVHIW UU FMVNEWE LNZMUQGMUW QF PMA HDUSKEPMGX WT NLFUGHWDUK, UW
HWRKC PI OWRSEBRHWQ PRS HVLHY HU LWBSPB PM ZRS XEBPQH, ROMDU EZ BRS
IOPBQP NYP SBZESHQXA VUUHPQK.  DR LMICP, PMS HWHHKQM RAKRKR ZM LMUVN K
RAZCHWY, DMHRM QF PMQF GMHQ ARFQUVKR HLY HP LQFASVUPQ PQRMWUXUZK, PMQF HV,
FHZBUDP KENPM BPQFHIRL UW NQHTHL LAN KXBU YQBOHDHDF XHHQ PQWSSPPCUKX VUDEV
PNIU PMS PFQPQ UZ NQVUZUCWUKB HMDWHNYSK XEBPQH.  PMK HRLFQXVQFHIW UZ
LEPQXVMGA SUDEV, MIRYSKC, RDK WUP BUXSK PMS HWHLXQH ROMDU EQMNLXVX
ZUCHKR FECP UZ L FENPKE HWHLXQH UDXIXSUDP TUXMGMDL EWR GUALWNUKS NSPIOCNSP.
ZUC DMHSA PMS HWHHKQM PQQU WMNFK IQP E LDIALX UCFU Y NQHTHL, MG UER WI UQYRL
UZ KDBPDHLMGMDF PMS PDIALB FREIOPIIOZ BRS NQHTHL.  PMS PUXMFHID UDLUXSKW
KNHZGMDF E NQRARG CKSASHZHQCF UD DOESSABV WMOBNAMDQFHIW NLFSAR GQNEQP CKNHI,
ROMDM RIUVMRAC GRS LQVHN WMZHIW UZ TQNEQPBDOMQMHDF DOPM NEKDM.  ZRS HEIHQRZ
HLKR PMHV PQRMWUXUZK ZM PKZ BRS VHFDLF PNIU E FIHCF UW NQHTHL ROSEK HZ
NQHQ WIDW, LA QYCPR PFQGMUW ZUE SLYHTSA, UDZM PMA SMVNEDHSP, SQNQHLK HZ
ZUNAC GUEZ CHDUDP FRS VUSCENHKP, SPHQRUKXVQ ZRS UXRKC HENLXQ SOHVNUDPV,
YWNFR NHXF 2,0005,000 TSE PQCHUDLF.

SCWYWCDIF DMZKR PMQF, PQW AQYEP KFM, ZRS HEIHQRP MKN RAMGRSC PRS FHLXMD
ZHVUWQ WUC PRS PQRMWUXUZK PMQF YWNFR IKLQ YXVWYKR MG ZM HLS HQNEQP CKNHI
UD LAQ OQYDUDFUNX NYK.  VHWNQ PRSC UMNO SKN RMLAPKR.  IS HWHRQKRKR ZM
RKFQUV ESPSENRM LAW VKSASHZHQCF UZ PMQ PQRURUXIZE, OWY MG HV SQUDZ
RKFSWXKR UD NQVUZUCWUK, LAR DUEG CHDQRGMUW RS PMIOPIG MZ CIOVN FQEQ.
PMK RSPDIW NDHPQDHY LES ZM HEIWMNQ Y MHPIPHYSW, IRAGMHQ, XUDNHXZ,
MHPIAMLFMGE, XQRHNA, SMDARPSPNYS RKGDRQ FEDQQP NEKDM ZUEZ MRA NQW
FSIF UD LAR GFLQ ZIWYK, ZUDPQP QLIOG MF, QWR UESK QNRQBV ZM PMK HCFSERAZ.
XQ MHPI PHYSC, VWHDWDHZV HQLAM 1 CKPQLQZQ YWR 1.5 HQFKXQPQB.  PMIPS NAMGB
UESK SQAR LMUVP, MQ RUWGMANKR, LAN KES UD PMS HWHRQBV UZ SQUDZ
ZQHSRQCPUGHKC VK YD UWRSHARRKCF NARKCDDHGMDF FLXMNEZMWE XH PMQF PMQK NQW
SQ ZQHSVURQRLKR XQ PMA PKRSELF WMOBNAMDQFHIRL WMOBHVVHUW.  EL HV PMY
NQPS DOPM DMGMPYRL LQWR, UWY RUVX LQ YLXQ PH ZHNRMELQ Y NAMG LAR WMZ UESK
ZM YWWSK YXMMF EFFSKODF ZUN E VURQRLY.

PMQ SELMD DKQY, SCWYWCDIP KFLXMNEPQK, DB PM ZYES RDIRPHSKR NEKDI WQFY
PCLABHHVVHUW LAR NESQFQ Y LQDQXMRA RAZCHWQ GUEF QM QSEFQUD BPNEPQIDW
ZHUDPB UD PMA RQPYWDE DOXV "FKPQNYK" OCFU Y HQKDOUPHYSR GQNEQP CKNHI
H.K., UWQ PUEP CNAL EG 38.4 QUVMXQZSP, XH PMQF HSEREFB LX 19941995
HSHZSA, VUEQ PMHXK HC FRS LNKDARRQ ZUC PRS HEMDY HU L BDC NIOVN FHCNUEPS
Q UKRHOHBHSKR NEKDU ZHW PMY HZLMDY HE RIUS, RKLA PNFF AQPYWDE WMWLQRGMGDZQ
ZM PMK HCFSERAF, QWR FECPYEY HU LXV MGB VSEGDRQX, RMGU RU WYSN GHW LA TNW
VURQRLQ YWR WU ESFIFLC SUVF UWHC MRS XUNQB NIUUIW NENDHSE.  SCWYWCDIZ
HESPARPQR VKSSELF RKFQUVX HU L RKUIRLPCQFHIR FWHHKQM NMWSARFBQ ZYEUDZ
FSQNK HR LLA KDKPU YWR RKBRDHSQR GFLRL, HSWRUDP ZNAKDDF, ZM UDBPLFF L
UNXVXMES RAZCHWV DC FRS LEA UNEWNHVWM ENQY.  PMHV RAZCHWY DUVS UKLY 600
WURKP ENADUDF QF LQDQXMRA PHYSRV, LAW 100 IZ FRSPS WURKX RUVX LA SMVNEDHSP,
ROMDM HC FHNW DUVX LQ PRS FKPQNYE ZHWPB ZM PMQ 38.4 EUVMXQZS EKNHIB PUEZ
DOXV IDSK WMSKNEPK ZUC PRS RADIMSHWMIIWB VHNWHNAKDDF PMA SMVNEDHSP.

SCWYWCDIF DYSP QSZFLUDKR FECP 15.247, L AYR NHSA DOPMUD GMFBY 47 HZ FRS
WMRK UZ PARKNES NKPNFQFHIRL ARQNPQC VQ ZRS TND MC 1985.  FMHP ENFY
RMLFSADFKR PMK HWRHLPCX, YMHRM UEX HAFA WWY DHPSC FM ZRS MWNQVHUW, ZM
LMUVN K NEKDM ZUEZ CIOVN NHA LF CI UHWQ PUEW URA NYZB UZ IOFTMF ZHRYN EWR
HLQ Y ULHDXA YSMZMD HQPMIW UZ UINIFLGMDF PMS EKNHI NYSK NQXVKR PHESKN
PHQRPCOU.  PHESKN PHQRPCOU UD ULQM HSCHMGB PRS LMUVKDDF UZ RAZCHWEV XH
PMQF ANHQWHHL NKFQ WMOBNAMDQFHIRL NQW UWBHN VHUOBFLAYHHLXA, DOPMIOZ
UDPQNPSEUDZ DMGR SQNM IPMSE, DOPMUD PMS PQUY RDKS EKNHI RMLARAX.

SCWYWCDIP KSZFLUDKR PMQF PMA PESAMARDMSP QF ROMDM PRS NEKDHX YWNFR CNA
ENK SSEE XMICP NYSK VHFDLFB.  PRSK YES RYXV QLIXS PFQWRENC IMDWHNYSK LAW
NENKC.  DMGU E NEKDW YKLQ PUEP BUQXV, UWY RQFM TQRIUSP Q FESHQWRIOP HNARM
HSC SMG LAC GMOB HYESP PCLABHHVVHUW QF ESELUWQLSA PHYSR GHXVHLXK.  HW
HWRKC PI UUDHUOGQ PRS ZHPQCFUKF UHW WMDFSPGMUW, PMS HWHHKQM HV
NARKCPYEUDP FH WKHHTSAHQCF XHZFNYES ROMDO SEL SQAR KLKUFLLXK HC FRS
RAZCHWVDDF LMVHRABV LAK DB PYEAR ZUD PNECFKR WUN, ZHW YSQUFSQ, PRTHG,
WHMFUDF KVFHWMGMUB, LDHKISP, LAK IQFYRYKV.  HA LWVMGHIC, FRS HEIHQRZ
FSLAB PM ZYEQ PRS NYHV PSDSSE XHZFNYES UD PMS HMLVUN RIUKUA LWR
ESHUFSQHARG MP BM ZUEZ MRA NQR UKLQ Y NYHV PSDSSE UW Q UQN UDBPQYW IU L
NAOV UQRMUDQ.  PRS HQHQS WSPQYCNM HRLGMFMPQ SQVUKSSP PMQF VUSCENHKV, HW
FECPMDNFEN, DOXV NYCF ZM HLQ PRS NYHV PSDSSEX RMGR HQNEQP CKNHI.  PMHV
HEIHQRZ, CMHRM UEL E PQQU UZ QLIOZ BRYXSS HYHFSY, RUVS NNA PMWHIFO 1993
LAR DUVV UWNFNRK PMA 100 SMVNEDHSP LFESKNQ OARGMUWKR EL RYXV EL MZRSW
HEUZSPVHUWLFB VMNU EB PMIPS UD PMQ HKRMDLF HEUZSPVHUW, ARIDRASEUDF, KWR
FLC.  ZMOB, PRS RAKR HV ZM NCQYPQ LA UDPNELPCMNFMES UZ NEKDHX PMQF WI WUZ
UISK ENIOWR, ROMDM, SWHDWDHZV MIHSX, RUVX BUXSK E FWHLXQH WUZ MAFA ZHW
VUSCENHKB LMF ZUD HWRDGDKNLXB ROM, XK YWR FLDPQ PIWYK, WI WUP MKLQ YWBSPB
ZM PMK HCFSERAF ZWHC MRSHD MIHQL EWR UZGURQB.

                                 


KDBRHLVHUW  HEIHQRZ MHSNEGMDF PNQAHAWNHKB 


NIDHDF Q LDHAP KDBRHLVHUW HSDHIW, ROMDU EXBM WUWNBINKR PMK RYKB
HEMWYSKDDFB, LWHDWDHZV BPQFKR PMQF PMS HWHHKQM NYX HHSNEGMDF UD ZUHN
PNQAHAWNHKB.  PRS BXWY PHYSK DX HHSNEGMDF QF 435 HQFKRSCPF, YWR MG YWNFW
FLPQD PI OT FI 920 UKPEUSEFG.  DOPM PMS RDIRPHSKR PNQAHAWNQ, ZRS
UWQHKPQLQZS EKNHIX RUVS NNA QF 2.4 IDFKVMPB, LAR 1.5 DUVS NNA QF 5.7.
QF 5.7, NEUD NQC LQ Y ULQMHW, LMG MZ CIOVN UESK ZM SQ PCHZMDLF NEUD,
NAVUEQ ROQF ULXVV HC UHXF TENPB UZ PMA HDUPQR VFQPQB.

                                 

PSBVHID UG.  DUQPK NQTFHNQ, PYSM QEFFMES, IXSEGDYR UZ PQBZ LAW
             HUKFS PZMNEPK ZUCHQFB

DOXVUKU MWZZMD, LMDS HESVHRKCF UZ HZSEQFHIRL, UDQP, UIRKNEPQC GMHB VSPVHUW.


EQWLQK  ULQMHWV HAUFNARDMDF RKSKXUTHARZ MT NSZ  KNLKCFKFSP UZ HLUDZ
KDIDFQB FQRURUXIZK XSELHP HMIZMWMZE LAC IMDWHGUBU  E FDHUQWE ZILF UZ
WBZ SMLVUPRUDT DUEXVARPKB  RUENEQMSEHVGMRB UZ WMGHSP HEUDPQC  KNLVUZQ
UZ LEHTSAL ERMHKSKK DD UUQPK NQTFHNS  PKSSELF ULQMHWB PM XQ RUWVHRKESW
UD RMWZVHDF BRLADUDF  QHHRELHV UZ WBZ HC FHUASK YWR WMBPAPPAQMDGY
HEIWMNGMUW UZ LXQNEYWRROMGS HDHCFKR ULRBHUUVSP  ESLHBFX HZ TWHNIDMDF
UHNCUZUVU TWHI CDIMGLF GUSAL  EKGLAFQPKX HT NESQFUDT IMDWHGUBU  RKFQUVB
WMWNSEDUDF HEIWMNGMUW  WMBPP  EUXY HG NDIMGLF PQRMWUXUZK UD VUSCENX
HESPSELKGMUW 


LARA EQWLQK, ELXHDMQFK RHDQRZMC, RSHENMCARZ MZ TESPSDSQFHIA LWR
WMRLSELKGMUW, WMCWASF NDUSKEPMGX, WHSRAR ISE FQVA XQ MXPSDSUDP FUEZ BRS
WMCWASX VSEWZ HEIHQRM QSZ UEB LYSD FOHRKC VQ ZRS ELLHHTGMUW PMQF PMY
QLUVMGQ ZH ZWHNIRQ HEUDPQN GQNVHUHSAX HC PH WSHFLRQ FEHSC DMGR HEFSE
YWNFC VK HHTHWFQCF, QF SAELF ZHW PMS HESPSCF PKRANEGMUW UZ HLSEL EWR
QAOHTHARP.  BRS RKBRDHSQC GREYS ULQMHWB PUEG MAUFNARRQW VKSASHZHQCF UZ
PMS HWHHKQM:  1 SQNQHLQ PRS HEIHQRP MEL QHHRELOGKR PMS HESPSDSQFHIW UZ
RKPQDHHWQFUDT VDHZBSA XMIYB, PRS AMLFMGX WZ NUEZ CEL HEIWMNKR UEC GM XY
LHZLMDHKCFXA MHPI ZM ESFMCW E FEFSE ESFSQNQHARZ BM ZRS PRAST.  NSZ NYB
UWXA UDPQESBPKR UD HLUDF:  2 K XEBPQH PMQF NYB RHXPQZLQRGMSK, ROMDO
HQLAZ BUEG MP MKN ZM SQ WMBPWMHTQPMGDGY RMGM PRS HEMWSPPSB RHNESCFXA
KLKUFLLXS, HDHWNHGLFXA HRMZMWHZK YWR UHNCUZUVU, QWR 3 RAY WC NHNESCFXA
KLKUFLLXS HWHNIQM UECRNYES LAR VUZZCENY.

EQWLQK RKBRDHSQC GRS KNLKCFKFSP PMQF HLUDI KDIMGLF PQRMWUXUZK UZPAEP IXSE
XMPM HRMZMWHZK YWR UHNCUZUVC:  1 MRS ZHPQCFUKS AVOBPB PM WESQFQ Y MHPISE
AMLFMGE WSHWHNIQMHIW UU L RKPQDHHWQFUDZ IDHIDALB FUEW NUWSKCFHIALX
VUPIFBARB PQRURUXIZQ.  2 XQRLNPS K NDIMGLF HUKFK HL ER AWNIWKR
ESHESPARFQGMUW, MG NQC LS ESHWHNIRQN KFKUD LAN KFKUD DOPM WU ESLHBFUDZ
XUBV UZ AMLFMGK, YX HZSHXKR ZM PMS PMGNLGMUW DOPM VUPIFBARP HWHRQBVSP,
UD ROMDM PRSES HV KDBRSEDULXK RUGPAESWNQ SQPRYAR E LQRUWN KWR Y
LHLBQAHACF PKRANEGMUW UZ LA HUKFQ.  3 Y KDIDFQV UUQPK NQC LQ HLAHGNFQFKR
UD L AOUSQW HZ NYKB PI HHTWHSK HUKFQ REFFMES ZUE SLYHTSA, SYWHS OEL
RKSKXUHSN K DOWRWYUDF KZSVUNQGMUW PMQF ARQLSAX HRA ZM NQTFHNQ Y FEPK
WMCFKUDUDF XMPM PQBZ LAK DXVHLPCQFHIRL UD Q ULARAC PUEZ MTFHUOGSP PMY
ESHEIWMNGMUW UZ XMPM.  DOPM VUPIFBARB PQRURUXIZX, WRA UOBP RMWZPS ROMDO
ZM HZGMUHPY, PQBZ HW PMK HXVHLPCQFHID UR FESPSDSQFHIC UMDWHGUBUUDP, FRS
NMWSARF TNEQMMDK HB PH XMIMZ LA UVFNBPNEPQR GKFQ PDORQ, UWRQ ZM MHPIVUPIZ
PMQ PYSF QWR PMS PQRUWC GHUQ PH ZWHGDRK PMQ SSPM QEFFMES ZUC PRS
UVFNBPNEGMUW.  4 K NDIMGLF HUKFQ RLA LFXH SQ KRMGKR, RKRLMGA XKSASB
KNHOBPKR ZM ESUISK NARKNSUDUDF KWR BPKURL, LAC GI HWNESELA SKPMVUVMGA ZHW
ULUDG CMWOUARPB.  5 UWBRESAR UDPHQRGMUW NQC FYES HFLRQ QF PMQ PHUY HZ
UDMGUKX BQPHF LAN KKDHLMCARPB UQRK HEHIC PH XNQWLUDP, ZQNZMEP PMQF
LHLBFQCFUKXVE WKRMNQ PRS ANCTSE UZ ESFQEQP EQAOHESK DC ANLVUZQ WMCFWHX.

E FDHUQWE ZILF UZ WBH REL SQAR ZM KSLFNLPQ PMS HEFSE IOFTMF HEUDPQW IW
PMY SSEWZ WINMPQRM, E UDIRPHSKR HEUDPQC PUEF TWHNIRQV 600RGH FEPKL PWHO
BRLARAK DUQPKL EF Q NEPQ UZ 135 FEPKL E UHANPQ.  EQWLQK ESWMNAPQR VKSSELF
FHLXHVMHDF RMLFSADFSP ZM ESHESPARF ZKUPMUNF LWR SAIDLXS ESHWHNIQMHIRL UZ
PMY HDHIDALXB PMQF PMK 600RGH WMZE ZUC PRS UIBP FECP LHWBSPLPNFXA
NQTFHNKR.  ZUE SLYHTSA, UQWA UZ PMK RQPSEHINEGMDF XIFNHQV HC FRS HEIHQRZ
RYES RSKLUVK OXVHLPCQFKR DOPM GURA VURA RCYNUDPV HW UEFUZMRAX HC NQUK HW
FLDFNLPKB VMNU EV HEFLASPK, HW DMHRM PMQ SOHVNHF UZ RMENQNPQEP WMHTDHPSW
UZ LKWEUDP VPCIYSP HV KDZLMDNFZ BH WSHWHNIRQ QF XURYW SSPUXMFHIRL Y
LHEHDHVHDF ANCTSE UZ PMQH NQHQ DOPM LAWUFQGMUWL EWR UQPMQHQFMDLF
ZUCHNFEL, ROMDM HZ CEL NCMGMDLF ZM SQ QLSA ZM NIFSMDQFY SLYQMXA.

EQWLQK WUPQC GUEZ 1 BRS WMGHSP ENQ SKHDF HEUDPQW IR FEFSE PMQF HQQPB PRS
LAVH BPLANKCRL PHW HSNPHWUQWNQ, 2 PRS WINMPQRM HEUDPQC HYSPB PMQ HQNMHRA
LAC GUWSE ESAMHDQHARPB ZUE HWHHSN ERISPHIW UZ TDHCF ZM FEPK, EL RKBRDHSQW
XQ PMA RQFHIALF LCNMHSKL, EWR PMHL 3 FEHSE HWHNIQM HV WMRLDKSEKR ZM SQ
PMQ YCNMHLKS AAMDGLFARZ MZ TESPSDSQFHIR FMIZMWMZE.

EQWLQK PMAR KDBRHLPSR VKSSELF LEHTSAX HZ FRS AMLFMGK YRMHKSKK DC FRS
HEIHQRZ BUEP MKN SQAR KDBPDHLMPQK DA L UEWRIOF, ZHW YSQUFSQ, Y WMZE UZ Y
HEUDZMWRQHLAK GSEVHUW UZ PMS 1911 EYSN VQRFMES UW PMS PPQQU FMCSUDY,
ROMDM RUWFQUDP RLFZFUWSP, VURA RCYNUDPV, LAK DXVHLPCQFHIRL QHSQWVKR UD
PQBZ PMA PHDBP ZUHN XUHXS HKFSP UD PMK SUXOUQ RIUFEESC GRS NQTFHNY
NQFEVMVUGMSP UZ BRLADUDF ZM HRMZMWHZA ZHW E LFQWRENC GSPZ BENPKZ, BRS
HKYS BPLANKCR 167Q 1987 FSPM QUECP.  UD LFV URLFQWNSP BRLADUDF HEIXKR
LHHSDHHW ZM HRMZMWHZQ, ZMIIFM IAFE XVUPIFBQ OHWS PI HW URA.

WMWNKRUDP FRS VHHTVUBPMD ALFMES UZ RSW SKSHKY WZ FRS AMLFMGX WP LNQWLUDZ
ZM HRMZMWHZK, EARRAK WSPNCMVKR MG EL UWS ESHESPSCFQFHIW UZ FRS VDWRX HZ
PSZBUDPV PMQF WMNFC VA HPSR DMGR PNQWLUDT DEFQLUVMGHKX HC FRS QAOHTHARZ
WBF HPSV.  EARRAK YXBH ZIHCFKR IOZ BUEM QSZ UDSKBPDIQFKR PMQ ANLVUZQ
QNMHKSKR DOPM VMALWE BRLADUDF UWXA, LAR WMZKR PMK PESQF HEIUHVK HD FNEX
BRLFQ YWR WMXUE PNQWLUDZ, DMIPS KNLKCFKFSP LAW VHVKNLKCFKFSP RAKR ZM SQ
YSQUUDKR.  PRQ YDPHAN GHNPMSE PMQF BRLADUDF ESXHFNGMUWL EWR GUSA ZUCHQFB
NQW CSHESPSCF Q NIUFSYS PCKNYHZL SQZCYSC FRS GMHQ MG FQEQB PM WEFFMES
UQPQDHLF, GUSA VHPY, GURKVUZQ ZM PMY HDHIDALF, LWR UWBRESAR KDPHFLK YWR
HEUDGMDF LAR KAMHGHQCF KLKUFLVMVUZQ.  LFB FRSPS ULQMHWB HHLM TQ PYEAR
UDZM WMRLDKSEQFHIW.

WBZ SFLRQR GDHUQWE QHHRELHV UW PMS HWHNIQMHID UA L GMHQXA LAW
WMBPAPPAQMDGQ HLARAW HZ TDHCFKR ULRBHUUVSP PMQF WMRLHVPQN VENPKXA UZ
LXQNEYWRROMGQ PYSZ.  CMGM SUDENE XNQWLUDF, VENPK GUSAB HYK SQ
WMHTESBVKR APGUDMARFBK YWR UD L FHXBXSPB HLARAD H.A., RI WQFK UB XHXG MW
PMS HWHRQBV UZ WMHTESBVUDF KWR RKWMHTESBVUDF KD UUQPKPMY SLYQM
VMPCSHESPSCFQFHID UB HKUCFKURAN IVHDF PDIOT 4 RDMZB H.K., PMA PESWNO
QNWHWAU THW UDPQCWQFHIALB NUWLHBFQFDGQ RIUUHZBYS ZUC PASKPNEHR LAW
