forty to one.  Grayscale compression, which primarily uses JPEG, is much
less economical and can represent a lossy compression i.e., not
lossless, so that as one compresses and decompresses, the illustration
is subtly changed.  While binary files produce a highquality printed
version, it appears 1 that other combinations of spatial resolution with
gray andor color hold great promise as well, and 2 that gray scale can
represent a tremendous advantage for onscreen viewing.  The quality
associated with binary and gray scale also depends on the equipment used.
For instance, binary scanning produces a much better copy on a binary
printer.

Among CXPs findings concerning the production of microfilm from digital
files, KENNEY reported that the digital files for the same Reed lecture
were used to produce sample film using an electron beam recorder.  The
resulting film was faithful to the image capture of the digital files,
and while CXP felt that the text and image pages represented in the Reed
lecture were superior to that of the lightlens film, the resolution
readings for the 600 dpi were not as high as standard microfilming.
KENNEY argued that the standards defined for lightlens technology are
not totally transferable to a digital environment.  Moreover, they are
based on definition of quality for a preservation copy.  Although making
this case will prove to be a long, uphill struggle, CXP plans to continue
to investigate the issue over the course of the next year.

KENNEY concluded this portion of her talk with a discussion of the
advantages of creating film:  it can serve as a primary backup and as a
preservation master to the digital file it could then become the print
or production master and service copies could be paper, film, optical
disks, magnetic media, or onscreen display.

Finally, KENNEY presented details re production:

      Development and testing of a moderatelyhigh resolution production
     scanning workstation represented a third goal of CXP to date, 1,000
     volumes have been scanned, or about 300,000 images.

      The resulting digital files are stored and used to produce
     hardcopy replacements for the originals and additional prints on
     demand although the initial costs are high, scanning technology
     offers an affordable means for reformatting brittle material.

      A technician in production mode can scan 300 pages per hour when
     performing singlesheet scanning, which is a necessity when working
     with truly brittle paper this figure is expected to increase
     significantly with subsequent iterations of the software from Xerox
     a threemonth timeandcost study of scanning found that the average
     300page book would take about an hour and forty minutes to scan
     this figure included the time for setup, which involves keying in
     primary bibliographic data, going into quality control mode to
     define page size, establishing fronttoback registration, and
     scanning sample pages to identify a default range of settings for
     the entire bookfunctions not dissimilar to those performed by
     filmers or those preparing a book for photocopy.

      The final step in the scanning process involved rescans, which
     happily were few and far between, representing well under 1 percent
     of the total pages scanned.

In addition to technician time, CXP costed out equipment, amortized over
four years, the cost of storing and refreshing the digital files every
four years, and the cost of printing and binding, bookcloth binding, a
paper reproduction.  The total amounted to a little under 65 per single
300page volume, with 30 percent overhead includeda figure competitive
with the prices currently charged by photocopy vendors.

Of course, with scanning, in addition to the paper facsimile, one is left
with a digital file from which subsequent copies of the book can be
produced for a fraction of the cost of photocopy, with readers afforded
choices in the form of these copies.

KENNEY concluded that digital technology offers an electronic means for a
library preservation effort to pay for itself.  If a brittlebook program
included the means of disseminating reprints of books that are in demand
by libraries and researchers alike, the initial investment in capture
could be recovered and used to preserve additional but less popular
books.  She disclosed that an economic model for a selfsustaining
program could be developed for CXPs report to the Commission on
Preservation and Access CPA.

KENNEY stressed that the focus of CXP has been on obtaining high quality
in a production environment.  The use of digital technology is viewed as
an affordable alternative to other reformatting options.

                                 


ANDRE  Overview and history of NATDP  Various agricultural CDROM
products created inhouse and by service bureaus  Pilot project on
Internet transmission  Additional products in progress 


Pamela ANDRE, associate director for automation, National Agricultural
Text Digitizing Program NATDP, National Agricultural Library NAL,
presented an overview of NATDP, which has been underway at NAL the last
four years, before Judith ZIDAR discussed the technical details.  ANDRE
defined agricultural information as a broad range of material going from
basic and applied research in the hard sciences to the onepage pamphlets
that are distributed by the cooperative state extension services on such
things as how to grow blueberries.

NATDP began in late 1986 with a meeting of representatives from the
landgrant library community to deal with the issue of electronic
information.  NAL and fortyfive of these libraries banded together to
establish this projectto evaluate the technology for converting what
were then source documents in paper form into electronic form, to provide
access to that digital information, and then to distribute it.
Distributing that material to the communitythe university community as
well as the extension service community, potentially down to the county
levelconstituted the groups chief concern.

Since January 1988 when the microcomputerbased scanning system was
installed at NAL, NATDP has done a variety of things, concerning which
ZIDAR would provide further details.  For example, the first technology
considered in the projects discussion phase was digital videodisc, which
indicates how long ago it was conceived.

Over the four years of this project, four separate CDROM products on
four different agricultural topics were created, two at a
scanningandOCR station installed at NAL, and two by service bureaus.
Thus, NATDP has gained comparative information in terms of those relative
costs.  Each of these products contained the full ASCII text as well as
page images of the material, or between 4,000 and 6,000 pages of material
on these disks.  Topics included aquaculture, food, agriculture and
science i.e., international agriculture and research, acid rain, and
Agent Orange, which was the final product distributed approximately
eighteen months before the Workshop.

The third phase of NATDP focused on delivery mechanisms other than
CDROM.  At the suggestion of Clifford LYNCH, who was a technical
consultant to the project at this point, NATDP became involved with the
Internet and initiated a project with the help of North Carolina State
University, in which fourteen of the landgrant university libraries are
transmitting digital images over the Internet in response to interlibrary
loan requestsa topic for another meeting.  At this point, the pilot
project had been completed for about a year and the final report would be
available shortly after the Workshop.  In the meantime, the projects
success had led to its extension.  ANDRE noted that one of the first
things done under the program title was to select a retrieval package to
use with subsequent products Windows Personal Librarian was the package
of choice after a lengthy evaluation.

Three additional products had been planned and were in progress:

     1 An arrangement with the American Society of Agronomya
     professional society that has published the Agronomy Journal since
     about 1908to scan and create bitmapped images of its journal.
     ASA granted permission first to put and then to distribute this
     material in electronic form, to hold it at NAL, and to use these
     electronic images as a mechanism to deliver documents or print out
     material for patrons, among other uses.  Effectively, NAL has the
     right to use this material in support of its program.
     Significantly, this arrangement offers a potential cooperative
     model for working with other professional societies in agriculture
     to try to do the same thingput the journals of particular interest
     to agriculture research into electronic form.

     2 An extension of the earlier product on aquaculture.

     3 The George Washington Carver Papersa joint project with
     Tuskegee University to scan and convert from microfilm some 3,500
     images of Carvers papers, letters, and drawings.

It was anticipated that all of these products would appear no more than
six months after the Workshop.

                                 


ZIDAR  A separate arena for scanning  Steps in creating a database 
Image capture, with and without performing OCR  Keying in tracking data
 Scanning, with electronic and manual tracking  Adjustments during
scanning process  Scanning resolutions  Compression  Deskewing and
filtering  Image capture from microform:  the papers and letters of
George Washington Carver  Equipment used for a scanning system 


Judith ZIDAR, coordinator, National Agricultural Text Digitizing Program
NATDP, National Agricultural Library NAL, illustrated the technical
details of NATDP, including her primary responsibility, scanning and
creating databases on a topic and putting them on CDROM.

ZIDAR remarked a separate arena from the CDROM projects, although the
processing of the material is nearly identical, in which NATDP is also
scanning material and loading it on a Next microcomputer, which in turn
is linked to NALs integrated library system.  Thus, searches in NALs
bibliographic database will enable people to pull up actual page images
and text for any documents that have been entered.

In accordance with the sessions topic, ZIDAR focused her illustrated
talk on image capture, offering a primer on the three main steps in the
process:  1 assemble the printed publications 2 design the database
database design occurs in the process of preparing the material for
scanning this step entails reviewing and organizing the material,
defining the contentswhat will constitute a record, what kinds of
fields will be captured in terms of author, title, etc. 3 perform a
certain amount of markup on the paper publications.  NAL performs this
task record by record, preparing work sheets or some other sort of
tracking material and designing descriptors and other enhancements to be
added to the data that will not be captured from the printed publication.
Part of this process also involves determining NATDPs file and directory
structure:  NATDP attempts to avoid putting more than approximately 100
images in a directory, because placing more than that on a CDROM would
reduce the access speed.

This upfront process takes approximately two weeks for a
6,0007,000page database.  The next step is to capture the page images.
How long this process takes is determined by the decision whether or not
to perform OCR.  Not performing OCR speeds the process, whereas text
capture requires greater care because of the quality of the image:  it
has to be straighter and allowance must be made for text on a page, not
just for the capture of photographs.

NATDP keys in tracking data, that is, a standard bibliographic record
including the title of the book and the title of the chapter, which will
later either become the access information or will be attached to the
front of a fulltext record so that it is searchable.

Images are scanned from a bound or unbound publication, chiefly from
bound publications in the case of NATDP, however, because often they are
the only copies and the publications are returned to the shelves.  NATDP
usually scans one record at a time, because its database tracking system
tracks the document in that way and does not require further logical
separating of the images.  After performing optical character
recognition, NATDP moves the images off the hard disk and maintains a
volume sheet.  Though the system tracks electronically, all the
processing steps are also tracked manually with a log sheet.

ZIDAR next illustrated the kinds of adjustments that one can make when
scanning from paper and microfilm, for example, redoing images that need
special handling, setting for dithering or gray scale, and adjusting for
brightness or for the whole book at one time.

NATDP is scanning at 300 dots per inch, a standard scanning resolution.
Though adequate for capturing text that is all of a standard size, 300
dpi is unsuitable for any kind of photographic material or for very small
text.  Many scanners allow for different image formats, TIFF, of course,
being a de facto standard.  But if one intends to exchange images with
other people, the ability to scan other image formats, even if they are
less common, becomes highly desirable.

CCITT Group 4 is the standard compression for normal blackandwhite
images, JPEG for gray scale or color.   ZIDAR recommended 1 using the
standard compressions, particularly if one attempts to make material
available and to allow users to download images and reuse them from
CDROMs and 2 maintaining the ability to output an uncompressed image,
because in image exchange uncompressed images are more likely to be able
to cross platforms.

ZIDAR emphasized the importance of deskewing and filtering as
requirements on NATDPs upgraded system.  For instance, scanning bound
books, particularly books published by the federal government whose pages
are skewed, and trying to scan them straight if OCR is to be performed,
is extremely timeconsuming.  The same holds for filtering of
poorquality or older materials.

ZIDAR described image capture from microform, using as an example three
reels from a sixtysevenreel set of the papers and letters of George
Washington Carver that had been produced by Tuskegee University.  These
resulted in approximately 3,500 images, which NATDP had had scanned by
its service contractor, Science Applications International Corporation
SAIC.  NATDP also created bibliographic records for access.  NATDP did
not have such specialized equipment as a microfilm scanner.

Unfortunately, the process of scanning from microfilm was not an
unqualified success, ZIDAR reported:  because microfilm frame sizes vary,
occasionally some frames were missed, which without spending much time
and money could not be recaptured.

OCR could not be performed from the scanned images of the frames.  The
bleeding in the text simply output text, when OCR was run, that could not
even be edited.  NATDP tested for negative versus positive images,
landscape versus portrait orientation, and single versus dualpage
microfilm, none of which seemed to affect the quality of the image but
also on none of them could OCR be performed.

In selecting the microfilm they would use, therefore, NATDP had other
factors in mind.  ZIDAR noted two factors that influenced the quality of
the images:  1 the inherent quality of the original and 2 the amount of
size reduction on the pages.

The Carver papers were selected because they are informative and visually
interesting, treat a single subject, and are valuable in their own right.
The images were scanned and divided into logical records by SAIC, then
delivered, and loaded onto NATDPs system, where bibliographic
information taken directly from the images was added.  Scanning was
completed in summer 1991 and by the end of summer 1992 the disk was
scheduled to be published.

Problems encountered during processing included the following:  Because
the microfilm scanning had to be done in a batch, adjustment for
individual page variations was not possible.  The frame size varied on
account of the nature of the material, and therefore some of the frames
were missed while others were just partial frames.  The only way to go
back and capture this material was to print out the page with the
microfilm reader from the missing frame and then scan it in from the
page, which was extremely timeconsuming.  The quality of the images
scanned from the printout of the microfilm compared unfavorably with that
of the original images captured directly from the microfilm.  The
inability to perform OCR also was a major disappointment.  At the time,
computer output microfilm was unavailable to test.

The equipment used for a scanning system was the last topic addressed by
ZIDAR.  The type of equipment that one would purchase for a scanning
system included:  a microcomputer, at least a 386, but preferably a 486
a large hard disk, 380 megabyte at minimum a multitasking operating
system that allows one to run some things in batch in the background
while scanning or doing text editing, for example, Unix or OS2 and,
theoretically, Windows a highspeed scanner and scanning software that
allows one to make the various adjustments mentioned earlier a
highresolution monitor 150 dpi  OCR software and hardware to perform
text recognition an optical disk subsystem on which to archive all the
images as the processing is done file management and tracking software.

ZIDAR opined that the software one purchases was more important than the
hardware and might also cost more than the hardware, but it was likely to
prove critical to the success or failure of ones system.  In addition to
a standalone scanning workstation for image capture, then, text capture
requires one or two editing stations networked to this scanning station
to perform editing.  Editing the text takes two or three times as long as
capturing the images.

Finally, ZIDAR stressed the importance of buying an open system that allows
for more than one vendor, complies with standards, and can be upgraded.

                                 


WATERS Yale University Librarys master plan to convert microfilm to
digital imagery POB  The place of electronic tools in the library of
the future  The uses of images and an image library  Primary input from
preservation microfilm  Features distinguishing POB from CXP and key
hypotheses guiding POB  Use of vendor selection process to facilitate
organizational work  Criteria for selecting vendor  Finalists and
results of process for Yale  Key factor distinguishing vendors 
Components, design principles, and some estimated costs of POB  Role of
preservation materials in developing imaging market  Factors affecting
quality and cost  Factors affecting the usability of complex documents
in image form 


Donald WATERS, head of the Systems Office, Yale University Library,
reported on the progress of a master plan for a project at Yale to
convert microfilm to digital imagery, Project Open Book POB.  Stating
that POB was in an advanced stage of planning, WATERS detailed, in
particular, the process of selecting a vendor partner and several key
issues under discussion as Yale prepares to move into the project itself.
He commented first on the vision that serves as the context of POB and
then described its purpose and scope.

WATERS sees the library of the future not necessarily as an electronic
library but as a place that generates, preserves, and improves for its
clients ready access to both intellectual and physical recorded
knowledge.  Electronic tools must find a place in the library in the
context of this vision.  Several roles for electronic tools include
serving as:  indirect sources of electronic knowledge or as "finding"
aids the online catalogues, the articlelevel indices, registers for
documents and archives direct sources of recorded knowledge fulltext
images and various kinds of compound sources of recorded knowledge the
socalled compound documents of Hypertext, mixed text and image,
mixedtext image format, and multimedia.

POB is looking particularly at images and an image library, the uses to
which images will be put e.g., storage, printing, browsing, and then use
as input for other processes, OCR as a subsequent process to image
capture, or creating an image library, and also possibly generating
microfilm.

While input will come from a variety of sources, POB is considering
especially input from preservation microfilm.  A possible outcome is that
the film and paper which provide the input for the image library
eventually may go off into remote storage, and that the image library may
be the primary access tool.

The purpose and scope of POB focus on imaging.  Though related to CXP,
POB has two features which distinguish it:  1 scaleconversion of
10,000 volumes into digital image form and 2 sourceconversion from
microfilm.  Given these features, several key working hypotheses guide
POB, including:  1 Since POB is using microfilm, it is not concerned with
the image library as a preservation medium.  2 Digital imagery can improve
access to recorded knowledge through printing and network distribution at
a modest incremental cost of microfilm.  3 Capturing and storing documents
in a digital image form is necessary to further improvements in access.
POB distinguishes between the imaging, digitizing process and OCR,
which at this stage it does not plan to perform.

Currently in its first or organizational phase, POB found that it could
use a vendor selection process to facilitate a good deal of the
organizational work e.g., creating a project team and advisory board,
confirming the validity of the plan, establishing the cost of the project
and a budget, selecting the materials to convert, and then raising the
necessary funds.

POB developed numerous selection criteria, including:  a firm committed
to imagedocument management, the ability to serve as systems integrator
in a largescale project over several years, interest in developing the
requisite software as a standard rather than a custom product, and a
willingness to invest substantial resources in the project itself.

Two vendors, DEC and Xerox, were selected as finalists in October 1991,
and with the support of the Commission on Preservation and Access, each
was commissioned to generate a detailed requirements analysis for the
project and then to submit a formal proposal for the completion of the
project, which included a budget and costs. The terms were that POB would
pay the loser.  The results for Yale of involving a vendor included:
broad involvement of Yale staff across the board at a relatively low
cost, which may have longterm significance in carrying out the project
twentyfive to thirty university people are engaged in POB better
understanding of the factors that affect corporate response to markets
for imaging products a competitive proposal and a more sophisticated
view of the imaging markets.

The most important factor that distinguished the vendors under
consideration was their identification with the customer.  The size and
internal complexity of the company also was an important factor.  POB was
looking at large companies that had substantial resources.  In the end,
the process generated for Yale two competitive proposals, with Xeroxs
the clear winner.  WATERS then described the components of the proposal,
the design principles, and some of the costs estimated for the process.

Components are essentially four:  a conversion subsystem, a
networkaccessible storage subsystem for 10,000 books and POB expects
200 to 600 dpi storage, browsing stations distributed on the campus
network, and network access to the image printers.

Among the design principles, POB wanted conversion at the highest
possible resolution.  Assuming TIFF files, TIFF files with Group 4
compression, TCPIP, and ethernet network on campus, POB wanted a
clientserver approach with image documents distributed to the
workstations and made accessible through native workstation interfaces
such as Windows.  POB also insisted on a phased approach to
implementation:  1 a standalone, singleuser, lowcost entry into the
business with a workstation focused on conversion and allowing POB to
explore user access 2 movement into a highervolume conversion with
networkaccessible storage and multiple access stations and 3 a
highvolume conversion, fullcapacity storage, and multiple browsing
stations distributed throughout the campus.

The costs proposed for startup assumed the existence of the Yale network
and its two DocuTech image printers.  Other startup costs are estimated
at 1 million over the three phases.  At the end of the project, the annual
operating costs estimated primarily for the software and hardware proposed
come to about 60,000, but these exclude costs for labor needed in the
conversion process, network and printer usage, and facilities management.

Finally, the selection process produced for Yale a more sophisticated
view of the imaging markets:  the management of complex documents in
image form is not a preservation problem, not a library problem, but a
general problem in a broad, general industry.  Preservation materials are
useful for developing that market because of the qualities of the
material.  For example, much of it is out of copyright.  The resolution
of key issues such as the quality of scanning and image browsing also
will affect development of that market.

The technology is readily available but changing rapidly.  In this
context of rapid change, several factors affect quality and cost, to
which POB intends to pay particular attention, for example, the various
levels of resolution that can be achieved.  POB believes it can bring
resolution up to 600 dpi, but an interpolation process from 400 to 600 is
more likely.  The variation quality in microfilm will prove to be a
highly important factor.  POB may reexamine the standards used to film in
the first place by looking at this process as a followon to microfilming.

Other important factors include:  the techniques available to the
operator for handling material, the ways of integrating quality control
into the digitizing work flow, and a work flow that includes indexing and
storage.  POBs requirement was to be able to deal with quality control
at the point of scanning.  Thus, thanks to Xerox, POB anticipates having
a mechanism which will allow it not only to scan in batch form, but to
review the material as it goes through the scanner and control quality
from the outset.

The standards for measuring quality and costs depend greatly on the uses
of the material, including subsequent OCR, storage, printing, and
browsing.  But especially at issue for POB is the facility for browsing.
This facility, WATERS said, is perhaps the weakest aspect of imaging
technology and the most in need of development.

A variety of factors affect the usability of complex documents in image
form, among them:  1 the ability of the system to handle the full range
of document types, not just monographs but serials, multipart
monographs, and manuscripts 2 the location of the database of record
for bibliographic information about the image document, which POB wants
to enter once and in the most useful place, the online catalog 3 a
document identifier for referencing the bibliographic information in one
place and the images in another 4 the technique for making the basic
internal structure of the document accessible to the reader and finally,
5 the physical presentation on the CRT of those documents.  POB is ready
to complete this phase now.  One last decision involves deciding which
material to scan.

                                 


DISCUSSION  TIFF files constitute de facto standard  NARAs experience
with image conversion software and text conversion  RFC 1314 
Considerable flux concerning available hardware and software solutions 
NAL throughput rate during scanning  Window management questions 


In the questionandanswer period that followed WATERSs presentation,
the following points emerged:

      ZIDARs statement about using TIFF files as a standard meant de
     facto standard.  This is what most people use and typically exchange
     with other groups, across platforms, or even occasionally across
     display software.

      HOLMES commented on the unsuccessful experience of NARA in
     attempting to run imageconversion software or to exchange between
     applications:  What are supposedly TIFF files go into other software
     that is supposed to be able to accept TIFF but cannot recognize the
     format and cannot deal with it, and thus renders the exchange
     useless.  Re text conversion, he noted the different recognition
     rates obtained by substituting the make and model of scanners in
     NARAs recent test of an "intelligent" characterrecognition product
     for a new company.  In the selection of hardware and software,
     HOLMES argued, software no longer constitutes the overriding factor
     it did until about a year ago rather it is perhaps important to
     look at both now.

      Danny Cohen and Alan Katz of the University of Southern California
     Information Sciences Institute began circulating as an Internet RFC
     RFC 1314 about a month ago a standard for a TIFF interchange
     format for Internet distribution of monochrome bitmapped images,
     which LYNCH said he believed would be used as a de facto standard.

      FLEISCHHAUERs impression from hearing these reports and thinking
     about AMs experience was that there is considerable flux concerning
     available hardware and software solutions.  HOOTON agreed and
     commented at the same time on ZIDARs statement that the equipment
     employed affects the results produced.  One cannot draw a complete
     conclusion by saying it is difficult or impossible to perform OCR
     from scanning microfilm, for example, with that device,  that set of
     parameters, and system requirements, because numerous other people
     are accomplishing just that, using other components, perhaps.
     HOOTON opined that both the hardware and the software were highly
     important.  Most of the problems discussed today have been solved in
     numerous different ways by other people.  Though it is good to be
     cognizant of various experiences, this is not to say that it will
     always be thus.

      At NAL, the throughput rate of the scanning process for paper,
     page by page, performing OCR, ranges from 300 to 600 pages per day
     not performing OCR is considerably faster, although how much faster
     is not known.  This is for scanning from bound books, which is much
     slower.

      WATERS commented on window management questions:  DEC proposed an
     XWindows solution which was problematical for two reasons.  One was
     POBs requirement to be able to manipulate images on the workstation
     and bring them down to the workstation itself and the other was
     network usage.

                                 


THOMA  Illustration of deficiencies in scanning and storage process 
Image quality in this process  Different costs entailed by better image
quality  Techniques for overcoming various deficiencies:  fixed
thresholding, dynamic thresholding, dithering, image merge  Page edge
effects 


George THOMA, chief, Communications Engineering Branch, National Library
of Medicine NLM, illustrated several of the deficiencies discussed by
the previous speakers.  He introduced the topic of special problems by
noting the advantages of electronic imaging.  For example, it is regenerable
because it is a coded file, and realtime quality control is possible with
electronic capture, whereas in photographic capture it is not.

One of the difficulties discussed in the scanning and storage process was
image quality which, without belaboring the obvious, means different
things for maps, medical Xrays, or broadcast television.  In the case of
documents, THOMA said, image quality boils down to legibility of the
textual parts, and fidelity in the case of gray or color photo printtype
material.  Legibility boils down to scan density, the standard in most
cases being 300 dpi.  Increasing the resolution with scanners that
perform 600 or 1200 dpi, however, comes at a cost.

Better image quality entails at least four different kinds of costs:  1
equipment costs, because the CCD i.e., chargecouple device with
greater number of elements costs more  2 time costs that translate to
the actual capture costs, because manual labor is involved the time is
also dependent on the fact that more data has to be moved around in the
machine in the scanning or network devices that perform the scanning as
well as the storage  3 media costs, because at high resolutions larger
files have to be stored and 4 transmission costs, because there is just
more data to be transmitted.

But while resolution takes care of the issue of legibility in image
quality, other deficiencies have to do with contrast and elements on the
page scanned or the image that needed to be removed or clarified.  Thus,
THOMA proceeded to illustrate various deficiencies, how they are
manifested, and several techniques to overcome them.

Fixed thresholding was the first technique described, suitable for
blackandwhite text, when the contrast does not vary over the page.  One
can have many different threshold levels in scanning devices.  Thus,
THOMA offered an example of extremely poor contrast, which resulted from
the fact that the stock was a heavy red.  This is the sort of image that
when microfilmed fails to provide any legibility whatsoever.  Fixed
thresholding is the way to change the blacktored contrast to the
desired blacktowhite contrast.

Other examples included material that had been browned or yellowed by
age.  This was also a case of contrast deficiency, and correction was
done by fixed thresholding.  A final example boils down to the same
thing, slight variability, but it is not significant.  Fixed thresholding
solves this problem as well.  The microfilm equivalent is certainly legible,
but it comes with dark areas.  Though THOMA did not have a slide of the
microfilm in this case, he did show the reproduced electronic image.

When one has variable contrast over a page or the lighting over the page
area varies, especially in the case where a bound volume has light
shining on it, the image must be processed by a dynamic thresholding
scheme.  One scheme, dynamic averaging, allows the threshold level not to
be fixed but to be recomputed for every pixel from the neighboring
characteristics.  The neighbors of a pixel determine where the threshold
should be set for that pixel.

THOMA showed an example of a page that had been made deficient by a
variety of techniques, including a burn mark, coffee stains, and a yellow
marker.  Application of a fixedthresholding scheme, THOMA argued, might
take care of several deficiencies on the page but not all of them.
Performing the calculation for a dynamic threshold setting, however,
removes most of the deficiencies so that at least the text is legible.

Another problem is representing a gray level with blackandwhite pixels
by a process known as dithering or electronic screening.  But dithering
does not provide good image quality for pure blackandwhite textual
material.  THOMA illustrated this point with examples. Although its
suitability for photoprint is the reason for electronic screening or
dithering, it cannot be used for every compound image.  In the document
that was distributed by CXP, THOMA noticed that the dithered image of the
IEEE test chart evinced some deterioration in the text.  He presented an
extreme example of deterioration in the text in which compounded
documents had to be set right by other techniques.  The technique
illustrated by the present example was an image merge in which the page
is scanned twice and the settings go from fixed threshold to the
dithering matrix the resulting images are merged to give the best
results with each technique.

THOMA illustrated how dithering is also used in nonphotographic or
nonprint materials with an example of a grayish page from a medical text,
which was reproduced to show all of the gray that appeared in the
original.  Dithering provided a reproduction of all the gray in the
original of another example from the same text.

THOMA finally illustrated the problem of bordering, or pageedge,
effects.  Books and bound volumes that are placed on a photocopy machine
or a scanner produce pageedge effects that are undesirable for two
reasons:  1 the aesthetics of the image after all, if the image is to
be preserved, one does not necessarily want to keep all of its
deficiencies 2 compression with the bordering problem THOMA
illustrated, the compression ratio deteriorated tremendously.  One way
to eliminate this more serious problem is to have the operator at the
point of scanning window the part of the image that is desirable and
automatically turn all of the pixels out of that picture to white.

                                 


FLEISCHHAUER  AMs experience with scanning bound materials  Dithering



Carl FLEISCHHAUER, coordinator, American Memory, Library of Congress,
reported AMs experience with scanning bound materials, which he likened
to the problems involved in using photocopying machines.  Very few
devices in the industry offer bookedge scanning, let alone book cradles.
The problem may be unsolvable, FLEISCHHAUER said, because a large enough
market does not exist for a preservationquality scanner.  AM is using a
Kurzweil scanner, which is a bookedge scanner now sold by Xerox.

Devoting the remainder of his brief presentation to dithering,
FLEISCHHAUER related AMs experience with a contractor who was using
unsophisticated equipment and software to reduce moire patterns from
printed halftones.  AM took the same image and used the dithering
algorithm that forms part of the same Kurzweil Xerox scanner it
disguised moire patterns much more effectively.

FLEISCHHAUER also observed that dithering produces a binary file which is
useful for numerous purposes, for example, printing it on a laser printer
without having to "rehalftone" it.  But it tends to defeat efficient
compression, because the very thing that dithers to reduce moire patterns
also tends to work against compression schemes.  AM thought the
difference in image quality was worth it.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Relative use as a criterion for POBs selection of books to
be converted into digital form 


During the discussion period, WATERS noted that one of the criteria for
selecting books among the 10,000 to be converted into digital image form
would be how much relative use they would receivea subject still
requiring evaluation.  The challenge will be to understand whether
coherent bodies of material will increase usage or whether POB should
seek material that is being used, scan that, and make it more accessible.
POB might decide to digitize materials that are already heavily used, in
order to make them more accessible and decrease wear on them.  Another
approach would be to provide a large body of intellectually coherent
material that may be used more in digital form than it is currently used
in microfilm.  POB would seek material that was out of copyright.

                                 


BARONAS  Origin and scope of AIIM  Types of documents produced in
AIIMs standards program  Domain of AIIMs standardization work  AIIMs
structure  TC 171 and MS23  Electronic image management standards 
Categories of EIM standardization where AIIM standards are being
developed 


Jean BARONAS, senior manager, Department of Standards and Technology,
Association for Information and Image Management AIIM, described the
notforprofit association and the national and international programs
for standardization in which AIIM is active.

Accredited for twentyfive years as the nations standards development
organization for document image management, AIIM began life in a library
community developing microfilm standards.  Today the association
maintains both its library and businessimage management standardization
activitiesand has moved into electronic imagemanagement
standardization EIM.

BARONAS defined the programs scope.  AIIM deals with:  1 the
terminology of standards and of the technology it uses 2 methods of
measurement for the systems, as well as quality 3 methodologies for
users to evaluate and measure quality 4 the features of apparatus used
to manage and edit images and 5 the procedures used to manage images.

BARONAS noted that three types of documents are produced in the AIIM
standards program:  the first two, accredited by the American National
Standards Institute ANSI, are standards and standard recommended
practices.  Recommended practices differ from standards in that they
contain more tutorial information.  A technical report is not an ANSI
standard.  Because AIIMs policies and procedures for developing
standards are approved by ANSI, its standards are labeled ANSIAIIM,
followed by the number and title of the standard.

BARONAS then illustrated the domain of AIIMs standardization work.  For
example, AIIM is the administrator of the U.S. Technical Advisory Group
TAG to the International Standards Organizations ISO technical
committee, TC l7l Micrographics and Optical Memories for Document and
Image Recording, Storage, and Use.  AIIM officially works through ANSI in
the international standardization process.

BARONAS described AIIMs structure, including its board of directors, its
standards board of twelve individuals active in the imagemanagement
industry, its strategic planning and legal admissibility task forces, and
its National Standards Council, which is comprised of the members of a
number of organizations who vote on every AIIM standard before it is
published.  BARONAS pointed out that AIIMs liaisons deal with numerous
other standards developers, including the optical disk community, office
and publishing systems, imagecodesandcharacter set committees, and the
National Information Standards Organization NISO.

BARONAS illustrated the procedures of TC l7l, which covers all aspects of
image management.  When AIIMs national program has conceptualized a new
project, it is usually submitted to the international level, so that the
member countries of TC l7l can simultaneously work on the development of
the standard or the technical report.  BARONAS also illustrated a classic
microfilm standard, MS23, which deals with numerous imaging concepts that
apply to electronic imaging.  Originally developed in the l970s, revised
in the l980s, and revised again in l991, this standard is scheduled for
another revision.  MS23 is an active standard whereby users may propose
new density ranges and new methods of evaluating film images in the
standards revision.

BARONAS detailed several electronic imagemanagement standards, for
instance, ANSIAIIM MS44, a qualitycontrol guideline for scanning 8.5"
by 11" blackandwhite office documents.  This standard is used with the
IEEE fax imagea continuous tone photographic image with gray scales,
text, and several continuous tone picturesand AIIM test target number
2, a representative document used in office document management.

BARONAS next outlined the four categories of EIM standardization in which
AIIM standards are being developed:  transfer and retrieval, evaluation,
optical disc and document scanning applications, and design and
conversion of documents.  She detailed several of the main projects of
each:  1 in the category of image transfer and retrieval, a bilevel
image transfer format, ANSIAIIM MS53, which is a proposed standard that
describes a file header for image transfer between unlike systems when
the images are compressed using G3 and G4 compression 2 the category of
image evaluation, which includes the AIIMproposed TR26 tutorial on image
resolution this technical report will treat the differences and
similarities between classical or photographic and electronic imaging
3 design and conversion, which includes a proposed technical report
called "Forms Design Optimization for EIM" this report considers how
generalpurpose business forms can be best designed so that scanning is
optimized reprographic characteristics such as type, rules, background,
tint, and color will likewise be treated in the technical report 4
disk and document scanning applications includes a project a on planning
platters and disk management, b on generating an application profile for
EIM when images are stored and distributed on CDROM, and c on
evaluating SCSI2, and how a common command set can be generated for SCSI2
so that document scanners are more easily integrated.  ANSIAIIM MS53
will also apply to compressed images.

                                 


BATTIN  The implications of standards for preservation  A major
obstacle to successful cooperation  A hindrance to access in the digital
environment  Standards a doubleedged sword for those concerned with the
preservation of the human record  Nearterm prognosis for reliable
archival standards  Preservation concerns for electronic media  Need
for reconceptualizing our preservation principles  Standards in the real
world and the politics of reproduction  Need to redefine the concept of
archival and to begin to think in terms of life cycles  Cooperation and
the La Guardia Eight  Concerns generated by discussions on the problems
of preserving text and image  General principles to be adopted in a
world without standards 


Patricia BATTIN, president, the Commission on Preservation and Access
CPA, addressed the implications of standards for preservation.  She
listed several areas where the library profession and the analog world of
the printed book had made enormous contributions over the past hundred
yearsfor example, in bibliographic formats, binding standards, and, most
important, in determining what constitutes longevity or archival quality.

Although standards have lightened the preservation burden through the
development of national and international collaborative programs,
nevertheless, a pervasive mistrust of other peoples standards remains a
major obstacle to successful cooperation, BATTIN said.

The zeal to achieve perfection, regardless of the cost, has hindered
rather than facilitated access in some instances, and in the digital
environment, where no real standards exist, has brought an ironically
just reward.

BATTIN argued that standards are a doubleedged sword for those concerned
with the preservation of the human record, that is, the provision of
access to recorded knowledge in a multitude of media as far into the
future as possible.  Standards are essential to facilitate
interconnectivity and access, but, BATTIN said, as LYNCH pointed out
yesterday, if set too soon they can hinder creativity, expansion of
capability, and the broadening of access.  The characteristics of
standards for digital imagery differ radically from those for analog
imagery.  And the nature of digital technology implies continuing
volatility and change.  To reiterate, precipitous standardsetting can
inhibit creativity, but delayed standardsetting results in chaos.

Since in BATTINS opinion the nearterm prognosis for reliable archival
standards, as defined by librarians in the analog world, is poor, two
alternatives remain:  standing pat with the old technology, or
reconceptualizing.

Preservation concerns for electronic media fall into two general domains.
One is the continuing assurance of access to knowledge originally
generated, stored, disseminated, and used in electronic form.  This
domain contains several subdivisions, including 1 the closed,
proprietary systems discussed the previous day, bundled information such
as electronic journals and government agency records, and electronically
produced or captured raw data and 2 the application of digital
technologies to the reformatting of materials originally published on a
deteriorating analog medium such as acid paper or videotape.

The preservation of electronic media requires a reconceptualizing of our
preservation principles during a volatile, standardless transition which
may last far longer than any of us envision today.  BATTIN urged the
necessity of shifting focus from assessing, measuring, and setting
standards for the permanence of the medium to the concept of managing
continuing access to information stored on a variety of media and
requiring a variety of everchanging hardware and software for accessa
fundamental shift for the library profession.

BATTIN offered a primer on how to move forward with reasonable confidence
in a world without standards.  Her comments fell roughly into two sections:
1 standards in the real world and 2 the politics of reproduction.

In regard to realworld standards, BATTIN argued the need to redefine the
concept of archive and to begin to think in terms of life cycles.  In
the past, the naive assumption that paper would last forever produced a
cavalier attitude toward life cycles.  The transient nature of the
electronic media has compelled people to recognize and accept upfront the
concept of life cycles in place of permanency.

Digital standards have to be developed and set in a cooperative context
to ensure efficient exchange of information.  Moreover, during this
transition period, greater flexibility concerning how concepts such as
backup copies and archival copies in the CXP are defined is necessary,
or the opportunity to move forward will be lost.

In terms of cooperation, particularly in the university setting, BATTIN
also argued the need to avoid going off in a hundred different
directions.  The CPA has catalyzed a small group of universities called
the La Guardia Eightbecause La Guardia Airport is where meetings take
placeHarvard, Yale, Cornell, Princeton, Penn State, Tennessee,
Stanford, and USC, to develop a digital preservation consortium to look
at all these issues and develop de facto standards as we move along,
instead of waiting for something that is officially blessed.  Continuing
to apply analog values and definitions of standards to the digital
environment, BATTIN said, will effectively lead to forfeiture of the
benefits of digital technology to research and scholarship.

Under the second rubric, the politics of reproduction, BATTIN reiterated
an oftmade argument concerning the electronic library, namely, that it
is more difficult to transform than to create, and nowhere is that belief
expressed more dramatically than in the conversion of brittle books to
new media.  Preserving information published in electronic media involves
making sure the information remains accessible and that digital
information is not lost through reproduction.  In the analog world of
photocopies and microfilm, the issue of fidelity to the original becomes
paramount, as do issues of "Whose fidelity?" and "Whose original?"

BATTIN elaborated these arguments with a few examples from a recent study
conducted by the CPA on the problems of preserving text and image.
Discussions with scholars, librarians, and curators in a variety of
disciplines dependent on text and image generated a variety of concerns,
for example:  1 Copy what is, not what the technology is capable of.
This is very important for the history of ideas.  Scholars wish to know
what the author saw and worked from.  And make available at the
workstation the opportunity to erase all the defects and enhance the
presentation.  2 The fidelity of reproductionwhat is good enough, what
can we afford, and the difference it makesissues of subjective versus
objective resolution.  3 The differences between primary and secondary
users.  Restricting the definition of primary user to the one in whose
discipline the material has been published runs one headlong into the
reality that these printed books have had a host of other users from a
host of other disciplines, who not only were looking for very different
things, but who also shared values very different from those of the
primary user.  4 The relationship of the standard of reproduction to new
capabilities of scholarshipthe browsing standard versus an archival
standard.  How good must the archival standard be?  Can a distinction be
drawn between potential users in setting standards for reproduction?
Archival storage, use copies, browsing copiesought an attempt to set
standards even be made?  5 Finally, costs.  How much are we prepared to
pay to capture absolute fidelity?  What are the tradeoffs between vastly
enhanced access, degrees of fidelity, and costs?

These standards, BATTIN concluded, serve to complicate further the
reproduction process, and add to the long list of technical standards
that are necessary to ensure widespread access.  Ways to articulate and
analyze the costs that are attached to the different levels of standards
must be found.

Given the chaos concerning standards, which promises to linger for the
foreseeable future, BATTIN urged adoption of the following general
principles:

      Strive to understand the changing information requirements of
     scholarly disciplines as more and more technology is integrated into
     the process of research and scholarly communication in order to meet
     future scholarly needs, not to build for the past.  Capture
     deteriorating information at the highest affordable resolution, even
     though the dissemination and display technologies will lag.

      Develop cooperative mechanisms to foster agreement on protocols
     for document structure and other interchange mechanisms necessary
     for widespread dissemination and use before official standards are
     set.

      Accept that, in a transition period, de facto standards will have
     to be developed.

      Capture information in a way that keeps all options open and
     provides for total convertibility:  OCR, scanning of microfilm,
     producing microfilm from scanned documents, etc.

      Work closely with the generators of information and the builders
     of networks and databases to ensure that continuing accessibility is
     a primary concern from the beginning.

      Piggyback on standards under development for the broad market, and
     avoid libraryspecific standards work with the vendors, in order to
     take advantage of that which is being standardized for the rest of
     the world.

      Concentrate efforts on managing permanence in the digital world,
     rather than perfecting the longevity of a particular medium.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Additional comments on TIFF 


During the brief discussion period that followed BATTINs presentation,
BARONAS explained that TIFF was not developed in collaboration with or
under the auspices of AIIM.  TIFF is a company product, not a standard,
is owned by two corporations, and is always changing.  BARONAS also
observed that ANSIAIIM MS53, a bilevel image file transfer format that
allows unlike systems to exchange images, is compatible with TIFF as well
as with DECs architecture and IBMs MODCAIOCA.

                                 


HOOTON  Several questions to be considered in discussing text conversion



HOOTON introduced the final topic, text conversion, by noting that it is
becoming an increasingly important part of the imaging business.  Many
people now realize that it enhances their system to be able to have more
and more character data as part of their imaging system.  Re the issue of
OCR versus rekeying, HOOTON posed several questions:  How does one get
text into computerreadable form?  Does one use automated processes?
Does one attempt to eliminate the use of operators where possible?
Standards for accuracy, he said, are extremely important:  it makes a
major difference in cost and time whether one sets as a standard 98.5
percent acceptance or 99.5 percent.  He mentioned outsourcing as a
possibility for converting text.  Finally, what one does with the image
to prepare it for the recognition process is also important, he said,
because such preparation changes how recognition is viewed, as well as
facilitates recognition itself.

                                 


LESK  Roles of participants in CORE  Data flow  The scanning process 
The image interface  Results of experiments involving the use of
electronic resources and traditional paper copies  Testing the issue of
serendipity  Conclusions 


Michael LESK, executive director, Computer Science Research, Bell
Communications Research, Inc. Bellcore, discussed the Chemical Online
Retrieval Experiment CORE, a cooperative project involving Cornell
University, OCLC, Bellcore, and the American Chemical Society ACS.

LESK spoke on 1 how the scanning was performed, including the unusual
feature of page segmentation, and 2 the use made of the text and the
image in experiments.

Working with the chemistry journals because ACS has been saving its
typesetting tapes since the mid1970s and thus has a significant backrun
of the most important chemistry journals in the United States, CORE is
attempting to create an automated chemical library.  Approximately a
quarter of the pages by square inch are made up of images of
quasipictorial material dealing with the graphic components of the
pages is extremely important.  LESK described the roles of participants
in CORE:  1 ACS provides copyright permission, journals on paper,
journals on microfilm, and some of the definitions of the files 2 at
Bellcore, LESK chiefly performs the data preparation, while Dennis Egan
performs experiments on the users of chemical abstracts, and supplies the
indexing and numerous magnetic tapes  3 Cornell provides the site of the
experiment 4 OCLC develops retrieval software and other user interfaces.
Various manufacturers and publishers have furnished other help.

Concerning data flow, Bellcore receives microfilm and paper from ACS the
microfilm is scanned by outside vendors, while the paper is scanned
inhouse on an Improvision scanner, twenty pages per minute at 300 dpi,
which provides sufficient quality for all practical uses.  LESK would
prefer to have more gray level, because one of the ACS journals prints on
some colored pages, which creates a problem.

Bellcore performs all this scanning, creates a pageimage file, and also
selects from the pages the graphics, to mix with the text file which is
discussed later in the Workshop.  The user is always searching the ASCII
file, but she or he may see a display based on the ASCII or a display
based on the images.

LESK illustrated how the program performs page analysis, and the image
interface.  The user types several words, is presented with a list
usually of the titles of articles contained in an issuethat derives
from the ASCII, clicks on an icon and receives an image that mirrors an
ACS page.  LESK also illustrated an alternative interface, based on text
on the ASCII, the socalled SuperBook interface from Bellcore.

LESK next presented the results of an experiment conducted by Dennis Egan
and involving thirtysix students at Cornell, one third of them
undergraduate chemistry majors, one third senior undergraduate chemistry
majors, and one third graduate chemistry students.  A third of them
received the paper journals, the traditional paper copies and chemical
abstracts on paper.  A third received image displays of the pictures of
the pages, and a third received the text display with popup graphics.

The students were given several questions made up by some chemistry
professors.  The questions fell into five classes, ranging from very easy
to very difficult, and included questions designed to simulate browsing
as well as a traditional information retrievaltype task.

LESK furnished the following results.  In the straightforward question
searchthe question being, what is the phosphorus oxygen bond distance
and hydroxy phosphate?the students were told that they could take
fifteen minutes and, then, if they wished, give up.  The students with
paper took more than fifteen minutes on average, and yet most of them
gave up.  The students with either electronic format, text or image,
received good scores in reasonable time, hardly ever had to give up, and
usually found the right answer.

In the browsing study, the students were given a list of eight topics,
told to imagine that an issue of the Journal of the American Chemical
Society had just appeared on their desks, and were also told to flip
through it and to find topics mentioned in the issue.  The average scores
were about the same.  The students were told to answer yes or no about
whether or not particular topics appeared.  The errors, however, were
quite different.  The students with paper rarely said that something
appeared when it had not.  But they often failed to find something
actually mentioned in the issue.  The computer people found numerous
things, but they also frequently said that a topic was mentioned when it
was not.  The reason, of course, was that they were performing word
searches.  They were finding that words were mentioned and they were
concluding that they had accomplished their task.

This question also contained a trick to test the issue of serendipity.
The students were given another list of eight topics and instructed,
without taking a second look at the journal, to recall how many of this
new list of eight topics were in this particular issue.  This was an
attempt to see if they performed better at remembering what they were not
looking for.  They all performed about the same, paper or electronics,
about 62 percent accurate.  In short, LESK said, people were not very
good when it came to serendipity, but they were no worse at it with
computers than they were with paper.

LESK gave a parenthetical illustration of the learning curve of students
who used SuperBook.

The students using the electronic systems started off worse than the ones
using print, but by the third of the three sessions in the series had
caught up to print.  As one might expect, electronics provide a much
better means of finding what one wants to read reading speeds, once the
object of the search has been found, are about the same.

Almost none of the students could perform the hard taskthe analogous
transformation.  It would require the expertise of organic chemists to
complete.  But an interesting result was that the students using the text
search performed terribly, while those using the image system did best.
That the text search system is driven by text offers the explanation.
Everything is focused on the text to see the pictures, one must press
on an icon.  Many students found the right article containing the answer
to the question, but they did not click on the icon to bring up the right
figure and see it.  They did not know that they had found the right place,
and thus got it wrong.

The short answer demonstrated by this experiment was that in the event
one does not know what to read, one needs the electronic systems the
electronic systems hold no advantage at the moment if one knows what to
read, but neither do they impose a penalty.

LESK concluded by commenting that, on one hand, the image system was easy
to use.  On the other hand, the text display system, which represented
twenty manyears of work in programming and polishing, was not winning,
because the text was not being read, just searched.  The much easier
system is highly competitive as well as remarkably effective for the
actual chemists.

                                 


ERWAY  Most challenging aspect of working on AM  Assumptions guiding
AMs approach  Testing different types of service bureaus  AMs
requirement for 99.95 percent accuracy  Requirements for textcoding 
Additional factors influencing AMs approach to coding  Results of AMs
experience with rekeying  Other problems in dealing with service bureaus
 Quality control the most timeconsuming aspect of contracting out
conversion  Longterm outlook uncertain 


To Ricky ERWAY, associate coordinator, American Memory, Library of
Congress, the constant variety of conversion projects taking place
simultaneously represented perhaps the most challenging aspect of working
on AM.  Thus, the challenge was not to find a solution for text
conversion but a tool kit of solutions to apply to LCs varied
collections that need to be converted.  ERWAY limited her remarks to the
process of converting text to machinereadable form, and the variety of
LCs text collections, for example, bound volumes, microfilm, and
handwritten manuscripts.

Two assumptions have guided AMs approach, ERWAY said:  1 A desire not
to perform the conversion inhouse.  Because of the variety of formats and
types of texts, to capitalize the equipment and have the talents and
skills to operate them at LC would be extremely expensive.  Further, the
natural inclination to upgrade to newer and better equipment each year
made it reasonable for AM to focus on what it did best and seek external
conversion services.  Using service bureaus also allowed AM to have
several types of operations take place at the same time.  2 AM was not a
technology project, but an effort to improve access to library
collections.  Hence, whether text was converted using OCR or rekeying
mattered little to AM.  What mattered were cost and accuracy of results.

AM considered different types of service bureaus and selected three to
perform several small tests in order to acquire a sense of the field.
The sample collections with which they worked included handwritten
correspondence, typewritten manuscripts from the 1940s, and
eighteenthcentury printed broadsides on microfilm.  On none of these
samples was OCR performed they were all rekeyed.  AM had several special
requirements for the three service bureaus it had engaged.  For instance,
any errors in the original text were to be retained.  Working from bound
volumes or anything that could not be sheetfed also constituted a factor
eliminating companies that would have performed OCR.

AM requires 99.95 percent accuracy, which, though it sounds high, often
means one or two errors per page.  The initial batch of test samples
contained several handwritten materials for which AM did not require
textcoding.  The results, ERWAY reported, were in all cases fairly
comparable:  for the most part, all three service bureaus achieved 99.95
percent accuracy.  AM was satisfied with the work but surprised at the cost.

As AM began converting whole collections, it retained the requirement for
99.95 percent accuracy and added requirements for textcoding.  AM needed
to begin performing work more than three years ago before LC requirements
for SGML applications had been established.  Since AMs goal was simply
to retain any of the intellectual content represented by the formatting
of the document which would be lost if one performed a straight ASCII
conversion, AM used "SGMLlike" codes.  These codes resembled SGML tags
but were used without the benefit of documenttype definitions.  AM found
that many service bureaus were not yet SGMLproficient.

Additional factors influencing the approach AM took with respect to
coding included:  1 the inability of any known microcomputerbased
userretrieval software to take advantage of SGML coding and 2 the
multiple inconsistencies in format of the older documents, which
confirmed AM in its desire not to attempt to force the different formats
to conform to a single documenttype definition DTD and thus create the
need for a separate DTD for each document.

The five text collections that AM has converted or is in the process of
converting include a collection of eighteenthcentury broadsides, a
collection of pamphlets, two typescript document collections, and a
collection of 150 books.

ERWAY next reviewed the results of AMs experience with rekeying, noting
again that because the bulk of AMs materials are historical, the quality
of the text often does not lend itself to OCR.  While nonEnglish
speakers are less likely to guess or elaborate or correct typos in the
original text, they are also less able to infer what we would they also
are nearly incapable of converting handwritten text.  Another
disadvantage of working with overseas keyers is that they are much less
likely to telephone with questions, especially on the coding, with the
result that they develop their own rules as they encounter new
situations.

Government contracting procedures and time frames posed a major challenge
to performing the conversion.  Many service bureaus are not accustomed to
retaining the image, even if they perform OCR.  Thus, questions of image
format and storage media were somewhat novel to many of them.  ERWAY also
remarked other problems in dealing with service bureaus, for example,
their inability to perform text conversion from the kind of microfilm
that LC uses for preservation purposes.

But quality control, in ERWAYs experience, was the most timeconsuming
aspect of contracting out conversion.  AM has been attempting to perform
a 10percent quality review, looking at either every tenth document or
every tenth page to make certain that the service bureaus are maintaining
99.95 percent accuracy.  But even if they are complying with the
requirement for accuracy, finding errors produces a desire to correct
them and, in turn, to clean up the whole collection, which defeats the
purpose to some extent.  Even a double entry requires a
characterbycharacter comparison to the original to meet the accuracy
requirement.  LC is not accustomed to publish imperfect texts, which
makes attempting to deal with the industry standard an emotionally
fraught issue for AM.  As was mentioned in the previous days discussion,
going from 99.95 to 99.99 percent accuracy usually doubles costs and
means a third keying or another complete runthrough of the text.

Although AM has learned much from its experiences with various collections
and various service bureaus, ERWAY concluded pessimistically that no
breakthrough has been achieved.   Incremental improvements have occurred
in some of the OCR technology, some of the processes, and some of the
standards acceptances, which, though they may lead to somewhat lower costs,
do not offer much encouragement to many people who are anxiously awaiting
the day that the entire contents of LC are available online.

                                 


ZIDAR  Several answers to why one attempts to perform fulltext
conversion  Per page cost of performing OCR  Typical problems
encountered during editing  Editing poor copy OCR vs. rekeying 


Judith ZIDAR, coordinator, National Agricultural Text Digitizing Program
NATDP, National Agricultural Library NAL, offered several answers to
the question of why one attempts to perform fulltext conversion:  1
Text in an image can be read by a human but not by a computer, so of
course it is not searchable and there is not much one can do with it.  2
Some material simply requires wordlevel access.  For instance, the legal
profession insists on fulltext access to its material with taxonomic or
geographic material, which entails numerous names, one virtually requires
wordlevel access.  3 Full text permits rapid browsing and searching,
something that cannot be achieved in an image with todays technology.
4 Text stored as ASCII and delivered in ASCII is standardized and highly
portable.  5 People just want fulltext searching, even those who do not
know how to do it.  NAL, for the most part, is performing OCR at an
actual cost per averagesize page of approximately 7.  NAL scans the
page to create the electronic image and passes it through the OCR device.

ZIDAR next rehearsed several typical problems encountered during editing.
Praising the celerity of her student workers, ZIDAR observed that editing
requires approximately five to ten minutes per page, assuming that there
are no large tables to audit.  Confusion among the three characters I, 1,
and l, constitutes perhaps the most common problem encountered.  Zeroes
and  Os also are  frequently confused.  Double Ms create a particular
problem, even on clean pages.  They are so wide in most fonts that they
touch, and the system simply cannot tell where one letter ends and the
other begins.  Complex page formats occasionally fail to columnate
properly, which entails rescanning as though one were working with a
single column, entering the ASCII, and decolumnating for better
searching.  With proportionally spaced text, OCR can have difficulty
discerning what is a space and what are merely spaces between letters, as
opposed to spaces between words, and therefore will merge text or break
up words where it should not.

ZIDAR said that it can often take longer to edit a poorcopy OCR than to
key it from scratch.  NAL has also experimented with partial editing of
text, whereby project workers go into and clean up the format, removing
stray characters but not running a spellcheck.  NAL corrects typos in
the title and authors names, which provides a foothold for searching and
browsing.  Even extremely poorquality OCR e.g., 60percent accuracy
can still be searched, because numerous words are correct, while the
important words are probably repeated often enough that they are likely
to be found correct somewhere.  Librarians, however, cannot tolerate this
situation, though end users seem more willing to use this text for
searching, provided that NAL indicates that it is unedited.  ZIDAR
concluded that rekeying of text may be the best route to take, in spite
of numerous problems with quality control and cost.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Modifying an image before performing OCR  NALs costs per
page AMs costs per page and experience with Federal Prison Industries 
Elements comprising NATDPs costs per page  OCR and structured markup 
Distinction between the structure of a document and its representation
when put on the screen or printed 


HOOTON prefaced the lengthy discussion that followed with several
comments about modifying an image before one reaches the point of
performing OCR.  For example, in regard to an application containing a
significant amount of redundant data, such as formtype data, numerous
companies today are working on various kinds of form renewal, prior to
going through a recognition process, by using dropout colors.  Thus,
acquiring access to form design or using electronic means are worth
considering.  HOOTON also noted that conversion usually makes or breaks
ones imaging system.  It is extremely important, extremely costly in
terms of either capital investment or service, and determines the quality
of the remainder of ones system, because it determines the character of
the raw material used by the system.

Concerning the four projects undertaken by NAL, two inside and two
performed by outside contractors, ZIDAR revealed that an inhouse service
bureau executed the first at a cost between 8 and 10 per page for
everything, including building of the database.  The project undertaken
by the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research CGIAR
cost approximately 10 per page for the conversion, plus some expenses
for the software and building of the database.  The Acid Rain Projecta
twodisk set produced by the University of Vermont, consisting of
Canadian publications on acid raincost 6.70 per page for everything,
including keying of the text, which was double keyed, scanning of the
images, and building of the database.  The inhouse project offered
considerable ease of convenience and greater control of the process.  On
the other hand, the service bureaus know their job and perform it
expeditiously, because they have more people.

As a useful comparison, ERWAY revealed AMs costs as follows:  0.75
cents to 0.85 cents per thousand characters, with an average page
containing 2,700 characters.  Requirements for coding and imaging
increase the costs.  Thus, conversion of the text, including the coding,
costs approximately 3 per page.  This figure does not include the
imaging and databasebuilding included in the NAL costs.  AM also
enjoyed a happy experience with Federal Prison Industries, which
precluded the necessity of going through the requestforproposal process
to award a contract, because it is another government agency.  The
prisoners performed AMs rekeying just as well as other service bureaus
and proved handy as well.  AM shipped them the books, which they would
photocopy on a bookedge scanner.  They would perform the markup on
photocopies, return the books as soon as they were done with them,
perform the keying, and return the material to AM on WORM disks.

ZIDAR detailed the elements that constitute the previously noted cost of
approximately 7 per page.  Most significant is the editing, correction
of errors, and spellcheckings, which though they may sound easy to
perform require, in fact, a great deal of time.  Reformatting text also
takes a while, but a significant amount of NALs expenses are for equipment,
which was extremely expensive when purchased because it was one of the few
systems on the market.  The costs of equipment are being amortized over
five years but are still quite high, nearly 2,000 per month.

HOCKEY raised a general question concerning OCR and the amount of editing
required substantial in her experience to generate the kind of
structured markup necessary for manipulating the text on the computer or
loading it into any retrieval system.  She wondered if the speakers could
extend the previous question about the costbenefit of adding or exerting
structured markup.  ERWAY noted that several OCR systems retain italics,
bolding, and other spatial formatting.  While the material may not be in
the format desired, these systems possess the ability to remove the
original materials quickly from the hands of the people performing the
conversion, as well as to retain that information so that users can work
with it.  HOCKEY rejoined that the current thinking on markup is that one
should not say that something is italic or bold so much as why it is that
way.  To be sure, one needs to know that something was italicized, but
how can one get from one to the other?  One can map from the structure to
the typographic representation.

FLEISCHHAUER suggested that, given the 100 million items the Library
holds, it may not be possible for LC to do more than report that a thing
was in italics as opposed to why it was italics, although that may be
desirable in some contexts.  Promising to talk a bit during the afternoon
session about several experiments OCLC performed on automatic recognition
of document elements, and which they hoped to extend, WEIBEL said that in
fact one can recognize the major elements of a document with a fairly
high degree of reliability, at least as good as OCR.  STEVENS drew a
useful distinction between standard, generalized markup i.e., defining
for a documenttype definition the structure of the document, and what
he termed a style sheet, which had to do with italics, bolding, and other
forms of emphasis.  Thus, two different components are at work, one being
the structure of the document itself its logic, and the other being its
representation when it is put on the screen or printed.

                                 

SESSION V.  APPROACHES TO PREPARING ELECTRONIC TEXTS


HOCKEY  Text in ASCII and the representation of electronic text versus
an image  The need to look at ways of using markup to assist retrieval 
The need for an encoding format that will be reusable and multifunctional


Susan HOCKEY, director, Center for Electronic Texts in the Humanities
CETH, Rutgers and Princeton Universities, announced that one talk
WEIBELs was moved into this session from the morning and that David
Packard was unable to attend.  The session would attempt to focus more on
what one can do with a text in ASCII and the representation of electronic
text rather than just an image, what one can do with a computer that
cannot be done with a book or an image.  It would be argued that one can
do much more than just read a text, and from that starting point one can
use markup and methods of preparing the text to take full advantage of
the capability of the computer.  That would lead to a discussion of what
the European Community calls REUSABILITY, what may better be termed
DURABILITY, that is, how to prepare or make a text that will last a long
time and that can be used for as many applications as possible, which
would lead to issues of improving intellectual access.

HOCKEY urged the need to look at ways of using markup to facilitate retrieval,
not just for referencing or to help locate an item that is retrieved, but also to put markup tags in
a text to help retrieve the thing sought either with linguistic tagging or
interpretation.  HOCKEY also argued that little advancement had occurred in
the software tools currently available for retrieving and searching text.
She pressed the desideratum of going beyond Boolean searches and performing
more sophisticated searching, which the insertion of more markup in the text
would facilitate.  Thinking about electronic texts as opposed to images means
considering material that will never appear in print form, or print will not
be its primary form, that is, material which only appears in electronic form.
HOCKEY alluded to the history and the need for markup and tagging and
electronic text, which was developed through the use of computers in the
humanities as MICHELSON had observed, Father Busa had started in 1949
to prepare the firstever text on the computer.

HOCKEY remarked several large projects, particularly in Europe, for the
compilation of dictionaries, language studies, and language analysis, in
which people have built up archives of text and have begun to recognize
the need for an encoding format that will be reusable and multifunctional,
that can be used not just to print the text, which may be assumed to be a
byproduct of what one wants to do, but to structure it inside the computer
so that it can be searched, built into a Hypertext system, etc.

                                 


WEIBEL  OCLCs approach to preparing electronic text:  retroconversion,
keying of texts, more automated ways of developing data  Project ADAPT
and the CORE Project  Intelligent character recognition does not exist 
Advantages of SGML  Data should be free of procedural markup
descriptive markup strongly advocated  OCLCs interface illustrated 
Storage requirements and costs for putting a lot of information on line 


Stuart WEIBEL, senior research scientist, Online Computer Library Center,
Inc. OCLC, described OCLCs approach to preparing electronic text.  He
argued that the electronic world into which we are moving must
accommodate not only the future but the past as well, and to some degree
even the present.  Thus, starting out at one end with retroconversion and
keying of texts, one would like to move toward much more automated ways
of developing data.

For example, Project ADAPT had to do with automatically converting
document images into a structured document database with OCR text as
indexing and also a little bit of automatic formatting and tagging of
that text.  The CORE project hosted by Cornell University, Bellcore,
OCLC, the American Chemical Society, and Chemical Abstracts, constitutes
WEIBELs principal concern at the moment.  This project is an example of
converting text for which one already has a machinereadable version into
a format more suitable for electronic delivery and database searching.
Since Michael LESK had previously described CORE, WEIBEL would say
little concerning it.  Borrowing a chemical phrase, de novo synthesis,
WEIBEL cited the Online Journal of Current Clinical Trials as an example
of de novo electronic publishing, that is, a form in which the primary
form of the information is electronic.

Project ADAPT, then, which OCLC completed a couple of years ago and in
fact is about to resume, is a model in which one takes page images either
in paper or microfilm and converts them automatically to a searchable
electronic database, either online or local.  The operating assumption
is that accepting some blemishes in the data, especially for
retroconversion of materials, will make it possible to accomplish more.
Not enough money is available to support perfect conversion.

WEIBEL related several steps taken to perform image preprocessing
processing on the image before performing optical character
recognition, as well as image postprocessing.  He denied the existence
of intelligent character recognition and asserted that what is wanted is
page recognition, which is a long way off.  OCLC has experimented with
merging of multiple optical character recognition systems that will
reduce errors from an unacceptable rate of 5 characters out of every
l,000 to an unacceptable rate of 2 characters out of every l,000, but it
is not good enough.  It will never be perfect.

Concerning the CORE Project, WEIBEL observed that Bellcore is taking the
topography files, extracting the page images, and converting those
topography files to SGML markup.  LESK hands that data off to OCLC, which
builds that data into a Newton database, the same system that underlies
the online system in virtually all of the reference products at OCLC.
The longterm goal is to make the systems interoperable so that not just
Bellcores system and OCLCs system can access this data, but other
systems can as well, and the key to that is the Z39.50 common command
language and the fulltext extension.  Z39.50 is fine for MARC records,
but is not enough to do it for full text that is, make full texts
interoperable.

WEIBEL next outlined the critical role of SGML for a variety of purposes,
for example, as noted by HOCKEY, in the world of extremely large
databases, using highly structured data to perform field searches.
WEIBEL argued that by building the structure of the data in i.e., the
structure of the data originally on a printed page, it becomes easy to
look at a journal article even if one cannot read the characters and know
where the title or author is, or what the sections of that document would be.
OCLC wants to make that structure explicit in the database, because it will
be important for retrieval purposes.

The second big advantage of SGML is that it gives one the ability to
build structure into the database that can be used for display purposes
without contaminating the data with instructions about how to format
things.  The distinction lies between procedural markup, which tells one
where to put dots on the page, and descriptive markup, which describes
the elements of a document.

WEIBEL believes that there should be no procedural markup in the data at
all, that the data should be completely unsullied by information about
italics or boldness.  That should be left up to the display device,
whether that display device is a page printer or a screen display device.
By keeping ones database free of that kind of contamination, one can
make decisions down the road, for example, reorganize the data in ways
that are not cramped by builtin notions of what should be italic and
what should be bold.  WEIBEL strongly advocated descriptive markup.  As
an example, he illustrated the index structure in the CORE data.  With
subsequent illustrated examples of markup, WEIBEL acknowledged the common
complaint that SGML is hard to read in its native form, although markup
decreases considerably once one gets into the body.  Without the markup,
however, one would not have the structure in the data.  One can pass
markup through a LaTeX processor and convert it relatively easily to a
printed version of the document.

WEIBEL next illustrated an extremely cluttered screen dump of OCLCs
system, in order to show as much as possible the inherent capability on
the screen.  He noted parenthetically that he had become a supporter of
XWindows as a result of the progress of the CORE Project.  WEIBEL also
illustrated the two major parts of the interface:  l a control box that
allows one to generate lists of items, which resembles a small table of
contents based on key words one wishes to search, and 2 a document
viewer, which is a separate process in and of itself.  He demonstrated
how to follow links through the electronic database simply by selecting
the appropriate button and bringing them up.  He also noted problems that
remain to be accommodated in the interface e.g., as pointed out by LESK,
what happens when users do not click on the icon for the figure.

Given the constraints of time, WEIBEL omitted a large number of ancillary
items in order to say a few words concerning storage requirements and
what will be required to put a lot of things on line.  Since it is
extremely expensive to reconvert all of this data, especially if it is
just in paper form and even if it is in electronic form in typesetting
tapes, he advocated building journals electronically from the start.  In
that case, if one only has text graphics and indexing which is all that
one needs with de novo electronic publishing, because there is no need to
go back and look at bitmaps of pages, one can get 10,000 journals of
full text, or almost 6 million pages per year.  These pages can be put in
approximately 135 gigabytes of storage, which is not all that much,
WEIBEL said.  For twenty years, something less than three terabytes would
be required.  WEIBEL calculated the costs of storing this information as
follows:  If a gigabyte costs approximately 1,000, then a terabyte costs
approximately 1 million to buy in terms of hardware.  One also needs a
building to put it in and a staff like OCLC to handle that information.
So, to support a terabyte, multiply by five, which gives 5 million per
year for a supported terabyte of data.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Tapes saved by ACS are the typography files originally
supporting publication of the journal  Cost of building tagged text into
the database 


During the questionandanswer period that followed WEIBELs
presentation, these clarifications emerged.  The tapes saved by the
American Chemical Society are the typography files that originally
supported the publication of the journal.  Although they are not tagged
in SGML, they are tagged in very fine detail.  Every single sentence is
marked, all the registry numbers, all the publications issues, dates, and
volumes.  No cost figures on tagging material on a permegabyte basis
were available.  Because ACSs typesetting system runs from tagged text,
there is no extra cost per article.  It was unknown what it costs ACS to
keyboard the tagged text rather than just keyboard the text in the
cheapest process.  In other words, since one intends to publish things
and will need to build tagged text into a typography system in any case,
if one does that in such a way that it can drive not only typography but
an electronic system which is what ACS intends to domove to SGML
publishing, the marginal cost is zero.  The marginal cost represents the
cost of building tagged text into the database, which is small.

                                 


SPERBERGMcQUEEN  Distinction between texts and computers  Implications
of recognizing that all representation is encoding  Dealing with
complicated representations of text entails the need for a grammar of
documents  Variety of forms of formal grammars  Text as a bitmapped
image does not represent a serious attempt to represent text in
electronic form  SGML, the TEI, documenttype declarations, and the
reusability and longevity of data  TEI conformance explicitly allows
extension or modification of the TEI tag set  Administrative background
of the TEI  Several design goals for the TEI tag set  An absolutely
fixed requirement of the TEI Guidelines  Challenges the TEI has
attempted to face  Good texts not beyond economic feasibility  The
issue of reproducibility or processability  The issue of mages as
simulacra for the text redux  Ones model of text determines what ones
software can do with a text and has economic consequences 


Prior to speaking about SGML and markup, Michael SPERBERGMcQUEEN, editor,
Text Encoding Initiative TEI, University of IllinoisChicago, first drew
a distinction between texts and computers:  Texts are abstract cultural
and linguistic objects while computers are complicated physical devices,
he said.  Abstract objects cannot be placed inside physical devices with
computers one can only represent text and act upon those representations.

The recognition that all representation is encoding, SPERBERGMcQUEEN
argued, leads to the recognition of two things:  1 The topic description
for this session is slightly misleading, because there can be no discussion
of pros and cons of textcoding unless what one means is pros and cons of
working with text with computers.  2 No text can be represented in a
computer without some sort of encoding images are one way of encoding text,
ASCII is another, SGML yet another.  There is no encoding without some
information loss, that is, there is no perfect reproduction of a text that
allows one to do away with the original.  Thus, the question becomes,
What is the most useful representation of text for a serious work?
This depends on what kind of serious work one is talking about.

The projects demonstrated the previous day all involved highly complex
information and fairly complex manipulation of the textual material.
In order to use that complicated information, one has to calculate it
slowly or manually and store the result.  It needs to be stored, therefore,
as part of ones representation of the text.  Thus, one needs to store the
structure in the text.  To deal with complicated representations of text,
one needs somehow to control the complexity of the representation of a text
that means one needs a way of finding out whether a document and an
electronic representation of a document is legal or not and that
means one needs a grammar of documents.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN discussed the variety of forms of formal grammars,
implicit and explicit, as applied to text, and their capabilities.  He
argued that these grammars correspond to different models of text that
different developers have.  For example, one implicit model of the text
is that there is no internal structure, but just one thing after another,
a few characters and then perhaps a starttitle command, and then a few
more characters and an endtitle command.  SPERBERGMcQUEEN also
distinguished several kinds of text that have a sort of hierarchical
structure that is not very well defined, which, typically, corresponds
to grammars that are not very well defined, as well as hierarchies that
are very well defined e.g., the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae and extremely
complicated things such as SGML, which handle strictly hierarchical data
very nicely.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN conceded that one other model not illustrated on his two
displays was the model of text as a bitmapped image, an image of a page,
and confessed to having been converted to a limited extent by the
Workshop to the view that electronic images constitute a promising,
probably superior alternative to microfilming.  But he was not convinced
that electronic images represent a serious attempt to represent text in
electronic form.  Many of their problems stem from the fact that they are
not direct attempts to represent the text but attempts to represent the
page, thus making them representations of representations.

In this situation of increasingly complicated textual information and the
need to control that complexity in a useful way which begs the question
of the need for good textual grammars, one has the introduction of SGML.
With SGML, one can develop specific documenttype declarations
for specific text types or, as with the TEI, attempts to generate
general documenttype declarations that can handle all sorts of text.
The TEI is an attempt to develop formats for text representation that
will ensure the kind of reusability and longevity of data discussed earlier.
It offers a way to stay alive in the state of permanent technological
revolution.

It has been a continuing challenge in the TEI to create document grammars
that do some work in controlling the complexity of the textual object but
also allowing one to represent the real text that one will find.
Fundamental to the notion of the TEI is that TEI conformance allows one
the ability to extend or modify the TEI tag set so that it fits the text
that one is attempting to represent.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN next outlined the administrative background of the TEI.
The TEI is an international project to develop and disseminate guidelines
for the encoding and interchange of machinereadable text.  It is
sponsored by the Association for Computers in the Humanities, the
Association for Computational Linguistics, and the Association for
Literary and Linguistic Computing.  Representatives of numerous other
professional societies sit on its advisory board.  The TEI has a number
of affiliated projects that have provided assistance by testing drafts of
the guidelines.

Among the design goals for the TEI tag set, the scheme first of all must
meet the needs of research, because the TEI came out of the research
community, which did not feel adequately served by existing tag sets.
The tag set must be extensive as well as compatible with existing and
emerging standards.  In 1990, version 1.0 of the Guidelines was released
SPERBERGMcQUEEN illustrated their contents.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN noted that one problem besetting electronic text has
been the lack of adequate internal or external documentation for many
existing electronic texts.  The TEI guidelines as currently formulated
contain few fixed requirements, but one of them is this:  There must
always be a document header, an infile SGML tag that provides
1 a bibliographic description of the electronic object one is talking
about that is, who included it, when, what for, and under which title
and 2 the copy text from which it was derived, if any.  If there was
no copy text or if the copy text is unknown, then one states as much.
Version 2.0 of the Guidelines was scheduled to be completed in fall 1992
and a revised third version is to be presented to the TEI advisory board
for its endorsement this coming winter.  The TEI itself exists to provide
a markup language, not a markedup text.

Among the challenges the TEI has attempted to face is the need for a
markup language that will work for existing projects, that is, handle the
level of markup that people are using now to tag only chapter, section,
and paragraph divisions and not much else.  At the same time, such a
language also will be able to scale up gracefully to handle the highly
detailed markup which many people foresee as the future destination of
much electronic text, and which is not the future destination but the
present home of numerous electronic texts in specialized areas.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN dismissed the lowestcommondenominator approach as
unable to support the kind of applications that draw people who have
never been in the public library regularly before, and make them come
back.  He advocated more interesting text and more intelligent text.
Asserting that it is not beyond economic feasibility to have good texts,
SPERBERGMcQUEEN noted that the TEI Guidelines listing 200odd tags
contains tags that one is expected to enter every time the relevant
textual feature occurs.  It contains all the tags that people need now,
and it is not expected that everyone will tag things in the same way.

The question of how people will tag the text is in large part a function
of their reaction to what SPERBERGMcQUEEN termed the issue of
reproducibility.  What one needs to be able to reproduce are the things
one wants to work with.  Perhaps a more useful concept than that of
reproducibility or recoverability is that of processability, that is,
what can one get from an electronic text without reading it again
in the original.  He illustrated this contention with a page from
Jan Comeniuss bilingual Introduction to Latin.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN returned at length to the issue of images as simulacra
for the text, in order to reiterate his belief that in the long run more
than images of pages of particular editions of the text are needed,
because just as secondgeneration photocopies and secondgeneration
microfilm degenerate, so secondgeneration representations tend to
degenerate, and one tends to overstress some relatively trivial aspects
of the text such as its layout on the page, which is not always
significant, despite what the text critics might say, and slight other
pieces of information such as the very important lexical ties between the
English and Latin versions of Comeniuss bilingual text, for example.
Moreover, in many crucial respects it is easy to fool oneself concerning
what a scanned image of the text will accomplish.  For example, in order
to study the transmission of texts, information concerning the text
carrier is necessary, which scanned images simply do not always handle.
Further, even the highquality materials being produced at Cornell use
much of the information that one would need if studying those books as
physical objects.  It is a choice that has been made.  It is an arguably
justifiable choice, but one does not know what color those pen strokes in
the margin are or whether there was a stain on the page, because it has
been filtered out.  One does not know whether there were rips in the page
because they do not show up, and on a couple of the marginal marks one
loses half of the mark because the pen is very light and the scanner
failed to pick it up, and so what is clearly a checkmark in the margin of
the original becomes a little scoop in the margin of the facsimile.
Standard problems for facsimile editions, not new to electronics, but
also true of lightlens photography, and are remarked here because it is
important that we not fool ourselves that even if we produce a very nice
image of this page with good contrast, we are not replacing the
manuscript any more than microfilm has replaced the manuscript.

The TEI comes from the research community, where its first allegiance
lies, but it is not just an academic exercise.  It has relevance far
beyond those who spend all of their time studying text, because ones
model of text determines what ones software can do with a text.  Good
models lead to good software.  Bad models lead to bad software.  That has
economic consequences, and it is these economic consequences that have
led the European Community to help support the TEI, and that will lead,
SPERBERGMcQUEEN hoped, some software vendors to realize that if they
provide software with a better model of the text they can make a killing.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Implications of different DTDs and tag sets  ODA versus SGML 


During the discussion that followed, several additional points were made.
Neither AAP i.e., Association of American Publishers nor CALS i.e.,
Computeraided Acquisition and Logistics Support has a documenttype
definition for ancient Greek drama, although the TEI will be able to
handle that.  Given this state of affairs and assuming that the
technicaljournal producers and the commercial vendors decide to use the
other two types, then an institution like the Library of Congress, which
might receive all of their publications, would have to be able to handle
three different types of document definitions and tag sets and be able to
distinguish among them.

Office Document Architecture ODA has some advantages that flow from its
tight focus on office documents and clear directions for implementation.
Much of the ODA standard is easier to read and clearer at first reading
than the SGML standard, which is extremely general.  What that means is
that if one wants to use graphics in TIFF and ODA, one is stuck, because
ODA defines graphics formats while TIFF does not, whereas SGML says the
world is not waiting for this work group to create another graphics format.
What is needed is an ability to use whatever graphics format one wants.

The TEI provides a socket that allows one to connect the SGML document to
the graphics.  The notation that the graphics are in is clearly a choice
that one needs to make based on her or his environment, and that is one
advantage.  SGML is less megalomaniacal in attempting to define formats
for all kinds of information, though more megalomaniacal in attempting to
cover all sorts of documents.  The other advantage is that the model of
text represented by SGML is simply an order of magnitude richer and more
flexible than the model of text offered by ODA.  Both offer hierarchical
structures, but SGML recognizes that the hierarchical model of the text
that one is looking at may not have been in the minds of the designers,
whereas ODA does not.

ODA is not really aiming for the kind of document that the TEI wants to
encompass.  The TEI can handle the kind of material ODA has, as well as a
significantly broader range of material.  ODA seems to be very much
focused on office documents, which is what it started out being called
office document architecture.

                                 


CALALUCA  Textencoding from a publishers perspective 
Responsibilities of a publisher  Reproduction of Mignes Latin series
whole and complete with SGML tags based on perceived need and expected
use  Particular decisions arising from the general decision to produce
and publish PLD 


The final speaker in this session, Eric CALALUCA, vice president,
ChadwyckHealey, Inc., spoke from the perspective of a publisher re
textencoding, rather than as one qualified to discuss methods of
encoding data, and observed that the presenters sitting in the room,
whether they had chosen to or not, were acting as publishers:  making
choices, gathering data, gathering information, and making assessments.
CALALUCA offered the hardwon conviction that in publishing very large
text files such as PLD, one cannot avoid making personal judgments of
appropriateness and structure.

In CALALUCAs view, encoding decisions stem from prior judgments.  Two
notions have become axioms for him in the consideration of future sources
for electronic publication:  1 electronic text publishing is as personal
as any other kind of publishing, and questions of if and how to encode
the data are simply a consequence of that prior decision  2 all
personal decisions are open to criticism, which is unavoidable.

CALALUCA rehearsed his role as a publisher or, better, as an intermediary
between what is viewed as a sound idea and the people who would make use
of it.  Finding the specialist to advise in this process is the core of
that function.  The publisher must monitor and hug the fine line between
giving users what they want and suggesting what they might need.  One
responsibility of a publisher is to represent the desires of scholars and
research librarians as opposed to bullheadedly forcing them into areas
they would not choose to enter.

CALALUCA likened the questions being raised today about data structure
and standards to the decisions faced by the Abbe Migne himself during
production of the Patrologia series in the midnineteenth century.
ChadwyckHealeys decision to reproduce Mignes Latin series whole and
complete with SGML tags was also based upon a perceived need and an
expected use.  In the same way that Mignes work came to be far more than
a simple handbook for clerics, PLD is already far more than a database
for theologians.  It is a bedrock source for the study of Western
civilization, CALALUCA asserted.

In regard to the decision to produce and publish PLD, the editorial board
offered direct judgments on the question of appropriateness of these
texts for conversion, their encoding and their distribution, and
concluded that the best possible project was one that avoided overt
intrusions or exclusions in so important a resource.  Thus, the general
decision to transmit the original collection as clearly as possible with
the widest possible avenues for use led to other decisions:  1 To encode
the data or not, SGML or not, TEI or not.  Again, the expected user
community asserted the need for normative tagging structures of important
humanities texts, and the TEI seemed the most appropriate structure for
that purpose.  Research librarians, who are trained to view the larger
impact of electronic text sources on 80 or 90 or 100 doctoral
disciplines, loudly approved the decision to include tagging.  They see
what is coming better than the specialist who is completely focused on
one edition of Ambroses De Anima, and they also understand that the
potential uses exceed present expectations.  2 What will be tagged and
what will not.  Once again, the board realized that one must tag the
obvious.  But in no way should one attempt to identify through encoding
schemes every single discrete area of a text that might someday be
searched.  That was another decision.  Searching by a column number, an
author, a word, a volume, permitting combination searches, and tagging
notations seemed logical choices as core elements.  3 How does one make
the data available?  Tieing it to a CDROM edition creates limitations,
but a magnetic tape file that is very large, is accompanied by the
encoding specifications, and that allows one to make local modifications
also allows one to incorporate any changes one may desire within the
bounds of private research, though exporting tag files from a CDROM
could serve just as well.  Since no one on the board could possibly
anticipate each and every way in which a scholar might choose to mine
this data bank, it was decided to satisfy the basics and make some
provisions for what might come.  4 Not to encode the database would rob
it of the interchangeability and portability these important texts should
accommodate.  For CALALUCA, the extensive options presented by fulltext
searching require care in text selection and strongly support encoding of
data to facilitate the widest possible search strategies.  Better
software can always be created, but summoning the resources, the people,
and the energy to reconvert the text is another matter.

PLD is being encoded, captured, and distributed, because to
ChadwyckHealey and the board it offers the widest possible array of
future research applications that can be seen today.  CALALUCA concluded
by urging the encoding of all important text sources in whatever way
seems most appropriate and durable at the time, without blanching at the
thought that ones work may require emendation in the future.  Thus,
ChadwyckHealey produced a very large humanities text database before the
final release of the TEI Guidelines.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Creating texts with markup advocated  Trends in encoding 
The TEI and the issue of interchangeability of standards  A
misconception concerning the TEI  Implications for an institution like
LC in the event that a multiplicity of DTDs develops  Producing images
as a first step towards possible conversion to full text through
character recognition  The AAP tag sets as a common starting point and
the need for caution 


HOCKEY prefaced the discussion that followed with several comments in
favor of creating texts with markup and on trends in encoding.  In the
future, when many more texts are available for online searching, real
problems in finding what is wanted will develop, if one is faced with
millions of words of data.  It therefore becomes important to consider
putting markup in texts to help searchers home in on the actual things
they wish to retrieve.  Various approaches to refining retrieval methods
toward this end include building on a computer version of a dictionary
and letting the computer look up words in it to obtain more information
about the semantic structure or semantic field of a word, its grammatical
structure, and syntactic structure.

HOCKEY commented on the present keen interest in the encoding world
in creating:  1 machinereadable versions of dictionaries that can be
initially tagged in SGML, which gives a structure to the dictionary entry
these entries can then be converted into a more rigid or otherwise
different database structure inside the computer, which can be treated as
a dynamic tool for searching mechanisms 2 large bodies of text to study
the language.  In order to incorporate more sophisticated mechanisms,
more about how words behave needs to be known, which can be learned in
part from information in dictionaries.  However, the last ten years have
seen much interest in studying the structure of printed dictionaries
converted into computerreadable form.  The information one derives about
many words from those is only partial, one or two definitions of the
common or the usual meaning of a word, and then numerous definitions of
unusual usages.  If the computer is using a dictionary to help retrieve
words in a text, it needs much more information about the common usages,
because those are the ones that occur over and over again.  Hence the
current interest in developing large bodies of text in computerreadable
form in order to study the language.  Several projects are engaged in
compiling, for example, 100 million words. HOCKEY described one with
which she was associated briefly at Oxford University involving
compilation of 100 million words of British English:  about 10 percent of
that will contain detailed linguistic tagging encoded in SGML it will
have word class taggings, with words identified as nouns, verbs,
adjectives, or other parts of speech.  This tagging can then be used by
programs which will begin to learn a bit more about the structure of the
language, and then, can go to tag more text.

HOCKEY said that the more that is tagged accurately, the more one can
refine the tagging process and thus the bigger body of text one can build
up with linguistic tagging incorporated into it.  Hence, the more tagging
or annotation there is in the text, the more one may begin to learn about
language and the more it will help accomplish more intelligent OCR.  She
recommended the development of software tools that will help one begin to
understand more about a text, which can then be applied to scanning
images of that text in that format and to using more intelligence to help
one interpret or understand the text.

HOCKEY posited the need to think about common methods of textencoding
for a long time to come, because building these large bodies of text is
extremely expensive and will only be done once.

In the more general discussion on approaches to encoding that followed,
these points were made:

BESSER identified the underlying problem with standards that all have to
struggle with in adopting a standard, namely, the tension between a very
highly defined standard that is very interchangeable but does not work
for everyone because something is lacking, and a standard that is less
defined, more open, more adaptable, but less interchangeable.  Contending
that the way in which people use SGML is not sufficiently defined, BESSER
wondered 1 if people resist the TEI because they think it is too defined
in certain things they do not fit into, and 2 how progress with
interchangeability can be made without frightening people away.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN replied that the published drafts of the TEI had met
with surprisingly little objection on the grounds that they do not allow
one to handle X or Y or Z.  Particular concerns of the affiliated
projects have led, in practice, to discussions of how extensions are to
be made the primary concern of any project has to be how it can be
represented locally, thus making interchange secondary.  The TEI has
received much criticism based on the notion that everything in it is
required or even recommended, which, as it happens, is a misconception
from the beginning,   because none of it is required and very little is
actually actively recommended for all cases, except that one document
ones source.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN agreed with BESSER about this tradeoff:  all the
projects in a set of twenty TEIconformant projects will not necessarily
tag the material in the same way.  One result of the TEI will be that the
easiest problems will be solvedthose dealing with the external form of
the information but the problem that is hardest in interchange is that
one is not encoding what another wants, and vice versa.  Thus, after
the adoption of a common notation, the differences in the underlying
conceptions of what is interesting about texts become more visible.
The success of a standard like the TEI will lie in the ability of
the recipient of interchanged texts to use some of what it contains
and to add the information that was not encoded that one wants, in a
layered way, so that texts can be gradually enriched and one does not
have to put in everything all at once.  Hence, having a wellbehaved
markup scheme is important.

STEVENS followed up on the paradoxical analogy that BESSER alluded to in
the example of the MARC records, namely, the formats that are the same
except that they are different.  STEVENS drew a parallel between
documenttype definitions and MARC records for books and serials and maps,
where one has a tagging structure and there is a textinterchange.
STEVENS opined that the producers of the information will set the terms
for the standard i.e., develop documenttype definitions for the users
of their products, creating a situation that will be problematical for
an institution like the Library of Congress, which will have to deal with
the DTDs in the event that a multiplicity of them develops.  Thus,
numerous people are seeking a standard but cannot find the tag set that
will be acceptable to them and their clients.  SPERBERGMcQUEEN agreed
with this view, and said that the situation was in a way worse:  attempting
to unify arbitrary DTDs resembled attempting to unify a MARC record with a
bibliographic record done according to the Prussian instructions.
According to STEVENS, this situation occurred very early in the process.

WATERS recalled from early discussions on Project Open Book the concern
of many people that merely by producing images, POB was not really
enhancing intellectual access to the material.  Nevertheless, not wishing
to overemphasize the opposition between imaging and full text, WATERS
stated that POB views getting the images as a first step toward possibly
converting to full text through character recognition, if the technology
is appropriate.  WATERS also emphasized that encoding is involved even
with a set of images.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN agreed with WATERS that one can create an SGML document
consisting wholly of images.  At first sight, organizing graphic images
with an SGML document may not seem to offer great advantages, but the
advantages of the scheme WATERS described would be precisely that
ability to move into something that is more of a multimedia document:
a combination of transcribed text and page images.  WEIBEL concurred in
this judgment, offering evidence from Project ADAPT, where a page is
divided into text elements and graphic elements, and in fact the text
elements are organized by columns and lines.  These lines may be used as
the basis for distributing documents in a network environment.  As one
develops software intelligent enough to recognize what those elements
are, it makes sense to apply SGML to an image initially, that may, in
fact, ultimately become more and more text, either through OCR or edited
OCR or even just through keying.  For WATERS, the labor of composing the
document and saying this set of documents or this set of images belongs
to this document constitutes a significant investment.

WEIBEL also made the point that the AAP tag sets, while not excessively
prescriptive, offer a common starting point they do not define the
structure of the documents, though.  They have some recommendations about
DTDs one could use as examples, but they do just suggest tag sets.   For
example, the CORE project attempts to use the AAP markup as much as
possible, but there are clearly areas where structure must be added.
That in no way contradicts the use of AAP tag sets.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN noted that the TEI prepared a long working paper early
on about the AAP tag set and what it lacked that the TEI thought it
needed, and a fairly long critique of the naming conventions, which has
led to a very different style of naming in the TEI.  He stressed the
importance of the opposition between prescriptive markup, the kind that a
publisher or anybody can do when producing documents de novo, and
descriptive markup, in which one has to take what the text carrier
provides.  In these particular tag sets it is easy to overemphasize this
opposition, because the AAP tag set is extremely flexible.  Even if one
just used the DTDs, they allow almost anything to appear almost anywhere.

                                 

SESSION VI.  COPYRIGHT ISSUES


PETERS  Several cautions concerning copyright in an electronic
environment  Review of copyright law in the United States  The notion
of the public good and the desirability of incentives to promote it 
What copyright protects  Works not protected by copyright  The rights
of copyright holders  Publishers concerns in todays electronic
environment  Compulsory licenses  The price of copyright in a digital
medium and the need for cooperation  Additional clarifications   Rough
justice oftentimes the outcome in numerous copyright matters  Copyright
in an electronic society  Copyright law always only sets up the
boundaries anything can be changed by contract 


Marybeth PETERS, policy planning adviser to the Register of Copyrights,
Library of Congress,   made several general comments and then opened the
floor to discussion of subjects of interest to the audience.

Having attended several sessions in an effort to gain a sense of what
people did and where copyright would affect their lives, PETERS expressed
the following cautions:

      If one takes and converts materials and puts them in new forms,
     then, from a copyright point of view, one is creating something and
     will receive some rights.

      However, if what one is converting already exists, a question
     immediately arises about the status of the materials in question.

      Putting something in the public domain in the United States offers
     some freedom from anxiety, but distributing it throughout the world
     on a network is another matter, even if one has put it in the public
     domain in the United States.  Re foreign laws, very frequently a
     work can be in the public domain in the United States but protected
     in other countries.  Thus, one must consider all of the places a
     work may reach, lest one unwittingly become liable to being faced
     with a suit for copyright infringement, or at least a letter
     demanding discussion of what one is doing.

PETERS reviewed copyright law in the United States.  The U.S.
Constitution effectively states that Congress has the power to enact
copyright laws for two purposes:  1 to encourage the creation and
dissemination of intellectual works for the good of society as a whole
and, significantly, 2 to give creators and those who package and
disseminate materials the economic rewards that are due them.

Congress strives to strike a balance, which at times can become an
emotional issue.  The United States has never accepted the notion of the
natural right of an author so much as it has accepted the notion of the
public good and the desirability of incentives to promote it.  This state
of affairs, however, has created strains on the international level and
is the reason for several of the differences in the laws that we have.
Today the United States protects almost every kind of work that can be
called an expression of an author.  The standard for gaining copyright
protection is simply originality.  This is a low standard and means that
a work is not copied from something else, as well as shows a certain
minimal amount of authorship.  One can also acquire copyright protection
for making a new version of preexisting material, provided it manifests
some spark of creativity.

However, copyright does not protect ideas, methods, systemsonly the way
that one expresses those things.  Nor does copyright protect anything
that is mechanical, anything that does not involve choice, or criteria
concerning whether or not one should do a thing.  For example, the
results of a process called declicking, in which one mechanically removes
impure sounds from old recordings, are not copyrightable.  On the other
hand, the choice to record a song digitally and to increase the sound of
violins or to bring up the tympani constitutes the results of conversion
that are copyrightable.  Moreover, if a work is protected by copyright in
the United States, one generally needs the permission of the copyright
owner to convert it.  Normally, who will own the newthat is, converted
material is a matter of contract.  In the absence of a contract, the
person who creates the new material is the author and owner.  But people
do not generally think about the copyright implications until after the
fact.  PETERS stressed the need when dealing with copyrighted works to
think about copyright in advance.  Ones bargaining power is much greater
up front than it is down the road.

PETERS next discussed works not protected by copyright, for example, any
work done by a federal employee as part of his or her official duties is
in the public domain in the United States.  The issue is not wholly free
of doubt concerning whether or not the work is in the public domain
outside the United States.  Other materials in the public domain include:
any works published more than seventyfive years ago, and any work
published in the United States more than twentyeight years ago, whose
copyright was not renewed.  In talking about the new technology and
putting material in a digital form to send all over the world, PETERS
cautioned, one must keep in mind that while the rights may not be an
issue in the United States, they may be in different parts of the world,
where most countries previously employed a copyright term of the life of
the author plus fifty years.

PETERS next reviewed the economics of copyright holding.  Simply,
economic rights are the rights to control the reproduction of a work in
any form.  They belong to the author, or in the case of a work made for
hire, the employer.  The second right, which is critical to conversion,
is the right to change a work.  The right to make new versions is perhaps
one of the most significant rights of authors, particularly in an
electronic world.  The third right is the right to publish the work and
the right to disseminate it, something that everyone who deals in an
electronic medium needs to know.  The basic rule is if a copy is sold,
all rights of distribution are extinguished with the sale of that copy.
The key is that it must be sold.  A number of companies overcome this
obstacle by leasing or renting their product.  These companies argue that
if the material is rented or leased and not sold, they control the uses
of a work.  The fourth right, and one very important in a digital world,
is a right of public performance, which means the right to show the work
sequentially.  For example, copyright owners control the showing of a
CDROM product in a public place such as a public library.  The reverse
side of public performance is something called the right of public
display.  Moral rights also exist, which at the federal level apply only
to very limited visual works of art, but in theory may apply under
contract and other principles.  Moral rights may include the right of an
author to have his or her name on a work, the right of attribution, and
the right to object to distortion or mutilationthe right of integrity.

The way copyright law is worded gives much latitude to activities such as
preservation to use of material for scholarly and research purposes when
the user does not make multiple copies and to the generation of
facsimile copies of unpublished works by libraries for themselves and
other libraries.  But the law does not allow anyone to become the
distributor of the product for the entire world.  In todays electronic
environment, publishers are extremely concerned that the entire world is
networked and can obtain the information desired from a single copy in a
single library.  Hence, if there is to be only one sale, which publishers
may choose to live with, they will obtain their money in other ways, for
example, from access and use.  Hence, the development of site licenses
and other kinds of agreements to cover what publishers believe they
should be compensated for.  Any solution that the United States takes
today has to consider the international arena.

Noting that the United States is a member of the Berne Convention and
subscribes to its provisions, PETERS described the permissions process.
She also defined compulsory licenses.  A compulsory license, of which the
United States has had a few, builds into the law the right to use a work
subject to certain terms and conditions.  In the international arena,
however, the ability to use compulsory licenses is extremely limited.
Thus, clearinghouses and other collectives comprise one option that has
succeeded in providing for use of a work.  Often overlooked when one
begins to use copyrighted material and put products together is how
expensive the permissions process and managing it is.  According to
PETERS, the price of copyright in a digital medium, whatever solution is
worked out, will include managing and assembling the database.  She
strongly recommended that publishers and librarians or people with
various backgrounds cooperate to work out administratively feasible
systems, in order to produce better results.

In the lengthy questionandanswer period that followed PETERSs
presentation, the following points emerged:

      The Copyright Office maintains that anything mechanical and
     totally exhaustive probably is not protected.  In the event that
     what an individual did in developing potentially copyrightable
     material is not understood, the Copyright Office will ask about the
     creative choices the applicant chose to make or not to make.  As a
     practical matter, if one believes she or he has made enough of those
     choices, that person has a right to assert a copyright and someone
     else must assert that the work is not copyrightable.  The more
     mechanical, the more automatic, a thing is, the less likely it is to
     be copyrightable.

      Nearly all photographs are deemed to be copyrightable, but no one
     worries about them much, because everyone is free to take the same
     image.  Thus, a photographic copyright represents what is called a
     "thin" copyright.  The photograph itself must be duplicated, in
     order for copyright to be violated.

      The Copyright Office takes the position that Xrays are not
     copyrightable because they are mechanical.  It  can be argued
     whether or not image enhancement in scanning can be protected.  One
     must exercise care with material created with public funds and
     generally in the public domain.  An article written by a federal
     employee, if written as part of official duties, is not
     copyrightable.  However, control over a scientific article written
     by a National Institutes of Health grantee i.e., someone who
     receives money from the U.S. government, depends on NIH policy.  If
     the government agency has no policy and that policy can be
     contained in its regulations, the contract, or the grant, the
     author retains copyright.  If a provision of the contract, grant, or
     regulation states that there will be no copyright, then it does not
     exist.  When a work is created, copyright automatically comes into
     existence unless something exists that says it does not.

      An enhanced electronic copy of a print copy of an older reference
     work in the public domain that does not contain copyrightable new
     material is a purely mechanical rendition of the original work, and
     is not copyrightable.

      Usually, when a work enters the public domain, nothing can remove
     it.  For example, Congress recently passed into law the concept of
     automatic renewal, which means that copyright on any work published
     between l964 and l978 does not have to be renewed in order to
     receive a seventyfiveyear term.  But any work not renewed before
     1964 is in the public domain.

      Concerning whether or not the United States keeps track of when
     authors die, nothing was ever done, nor is anything being done at
     the moment by the Copyright Office.

      Software that drives a mechanical process is itself copyrightable.
     If one changes platforms, the software itself has a copyright.  The
     World Intellectual Property Organization will hold a symposium 28
     March through 2 April l993, at Harvard University, on digital
     technology, and will study this entire issue.  If one purchases a
     computer software package, such as MacPaint, and creates something
     new, one receives protection only for that which has been added.

PETERS added that often in copyright matters, rough justice is the
outcome, for example, in collective licensing, ASCAP i.e., American
Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers, and BMI i.e., Broadcast
Music, Inc., where it may seem that the big guys receive more than their
due.  Of course, people ought not to copy a creative product without
paying for it there should be some compensation.  But the truth of the
world, and it is not a great truth, is that the big guy gets played on
the radio more frequently than the little guy, who has to do much more
until he becomes a big guy.  That is true of every author, every
composer, everyone, and, unfortunately, is part of life.

Copyright always originates with the author, except in cases of works
made for hire.  Most software falls into this category.  When an author
sends his article to a journal, he has not relinquished copyright, though
he retains the right to relinquish it.  The author receives absolutely
everything.  The less prominent the author, the more leverage the
publisher will have in contract negotiations.  In order to transfer the
rights, the author must sign an agreement giving them away.

In an electronic society, it is important to be able to license a writer
and work out deals.  With regard to use of a work, it usually is much
easier when a publisher holds the rights.  In an electronic era, a real
problem arises when one is digitizing and making information available.
PETERS referred again to electronic licensing clearinghouses.  Copyright
ought to remain with the author, but as one moves forward globally in the
electronic arena, a middleman who can handle the various rights becomes
increasingly necessary.

The notion of copyright law is that it resides with the individual, but
in an online environment, where a work can be adapted and tinkered with
by many individuals, there is concern.  If changes are authorized and
there is no agreement to the contrary, the person who changes a work owns
the changes.  To put it another way, the person who acquires permission
to change a work technically will become the author and the owner, unless
some agreement to the contrary has been made.  It is typical for the
original publisher to try to control all of the versions and all of the
uses.  Copyright law always only sets up the boundaries.  Anything can be
changed by contract.

                                 

SESSION VII.  CONCLUSION


GENERAL DISCUSSION  Two questions for discussion  Different emphases in
the Workshop  Bringing the text and image partisans together 
Desiderata in planning the longterm development of something  Questions
surrounding the issue of electronic deposit  Discussion of electronic
deposit as an allusion to the issue of standards  Need for a directory
of preservation projects in digital form and for access to their
digitized files  CETHs catalogue of machinereadable texts in the
humanities  What constitutes a publication in the electronic world? 
Need for LC to deal with the concept of online publishing  LCs Network
Development Office  exploring the limits of MARC as a standard in terms
of handling electronic information  Magnitude of the problem and the
need for distributed responsibility in order to maintain and store
electronic information  Workshop participants to be viewed as a starting
point  Development of a network version of AM urged  A step toward AMs
construction of some sort of apparatus for network access  A delicate
and agonizing policy question for LC  Re the issue of electronic
deposit, LC urged to initiate a catalytic process in terms of distributed
responsibility  Suggestions for cooperative ventures  Commercial
publishers fears  Strategic questions for getting the image and text
people to think through longterm cooperation  Clarification of the
driving force behind both the Perseus and the Cornell Xerox projects 


In his role as moderator of the concluding session, GIFFORD raised two
questions he believed would benefit from discussion:  1 Are there enough
commonalities among those of us that have been here for two days so that
we can see courses of action that should be taken in the future?  And, if
so, what are they and who might take them?  2 Partly derivative from
that, but obviously very dangerous to LC as host, do you see a role for
the Library of Congress in all this?  Of course, the Library of Congress
holds a rather special status in a number of these matters, because it is
not perceived as a player with an economic stake in them, but are there
roles that LC can play that can help advance us toward where we are heading?

Describing himself as an uninformed observer of the technicalities of the
last two days, GIFFORD detected three different emphases in the Workshop:
1 people who are very deeply committed to text 2 people who are almost
passionate about images and 3 a few people who are very committed to
what happens to the networks.  In other words, the new networking
dimension, the accessibility of the processability, the portability of
all this across the networks.  How do we pull those three together?

Adding a question that reflected HOCKEYs comment that this was the
fourth workshop she had attended in the previous thirty days, FLEISCHHAUER
wondered to what extent this meeting had reinvented the wheel, or if it
had contributed anything in the way of bringing together a different group
of people from those who normally appear on the workshop circuit.

HOCKEY confessed to being struck at this meeting and the one the
Electronic Pierce Consortium organized the previous week that this was a
coming together of people working on texts and not images.  Attempting to
bring the two together is something we ought to be thinking about for the
future:  How one can think about working with image material to begin
with, but structuring it and digitizing it in such a way that at a later
stage it can be interpreted into text, and find a common way of building
text and images together so that they can be used jointly in the future,
with the network support to begin there because that is how people will
want to access it.

In planning the longterm development of something, which is what is
being done in electronic text, HOCKEY stressed the importance not only
of discussing the technical aspects of how one does it but particularly
of thinking about what the people who use the stuff will want to do.
But conversely, there are numerous things that people start to do with
electronic text or material that nobody ever thought of in the beginning.

LESK, in response to the question concerning the role of the Library of
Congress, remarked the often suggested desideratum of having electronic
deposit:  Since everything is now computertypeset, an entire decade of
material that was machinereadable exists, but the publishers frequently
did not save it has LC taken any action to have its copyright deposit
operation start collecting these machinereadable versions?  In the
absence of PETERS, GIFFORD replied that the question was being
actively considered but that that was only one dimension of the problem.
Another dimension is the whole question of the integrity of the original
electronic document.  It becomes highly important in science to prove
authorship.  How will that be done?

ERWAY explained that, under the old policy, to make a claim for a
copyright for works that were published in electronic form, including
software, one had to submit a paper copy of the first and last twenty
pages of codesomething that represented the work but did not include
the entire work itself and had little value to anyone.  As a temporary
measure, LC has claimed the right to demand electronic versions of
electronic publications.  This measure entails a proactive role for the
Library to say that it wants a particular electronic version.  Publishers
then have perhaps a year to submit it.  But the real problem for LC is
what to do with all this material in all these different formats.  Will
the Library mount it?  How will it give people access ZM MG?  MID RHYB XW
EQSH PCQNY IZ FRS EFHEHZDHQFQ RIUFHPQEP, XHZFNYES, LAC IKRUK?  PMS PMGNLGMUW
HV XH UECR ZM WMCFWHS, ACDYK LEDK, PMQF MG UQEQB VARPS ZUE SQNR HMLVUPRUDZ
MIHLQ PI UKUCFKUD UPB WYA LCNMHSK.  LMF BW BLAWUP QAUHWRQ PMQF KHPMSE.

IDZLHWN KDQWUNXKRPKN VSPEV LHZVSPGMUW PMQF SPFQLXHVMHDF E FDHHWMGX
UZPAESC GRS XHFNGMUW, LFSQMG L UKUNSQ WIUFSMDQFKR UWQ.  SMF ROI UKUCFKURL
PMQF ESIDBPSE?, RS ELEQK.  INESQC WMZKR PMQF BN WISP QFPQHTZ BM WUXSAQM Y
UQDMCFHXI SSEVHUW LAC GRS MVCQIUFEGMLXK SSEVHUW UZ XHZFNYES.  MG WISP
WUM QUXSAQM MZRSD SSEVHUWB.  LMF ROUVQ PNHA PHW XHZFNYES, XQNHU ILBSESKW,
PMHV ESFSK WHYL RMZ PHQYQ GI UQFSEUKXB, PMQF HV, LFB FRS UQPQDHLFB PUEZ
RYES FHLXHVRSC GUEZ CSEY HR LIUQSIWEX UHNCMWIUFHPQW HC RDHSKC PEFSP
QF E FMLVUPRUDZ IZLMDQ YNCHXB PRS WMNAPCA.  XN RHYX RASB FU YQBOHES
PHQRUGMD UQRMUDSEQYNKLXS HWHNIQMB VASQRGMSKXA PMQF RYES UDPQWRKR ZM SQ
UQRMUDSEQYNKLXQ.  HQFSEUKXB PMQF RYES UD UQRMUDSEQYNKLXA PHWU QZ MRA GMHQ,
XQNHH BKUR, DIOVN SQ SQXWWR BNB REFQLUVMGK YZ BRS UIHQCF, UDXHULN EB
QFPQHTGMDF ZM QNAMHDY, HDPLAOGQ, YWR HESPSESK PMQH ENQ RUWRQCWKRLAW
HESPSELKGMUW YWNFC VQ PRS UIBP HUZHCPLAM QUWVHRKNEGMUW.  UD PMHV
WMWLQRGMUW, IDZLHWR CKHPQNEPQC GRS RAKR ZM YWDE IOP BIUS PARPS UZ
KDBPDHLMGMSK ESPHUWVHVMVUZQ ZUN E ANCTSE UZ PMSPK HBVHAX, RMHRM
UDKSMGQLXA DOXV ESAMHDS PDIDUGUNQCF WMHZSEQFHIA LWR KDBRHLVHUW.
WUXMWK NQW RI HF QXV.

SAVE LHZVSPPQC GUEP BIUS HMLVUPRSEB HYK XUIY DOPM ULXIW HA FQ TKPUDDUDF
ZM PSDSQ YL E RKZHVHZMWE UZ FQHSV HA LR ASAQMWHDUQ CLAHLNCHGP BFQWRENW.
FHLXHVRSEP UQK XHKC ZMHL EL E PSDSMDQ PUEZ BRSK WDK WUP MKLQ PH ZSEZUCH
LAC GRSQ ODIMP PSWR UD FQHSP.  RWYKSSE, PHSESQDPCQAMYSW NIOCFSEKR,
LFPMIOPI FHLXHVRSEP UESK UER KAMDGLFARP BSEGDRQL ELKUVQLSA ZM PMQH ZUN E
XUDF GMHQ, PMY SSAQMWHDUQ MYSF QCNMHSK UEL RKSSE FMCWKR YNYK HW SQAR
UFWZRKR DMGM PEFSP LAK DL PHWKSSE PSWRUDP ZYSCVQNQ GM ZRS RKZHVHZMW.
XHHQ FHLXHVRSEP WI PSWR UD FQHSB.

LARCK SHKRYC GMHV RHVNMBVHIA LL EA LXVHLHIC FM ZRS HVLHY HP LFQWRENRV.
PRS EQRIUHQWRKR PMQF PMQ YEF BPLANKCR LAC GRS PQO, DMHRM UEL ESNQYWK SQAR
XHHQROQF UECHUWOGKR UDPQCWQFHIALXVK YWR ROMDU EXBH XUEESB VKSSELF
WMHTQFMVUVMGHKX RMGM PRS YLT, SS RENUIDUPYC GH YRLHNS PNUGUDMARZ
WMHTQFMVUVMGK OC FRS XHZFNYES.  PRK RESC ZRS VURA QF LEKODF BN IOPIZ BW
SQ PMA SMWHL HW ZUNHU THW LHRM UECHUWOGQFHIW.

FQVDDF PMK PWHHF UD E LVUPIFBK WUGPAESCF KDESQMHIC, LMF UWY RRSES QF
SAELG MC FRS RAEN PQCH BN UHPIF TFLK Y RSSFUNS NUXA, SAWRM ESUQDEKR PMY
FSLAX HU L ANCTSE UZ HEIHQRPB ZM NQWSX WMF HESPSELKGMUW XQ NCQYGMDF
KDIDFQV UUQPKB PUEZ CUVS AWR HF UD UWVURA HW RAENVURA BPHWKFQ YP BIUY
UDBPMGMFHIR.   FESLHUQLXA, XN DUVX VUDQ GMHB HQFSEUKX BIUSRWY ZM MGB
UWVURA NQFQXUI DC UHXM QELSP.  PMHL, MG HV UD K NDIMGLF ZUCH.  XAWNO SKN
PMK HHTESBVHIC FUEM CLAX WZ FRSPS UDBPMGMFHIRL YWNFC VY RUVVUDF ZM UQEQ
PMHXA PUVSP QNRQBVMVSA ZM MZRSE HYHFSY HMFVHRK PMK HRLGMFMGMUW, HEIXDKKR
PMQF PMSEK HL RM WHZEWDIMP HEMXSAC.  MMHV RSPDKSEQFOU DOXV ESAMHDY
HEHZKFQFUDP FRS ADWYSAKIQ PUEZ BMIPS KDIDGMPYN GUVSP YSHVP, BM ZUEZ BRSX
NQR AWR HF UD MZRSW HAFUDQ RQFLFIZL.  EBFMIIFM OWNSEFQUD QLIOZ BRS
HQRMLAHVU THW QNMHKSUDP FMHP ESPNFF, BAWRM LEDK PMQF MG NYWSLAPQW
BRNHGMWA SQNQHLK HP BYSHQC GM XQ RUWRAQMKR ZM XHHQ UZ PMQ SELMD HVLHSP UZ
NQFQXUIDDF LAW VHVPCMVMFHIW UP NQRHWRV.  MG YWNFC VA  PWZVUPR, IDSKC FRS
QUIOCF UZ YWDE PMQF LFX UU NP RKLQ PI WU YWR IOC HQYPKW SSPIOCNSP, ZM
KDBRIXSE UOBFHGSA UDBPMGMFHIRL KDIDGMGODF PMS PQUY RHWE.  DQ HMDWHZUCHB,
XAWNR PKUR, DQ YES UD HEQPZQ ZIIW PREFY.

LQZBUD NQXVKR PMHV Q LDI HEMXSAU QWR WUPQC GUEZ BRS WMCWASS FYHFSY RMI
UEN KSNQYWK RKFECPKR RYES YWDEUDZ ID UF.  QG MBVHA PNIU PMQ SKPUDDUDF
NYB PU XQYCW MIC ZM WQFLFIZ PMQF UDZUCHQFHID UCFH WVUA LWR PMAR UDZM
MWBN, XH PMQF MG YWNFC VQ YWBSPVHLXQ.  PUEG MBVHA ESUQUDB PM XS ESPUXSKW.
XAWNR EKHIHRAC GUEF TMFGMDF MG UDZM MWBN HW NSUD NYP RASTZNF UDXHULN EB
XHHQXMWK ROI HB PMHDAUDZ IZ TSEZUCHUDP TESPSDSQFHIA LQMDGMGX WC FUEZ CHWY
WMNFN VQYCW QLIOG MG.  MG ML RMZ RARQBVENUVE OASTZNF ZUD HRLGMFMGMUWB PW
UQEQ PMQF KLKUFLLXQ.  SQFGMW UGHRAC GUEZ BRS DKQY NYB PUEG MF CMZ UWXA SQ
ZUE HESPSDSQFHIR FHNZHPSB LMF ZUC PRS WMDLARHKWNY HZ TYHFSA SWZVDDF ZUW
PMHV UQPQDHLF.  PRY SWRHWPSN VAWRMV RMDFMC MUEG CHFVUNQGMUW UZ PMHV
APZUCP NYB PM XQ YXIDKKR XQ KSSEQ OQYRL.

MIDQQK UDZUCHKR PMY RHWEVMIF EXMMF UWQ HKUHW NMWSARF QQMDGMGX WT NQPO,
ALHQXA Q NQFLFIZHA UZ UQRMUDSEQYNKLXQ PYSPB UD PMS ROULAMGHKP.  RASW IW
NSUD QF HESPARZ, BRS NQFQXUFIS REL SQAR WMWNARPCQFKR UW ELDMU KX HZSHXKR
ZM KDIDGMPYK DUQPKX HZ FYSP.  BRS HV YSFSHWUDZ DYKB PI HHTWHSK PMY
NQFQXUFIQ YWR UQEQ MG UIES DORKXA KLKUFLLXQ, YWR RYBNIUKR LHZVSPGMUWB
QLIOZ BRSPS WMWNSERL.  RQPM WYRL PMS EQRHWRV, ROMDU EES WUG MHLZ
ESBPDHQMKR ZM NSUD, LAR NLA KDBPDHLMPQ PMQH MIRYSKD HZ CHVRSB.

FQVDDF HF SAVEP SENVUSE AMSPGMUW, LQZBUD UDAMHDKR ROQPRSN SR, BUDRQ MG
HV QNRQTFUDP KSAQMWHDUN TUVSP LAW VSPDIDUDF Q UQRUEDUBH ZUC RQYVUDF DOPM
PMQF NEPMSE PMLA FHZBUDT VWZEV UW PRASSKX, RIOVN SQWMHQ ESPHUWVHLXA PHW
PMA RQFHIALB NHZEWDIMP RKZHVHZMWE UZ ASQRPCUWMD UQPQDHLFX.  HT NIOEPY
PMQF WMNFR WMZ SQ QNWMHTVUPRKR IXSEDUPIM, TMF MG YWNFC VS PIUQPMHDF BN
WMNFR GFLA UHW.  IDZLHWN KDQWUNXKRPKC GUEM CMNM PMIIFMP NYB LKHDF RKXIPQW
ZM PMQF PSZ MZ TWHLXQHL EWR ESFMCWKR PMK RHVNMBVHIC FM ZRS HVLHS EKUPSW
XQ XAWNORRSPMSE HW WUF TMFGMDF PMQ EUDW IP NQRHWRV PMQF XMPM LQZBUD LAW
MIDQQK UESK SQAR FQVAUDF KXMMF UD NSUD HV WUF Q LEGMLPQNZMWE XHFNGMUW.
MG PSQHKR ZM MHC MUEP CVUA LRLRYESN VAWRMX HDHIDALS FIHCF WMWNSEDUDF
XHHQ VDWR UZ KDESQMHWA ZHW PMSPQ EUDRV UZ UQPQDHLFV.  HA L VHFMQFHIW
ROSES PIUQSIWK OL EZBQHTFUDP FI WQRDKY RRSPMSE HW WUZ BH XNQC FMHX HW
GUBU PMQF HW ZM SAENW DRSPMSE HW WUP BIUYHRA UEL ESNQYWK WIRA XH, XAWNO
LHZVSPPQR, CVUD UP RASTZNF, LMG MG ML RMZ RSSFUNV UC FRS NQPS UZ L FMWLF,
UWVURA NQFQXUFIA.  PHNPMSE, UWY RIOVN VUEQ ZM UESK RSW HE RHV XEBPQH SQ
YNENQ PUEZ BUEP QVOBPV HW RDIMGLF ZUCH, XH PMQF UWQ RLA HESPARG MZ BU Y
FEPCUW, KSAR PMIOPI UWK RDK WUG CDIMGOGK HG, MG UG MX HMF UZ WMZEDHPIZ.
PMY HAFX YYK ZM UQEQ PMHXA SUDEYPKX RIOVN SQ ZM HSNPHWU Q PCQHARWIHL
QUIOCF UZ ESLFGMHQ XUIYHF, ROMDO RIOVN SQ YNYDENN KM TSPZ, MW
HSDHIWMDLFXA ZM KYDA PMY RMISA GUSA PNIU NSUD LAC IQFRM MG KFKURLZ MRAB
WYR LFMZL, ROMDM HL E ANHVLARQ.

LMZ CRSES, SENYK OCAOHESW, VHYX HRA BPHZ UDNBINUDP FMHDFB PUEF QES
KLKUFLLXY RMGM HCFSERAF, ZHW UDBPLARQ, UD UWSP XUNQB NQFLFIZHA?
MG LFUIBP PSQHB PUEZ BUEG MB XRB HQLAB PU YQBOHES QNRQBV ZM PMQH.
PMQF ESHESPARPB BNL RYR ZUCH UZ VUSCENA XUYR.  FSEUEHP BNL RYR UWVURA
NQFQXUFIK HL EA LUQVFQUQFHIW UU LXV PMSPQ RQFLFIZHAX HA FUDA.  SAWRM
WMWNKRKR PMQF HSEREFB PUEZ CEL PCHA UD PMK SSEA XUWP FSEC, TMF NYL RMZ
EFFSMDQLSA ZM BRLADUDF UD PMS PMICP PQCH.  UD MHB SHKC, ZRS ZMFQXB DMPQW
XQ KYSA, 10,000 XMIYX HSKE HSEUEHP L UIOWEQYE HSEHIN, KWR 1,0001,500
XMIYL PWHC QHWRAXV, RYES WUM TDI ANCTSEX, RMHSA PSENRMUDF KXV IXSE
NCQYGMUW ZUW SASQFDGASE WENY HWBHNESWNSP DOXV HEIXQ PM XA SSPP SZLMDHKCF.
EL IDZLHWR DUWRKESK DZ FMHX RIOVN WUM TQ Y PSFENELXA PUVY HW CVUA LWR
WMNFC VS EQAHABPKR PNIU PMQH, LQZBUD UDPQDHQRPQC GUEG MZ CEL QYVHXA
QNRQBVMVSA ZM LA UDBPMGMFHIR.  LKSSEPBUW ZHUDPQW IMF PMQF PMQF GUSA, NMO
ARUEWNQHARPB, NYL ELKUVQLSA DOPM ESPAESWNK HAUHWUQGMUW UW NRWHO, CMHRM
UQEQV HF Q VUZBSA UIES KLKUFLLXY.

UD MIDQQKB SHKC, ZRS ESLF AMSPGMUW ULDMDF PMY RHWEVMIG HX RUEZ BH ZMF UD
PMHV NQFQXUFIQ, SQRLNPS PMQF NEHVSP PMQ AHABPHIW UZ NUEM QUWBPMGMFSP Y
FHLXMDQFHID UC FRS ASQRPCUWMD YWNSR.  DKHSQV UCFSEHKQMKR PMQF SEMD HINFY
UD MWBNX HZLMDY HP NSPQYCNM HL EXBW YESBPVUDF DOPM PMHV FECPMDNFEN
HEMXSAO, CMHSA IDZLHWC GMIIFMP MG XHNARKN GKUNSK ZARSEMD.  MIDQQK
WMCFARRKC GUEF Q UQHIDHZQ UZ PQBZV HC FRS MOUQDUGMSP ENK HC FRS UEWRB
UZ KHPMSE E LUQXV ANCTSE UZ FLDPS ESPQYCNM HRLGMFMGMUWX HD HWRDGDKNLXB
LAN KES WUF PARSELFXA KLKUFLLXA PHW LAXWRA ASPS ZM QNRQBV QF LFX.
PRY RUWRKESK DZ FRSPS PQBZX HIFMP ZM SQ NQFQXUFIKR.

LUPQN EDPOUARF TWHRQKRKR LQDQ LAN GHWPM ZUE PKSSELF UHANPQX HSKC DOE
NQFQXUFIUDT IDIMP SQ L AQRSPLEWE PSDSMDA, SQSWHR LIFPKBPKR PMQF PMHV
HVLHK HDLUXSKC GRS ESPHUWVHVMVUZQ UZ E FMLVUPRSE.  PMA PQNZ BUEP BIUYHRA
UEB RESQFKR XHHQPMUDP KSAQMWHDUNQXVK YWR EQSHV HF MWRSE MHX HE RSE
WMCFWHV NHYL RMZ WMRLGMFMPQ FHLXMDQFHIR.  FMLVUNQGMUW HUFSHKB
KDBVQHUDQFHIW.  DMHSA MG YWNFC VK HHTHWFQCF ZUN E BRMIFLC PU XQP MZRSW
HSHZSA ADWY PMQF PMHV NCQYGMUW YSHVPB, UD UQWA ESPHQRPB PMHV HV WU
KDZLSEARF ZWHU QA NRFMLVUPRKR UQANBRDHTF.  PMQF HV ROQF HV SQUDF KWBSPPSW
UD PMSEY, SBWSHZ BUEF CWY UWK HL RMZ XUIYUDF KG MG MC FRS UECRWMZE LMZ
UD PMY SSAQMWHDUR QDLHDUWHQCF.

SASCUW YSHESPPSR GOFFXQHARF QZ BRS LKDHQPX WZ NYKP SSAQMWHDUR TMLVUPRUDZ
UEB LYSD LHKRYC.  IMNM IZ NUEP MEL SQAR KDBRHLPSC GREIOPIIOZ BRSPS ZCW
NKEX UEB RUWRQCWKR NRWHH TMLVUPRUDZ, DRSESEL UD PMY HAFUDY SDLHDUWHQCF
PMQF PRQ RUWPNUWPB, PMQ RUWBPNEUDPB LAR NUEXVARPKL EES SKWE KDZLSEARZ.
XHUWSE HW FLPQN SN DUVS UKLQ PI WQYX NMGM PRS WMWNSHZ MZ UAFUDY
FHLXHVMHDF.  FQVDDF HF PMQ RIUHQCF SENYQ OKNY SENVUSE QLIOP BZMDHDF
WMGHSP, SASCUW FKSK RSW HDW HIHNALF LL ER ALYHTSA.  MIY ZIOVN PRK RSHHXMG
IHWBF ZHW WMZEDHPIP?, BRS ELEQC, VQRLNPS PMK HIOCWLF DOXV YSHVG MC FRS
UQUDPNQUQ YZ MNBN QWR HSHZSA DOXV SQ QLSA ZM QNRQBV MG.  RSES PMY
VHFMQFHID UV RUGPAESCF, WYRAEPMHG SSELHL EWBSPL, EWR HV XHHQPMUDP FUEZ
ENHVSP DOPM FHLXMDQFHID UC FRS UWVURA ARGDWHCUARF, ZELPQC PUED UB
XHHQGMHQP EQYVUPYN.  VQNVDDF NBQYN ERLRYEP ZM LFX UZ FRSPS AMSPGMUWB
RSEPASU, FQSWHW RDK WUF QCFMDHGQFQ PUEF BN DIOVN SQ QLSA ZM FQEQ E NUXY
UD RSSFUDP FI WAPUDS PIUY HZ FRSU THW AMMGQ Y ROUVY.

PDYSAUHKVN MXPSDSKR PMQF BNL RQPYWDE RKSKXUTHARZ MZLMDK HL EZBQHTFUDZ,
QUUWZ IPMSE PMUDPV, ZM YSFSHWQ PRS VUUHPB UZ UQCN EL E LFQWRENK DC FSEHB
UZ UEWRVUDF ASQRPCUWMD UDZUCHQFHID.  FESARGUASN KXBU WMZKR PMQF ESSQWBY
FIARPMSE PNIU PMQF UZGURQ FKSK E FEFSE ZM PMQ YHQDHNQR LMWHKZQ ZUW
UDZUCHQFHIR LDMARRQ ELHV LHOBENOGUDP VKSSELF UZ PMK RHVNMBVHIR FEFSEB
PMQF RYES WMUHDF IOZ MZ FRS RAZCHWV KKSASHZHQCF UZGURQ.  PDYSAUHKVN LEDK
RS NARKEPZMIW PMQF PMQF UZGURQ UEN K VUBPPSDSSE XHVUDMGMDF HOBP PMQ EUDW
UZ PAKRLQDQ ESRQDGKR ZMNKQ WUWRQCWUDP FRS KDZLMDNFGMSP UZ DKARGMZAUDF KWR
NQFQXUFIUDP KSAQMWHDUD MAUHWUQGMUW.  PDYSAUHKVN MIHSC GUEP QSKWEXMWK
YWNFC VQ YNYES UZ PMQF LAR VIUSRWY WMCFDHLMPQ ZM PMQF WMDLSELEGMUW.

WUGMDF ZCW ZU FRB WHSAL, PHDBP, ZM QNF QL E ESZHVHZMWE UZ ESWMCR ZUW
UQPQDHLF PMQF HV WMZEDHPIPQK DC FMHB RIOCFWE, LAR VQRUWC, GI UYEY
UQPQDHLFV HP MUXRV KLKUFLLXK HR LIUA SHUMGKR ZUCH ZM Q NVUARPQSA PMQF
ZISP SQXWWR WMDFESBV, SQBVSE LHZVSPPQC GUEG MZ CEL UDNMCTARZ MA FQ MW
YSPQWR PMHXS ESPZHRLMVUVMGHKB PU YXV PMQ PMHDFB LKHDF FHLXHVRSK DW
ASQRPCUWMD ZUCH.  PMHV YWNFC IQYR ASKCFNLXVK YWBSHGMDF ASQRPCUWMD
ZUCHQFB.  XW BIOVN ESAMHDQ PUEF QP BIUS HIHCF PMQK SQ UD Q NSEFQUD
VUUHPQR VQP UZ ZUCHQFL, EWR PMAR RKSKXUT HQRUEDUBHL PHW LFXUDODF HSHZSA
ZM QNRQBV PMHXK HC FRS LEHQ NYQ ZUEZ MPMSE PMUDPV ENQ YWBSPPSC.  GMHB
WISP WUG MHTXA PMQF PMQK ENY HC FRS RAZCHWE YWR KLKUFLLXQ PH YSKWEUWY.
BN WISP PMQF DOPM UIBP UZ MGB LMVVUIZNEHRMD ESWMCRB, LSPPSE PKUR, DMHRM
ARN IT HDINEGMDF ZM PMA HGMVUZQ K.P., MWBN HW XHHQROSEY SXBQ.  SMF HOBP
EL UIBP UZ BNB LWZEV ENQ YLKUVQLSA UD XHHQ ZUCH PMWHIFM HCFSEVUSCENX
XULA HW XHHQ MZRSC HQRUEDUBH, XH UD PMS PQUY RYK ASQRPCUWMD ZUCHQFX HIFMP
ZM SQ KLKUFLLXQ PW ZPMSEV HR LIUA PHWUQZ, BMIIFO RMGR PIUQ RHZEWDIMP
WMRLDKSEQFHIRL.  SQBVSE NYL RMZ LHZVSPGMDF PMQF PMSPQ HQRUEDUBHB LY
SPFQLXHVRSC GIUHWWHY, WAFQ ZUEZ BRSE XYSHQC GU ZLFX NMGMHA FRB FHDSHKY,
LAC GUEZ BRSES PRIOVN SQ XUDFNEDFS HFLRL ZM SPFQLXHVM PRSO.

QNADWYSAKIUDP FUEZ BMIPS PNIU BN UD PMS EWZU QPDYSR DMGM SSPPSW
WMWNSEDUDF PMA RYSC GM WUWPNUWG CUGGUNMBF AMSPGMUWV, PUGZUCR NARKEPWMESW
PMQ HKFDUFMRK UZ PMS HWHLXQH UZ ROQF ZM EQSH LAR DUEZ BH XASQRF.  PUGZUCR
WUPQC GUEF BW BHNESCFXA ESRQDGSP XHHQ 31,000 MGQHP HSE NKA, WMZ WMNAGMDF
ASQRPCUWMD UQPQDHLFL, EWR ENFIKR ZUC HMNM UHWK RHVPCMVMFKR ESPHUWVHVMVUZQ
UD HWRKC PI UKUCFKUA LWR BPHWY SSAQMWHDUD MAUHWUQGMUW.

SQBVSE ESPHUWRKC GUEZ BRS ELPSCTSAK IWHHF WMNFC VK SHKRYN KL E BPENGMDF
ZHUDZ, CMIPS UDMGUKX UHSNEGMDF HEQHHVQ RIOVN SQ RSSFUDP FI UIXK HC FMHB
KDESQMHIA LWR RKGUDUDF MIN XW BIOVN WI XH, ZUE SLYHTSA, UD ENQYX HZ
BPLANKCROGQFHIW UC RHVPCMVMFHIW UP NSPZHRLMVUVMGX.

UFKHBROSLNSE KNRKC GUEF QO CEL UNXVK QDFKFKR, DCSPFBUDZ DMGR PIUY HZ FRS
AMSPGMUWB PUEF TSEFQUD ZM PMQ RUWSKEPHIW UZ UVNSE MHBPHWMDLF UQPQDHLFB,
ROMDO RIOVN SQ UWQ PMHDF PMQF PMA SMVNEWE UZ WMDFESBV UHPIG CH.  XKSSELF
ZHUDPB HQCFHIRAC VQ XSPPSN EWR PSSKNEX UPMSEX HC FMHB EHABPHIR UKLQ Y
UORM PDQYPQD HHTQNZ MC FMIPS ROU YES WMWNSERAR DMGM RQFLFIZOHDF LAC GRS
RAZCHWVDDF UZ VMLXHIPDEFMHD MAUHWUQGMUW, EL RYXV EL HESPSELKGMUW MGPSFU.

PHQYVDDF KDESQMXA ZM QU, ROMDO SQ RUWVHRKESR DEL L FENPKXA NAWMZEDHPIPQW
NKFQLQPS, XAWNM ODPKR RKSKXUTHARZ MU L RAZCHWV GSEVHUW UZ QU, HW
WMRLDKSEQFHIW UT UYEUDP FRS NKFQ UD MG KLKUFLLXQ PH ZYHFSK HCFSESPPQK DW
WIUDF DQPYWDE UOBFHUKRUK.  UW QNWMNAZ MZ FRS NMWSARF PESQF PRHWFQPK UZ
KDIDFQV NQFQ FUEG MB LMZU EZSQYVUDF LAN IRAWNOUSQESC VQ WIUFSYS DHPIPB
HEMXSAHB, PMHV WMHNPS UZ QNGMUW WMNFR IKLQ Y VHFDUGMDLAP QZLQRZ MC UYEUDZ
RAZCHWQ INFGMHQKDY L ESLFMGX.

UD PMHV WMWLQRGMUW, UFKHBROSLNSE ESZHCPKR UW L UNETIARFQWE HEMZMZEZK HW
BNX HZLMDY HG UAUHWUQGMUW PQRMWUXUZK PSDSMDSP PMQF QFPQHTPB ZM ELXHDMQFY
KDIDFQV UUQPKX HZ TMIZMPDEFRP DOPM NQFQXUFIUDI DAUHWUQGMUW UD NYEX PMQF
YWDE DOPMUD L FMWLF ENQY RAZCHWEY BPSH, XH ZM LEQ, ZWYENN KHB
WMRLPCMNGMUW UZ XHHQ XHCP UZ EFFENEFML PHW QNRQBV.  UNCPRSN, EU MEL
QFPQHTPQC GI OPS BPLANKCR NKFQ ZUCHV HW UCRSE ZM RSSF UQEQ PMQF
KDBPUDQMHIC LQPRYAR PMQ YWBSPB PWZXB LAC GRS NARKNSKODF NKFQ, LAC GMOB
SQVUKSSP PMQF PMK RQFQLELK HL RQPYWDEQLSA.

K NASMDQFQ YWR KFUWOGUDP TUXMDK AHABPHIA UHW BN, MIRYSKC, DMHRM WMHQB
LQDQ ZM ESXHHNRQL EWR NAZUCPNAQFASE OEL LA HUFEQM UW PMHV, HV ZM GUWR
XHHQ EFHEHZDHQFS, RUWHWQLSA, LAN VKPLF WMBPESWMSKWE ZHBVMVUVMGHKL.  E
RQCPKUR LVDZBHVURSPB RUWRQCWUDT DHXPCQRIXSEE OEL UQRK HSHZSA NALHES
YSQNFBX YUEZ BI WU.  YO CIOVN SQ MHPIXA ESRQTFDGQ PI WHVNMBVUDP ZHNPMSE
XAWNRP UZPAC PM ZSPZ MC RQHUWBPNEPQ MGV RQFQLELK HA L RAZCHWY
ARGDWHCUARF, ZSAHVRMUEHAE PKUW.

ESFMCWUDP FRS KDBRHLVHUW ZM ROQF PRK SHKRYN KB PRS GDFQV UBVHA UZ
ASQRPCUWMD RKZHVHM, TQFGMW CQRIUHQWRKR PMQF BN UDMGUKPQ Q NQFLFQZMD
HEMWSPV HC FSEHB UZ KDBPDHLMPQR CSPZHRLMVUVMGQ, ZUEG MB, LDHDF ZMPKPMSE
PMK RHVPCMVMFKR HWFKDUFYGMUWL EWR PSF MF E BPINK ZWHHF ZM XUIY QF LFX
PMSPK HBVHAL EWR PSY RRSES RY EL L AQFHIR LMINFC IIXQ.  PRS SCUYRKW
HVLHSP UZ MIY ZK RQYX NMGM PRS UQALPKHQCF UZ ASQRPCUWMD UDZUCHQFHIW DUVX
WUG CHVEFHSEN, LMZ MAFK ZWHY ZHWPS.

SAVE ZMIY HF PMHV PMQHQ YWR LHZVSPPQC GUEF BN QZBQHTF ZM HSEPNLRK UWY
UQHIN SMVNEWE UD QYRM BPQFQ PI WQYX NMGM HPB BPQFY SAMDGLFARF TMLVUPRSE,
ROMDM UDIMP HEIWMNQ Y WMHZSEQFDGS HWHHKQM PMQF YWNFC VY SAMMGQLXA
KDBPDHLMPQN KWHNAC GRS WMNAPCK, YWR UWK HW DMHRM BN YWNFC VK RQYVUDF DOPM
Q UUDHULF ANCTSE UZ FHLXHVRSEP LAC IUDHULF WMZEDHPIF TWHLXQHB.

PDQLSE ESUQDEKR PMS EQRARG CKSASHZHQCF UD PMS PDMARGMGUW BIUUODUZQ UZ Y
DOXVUDFDSPB PI OPS VPUB LAR KMGRSC RSHHXMG HW UDPQCNUEDFY HA L ULHDXA
BPLANKCROGKR ZUCHQF.  RS YWWRSEKR UG E LHUUVEN UISKHQCF NYB PYEUDP TFLRQ
UD PMS ROULAMGHKL.  EBFMIIFM PRS ALGMUWLF VUSCENX WT UKRMDUDA PIOWR UWXA
L UYR FHLXHVRSEP ZM WMHZSEQFK HA L VUEQ SKCFHNQ PYW HW PMESQ KQYEP KFU, Y
RAR YZLHWM CDIMP PKRANEPQ Q UMNU SENPKC WOUSQC DUVVUDF ZM WMHZSEQFY.

VDCTLFS NQRIOCFKR MHL HDUPB UQRMUDSEQYNKLXQ RUXSAQMHIRL ESKNUDP DWZO
PCIOLXSP DOPM PMQ RIUHQCNUKS FMLVUPRSEX HP ASAQMWHDUQ CKRUK UD QNAMHDUDZ
UQPQDHLFL PHW BNB RUXSAQMHIRL, UD FECPMDNFEN PMS HMLVUPRSEL PQYC PUEZ
PMQK YWNFR WMZ SQ QLSA ZM WMSKC PRSHD WMBPL EWR YWNFN VHXQ RUWPCUX UZ
PMKHE HWHNIQMB, PUEF BN DIOVN IDSK PMQH YNYK HW PSXV PMQH LAC IYEY
HEUZMGL PWHC MRSU.  MK RIOTMKR PMQF PMS HMLVUPRUDI DWRHLPCX YEL HESHENKR
ZM UISK UDZM PMHV ENQY QF PMQ HIUARF, PDGAR MGP ESPHVFQWNQ PU YXVWYUDF VW
ZM HLK HPB UQRMUDSEQYNKLXQ HQFSEUKXB EL PMA SMVNEWE YWNFN VDVY.

PMQ RHZEWDIMP FLD WWY KNRCSPPSB RIUFEQM KDVE EL Q UKRHOU, QWR BN NQW
ESAMSPZ MRA WMZE UZ PMQF, HW ZCM WHZHKV HG UG MB PRS UWXA SKEPHIA, LWR
NQW CQAHABP WMGHSP UZ XHZFNYES, LMZ BUEF ZKUXB ZM KNRCSPB HKFYFUDSP HW
XMIYX HN EWAPMUDF VDVQ PUEZ CMHRM HV UD UQRMUDSEQYNKLXA PHWO.

IDZLHWN KDQWUNXKRPKC GRS PMHWWA ALFMES UZ PMHV HVLHY, RMHRM RS UVFNBPNEPQW
DOPM PMY SLYHTSA UZ PMQ ROUSQEPIUS HWHRQBV UDXIXSKR UD FHZBUDF K WMZE UZ Y
BRHKCFUGMD NKFQLQPS UW L FLA UD BNB VDMARRQ ESKNUDP DWZU.  MQ YXBW
QNADWYSAKIKR PMQF BN RAKRP RASF EWR WMNFR KAFHVZ BRS ARSEIDSP LAC GLFARPB
UZ YWDEPRHZ FECPMDHGLAPB UD PMUDVDDF PMWHIFU E ANCTSE UZ PMSPS HWHLXQHB.

IDZLHWR CQPHNRAC GRS KDBRHLVHUW ZM PKZBUDP FRS HUKFQ YWR PQBZ HSHZSA ZM
PMUDQ GREIOPI ZMPKPMSE ROSEQ PRSX YLAZ BI ZI HC FRS XUDF PQCH.  OQXUALB
WMWNKRKR PMQF RSE SSZSEHKWNQ YZ BRS GHSERQ XEHTHXHOC MRS HEKSHIHL RYQE QF
PKHWPKZMDW NADGSEVHZQ LAC GMHX RYSE YF BR MKN ZUCNKR RSC PH WYSLKFNQFY
RSE HSEPHQRGMSK UW PMA HPSUNFASPX HZ FYSF QV HUQPKB.  HAXUWEL PNQUKR PMY
HVLHSP UD E LSEHKX HT AHABPHIRL:  MID RW YQ YQBOHES UQRMUDSEQYNKLXY
PQBZ?  WI RY FQEQ GHQMHNSP UZ MG LAR GSEZUCH MWW HD UF BQFSE?  HV MG
HUZHCPLAZ BW ZTMKUD LSEE ODIMENLVUZQ HUKFSP LAC GYSP, QMQ.?
UFKHBROSLNSE KFESKR DOPM OQXUALBV PNQUUDZ IP LPCQFKPMD AMSPGMUWL, EWVUDZ
PMQF L FENPK UDBPMGMFHIR LMNU EB XR TWHLQLXE OEL ZM WI LFX UZ FMIPS
PMUDPV QF KDZLSEARZ BHUSP.  PMHL, PMQ PDHDQ HV ZM YSSEDMPS HOKIHQCF.  PMY
YWDEPRHZ UEN KWVKR ZM MHL EWR QUB RUWVHRKNEGMUWV HC UYEUDP FMIPS
HOKIHQCFB.  RUWRQCWUDP ZMFHNQ HYSGMDFX HC RHVNMBVHIRL, OQXUALB VIFPKBPKR
PMQF BRESARUDP TDHHWMGHKX RIOVN SQ RSSFUNX.

RYMVAS HZUDKR PMQF PMK RDGSEVHZQ ESUFQRPQK DC FMHV PWHHF NYL E VHFD XMPM
UZ PMS RQYBFU EWR UZ PMK HOBQFHNMGX WZ FRS GUASN, KWR UIES GMHQ YWNFW
UESK ZM FEBV SQZUES RY WMDLUDRQ UWQ YWUPMSE WMWNSEDUDF BPLANKCRB.

LA YSRMLAPK SQZCYSC UAXUWEL LAC VQFGMW NFLDHGUKR PMS HIHCF PMQF PMY
RCDGUDP ZHWRQ SQMHWR XMPM PMS HSEPSHL LAC GRS WMCWASX VSEWZ HEIHQRPB NYB
PMS HESPSDSQFHIW UG AWUNXKRPK ZUC PRS UNFMES, WUP BHUFSA ZHW FECPMDNFEN
ESPSENRM HLK.  HC FRS NQPS UZ HSEPAHB, HAXUWEL LEDK, PMQ YBVOUTFHIW DEL
PMQF PMQ PYSPB YWNFR WMZ SQ ARPQESN KFKUD UDZM ASQRPCUWMDLFXA ESKNQLSA
ZUCH.  PHSESQDPCQAMYSA LWVKR PMQF E LNQWLKR HUKFY RIOVN WUP BSESK EL LA
ENRMDGLF WMZE ZUE HHNZHPSX HZ TESPSDSQFHID UC FRS NQPS UZ, LEQ, ZRS VMXV
UZ DHPIPB, UD PMS PARPS PMQF PMS PNQWLKR HUKFSP ENY SZLQRGMSKXA PMY
ENRMDGLF WMGHSP ZUC PRS WMCWASB UQFRSUQGMRB XMIYB.


                                 


                          EFHSWROV H:  GWHPDQU



                                YWDEPRHZ
                                   UW
                               ASQRPCUWMD
                                  PQBZB



                             910 HORA 1992

                           VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB
                            NYPRUDPFUW, R.N.



    LHZSHWPQC VK Y PDLAF ZWHC MRS NKGDN KWR FNDMSA FEDQENN GIOWRQFHIW


FMSPNKK, 9 ONAY 1992

ALGMUWLF RKUIRLPCQFHIA FQL, QFDHOU, VUSCENQ OKNHVUW

8:30 QU   WMZLYS LAW VLAHVR, EKPHVPCQFHIW

9:00 QU   RYBNIUY

          HEHXPSD PUGZUCR, KDESQMHW ZUE PRMUXENXA HEIZNEHB, LAR NENX
             UFKHBROSLNSE, WMHWKDALZMN, EHQDHNQC UQHHWA, XMVNEWE UZ
             WMDFESBV

9:F5 LH   BSPVHUW M.  DUWPQCF UD L AYR ZUCH:  ROW YUVF NPS MG LAR DUEZ
          DOXV PMQK WI?

          SCUYW VSPNCHGGMUW UZ PMS ELAPK UZ ASQRPCUWMD UDZUCHQFHIW.
          RMENQNPQDHFYGMUW UZ ROI OPSV HF QWR MID OG MX HC HYK SQ HLKR.
          UD KNKDGMUW ZM L FWZE YP BRMUXENXA HLSP, PMHV PSBVHIW DUVX
          UDNBINQ Y HESPARFQGMUW UW HLQ SE XFMRKCFV E12 LAR NUXSAPK
          LAC GRS PKRANES FMLVUW.

          UIRKNEZMD:  HQUSP NKXA
          KLNE UHRMASXHA, LCNMHLKS NSPQYCNU EWR KSLFNLGMUW BPLUZ,
             ALGMUWLF ENRMDGSP LAR CQRHWRV KNUHDUBPNEGMUW IXSEGDYR
          LHLER U. SKWBUK, PQQU SAKNSE, QUSEMDLA HQUIWE, HLSE KSLFNLGMUW,
             LAW
          HILARA PNYSUQA, LBVMWUKPQ WMHWKDALZMN, EHQDHNQC UQHHWA, XMVNEWE
             UZ WMDFESBV SQXWWR PMS PRMUXEN

10:30
11:00 QU  SCQYY

11:00 QU  PSBVHID UH.  VMIN YWR PQXV.

          QYRM HESPARFQGMUW ZM WMRLHVZ MU L GUZFYSCUUDMFY
          BPQFQHARPBMID ZWHHF KDBRHLVHUW DOXV ZUXVWY FNWNO.

          UIRKNEZMD:  HQNAMASUDS RSPV, RHDQRZMC, WQFHIALV NQHUWBPNEGMUW
             FLL

            1.  Q NFLBVMDP HWHHKQM, BPESBVUDP FYSPB LAC GYSP CQPDHKSLF
                UIES PMLA UOBFHUKRUK:  HSEPAHP HWHHKQM, UEDSENW
                NADGSEVHZQ
                ASVU OQXUALB, HLAKFUDP KKDZMW

            2.  MZRSE ROULAMGHKP HWHHKQMP SHTXUKODF PMY SHQDPUDF DHWHB UZ
                PMQ PYSP QWNIWUDI DDUGMQFDGQ PKH:  RMKNYXDQRSLFQKB
                PMY SDFVUPR ZHQPWE UNXV PQBZ NKFQLQPS LAWIE HQFWHXUIDY
                FLGMAL NKFQLQPS
                SEMD C. QLFLFMNK, LMDS HESVHRKCF, RMKNYXDQRSLFQK, UDW.

            3.  QUSEMDLA HQUIWE
                NQNS UFKHBROSLNSE, WMHWKDALZMN, EWR
                DHDQK QCDYK, ELXHDMQFQ RWZCRUDQFHW, VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB

            4.  ZUNAKDDF ULPMSEP SLYHTSA PNIU FEDQENR IOULAMGHKB
                UDBPMGMFQ:  PRS FEHSEP UZ PKHWPK NYPRUDPFUW, NADGSEVHZQ
                UZ GDDPUDUK
                WIWHPMQ ZYWMHT, ILAKFUDP KKDZMN, EWRHW
                NKGDR DWZNVQK FEDQENW

            5.  LA ASQRPCUWMD HQKDNQV UIOCWLF UZPADHDF PDEFMHRB LAW
                UNXVPQBZ PSENRMQLUVMGQ:  ZRS UWVURA HIHNALX UT NHNESCF
                NBUDMDLF PCUKXB, QUSEMDLA ELXHDMQFHIA UHW PMQ YKGLARQHQCF
                UZ BRHKWNY
                UQDHL F. SASCUW, UQALIDDF KRMGHW

            6.  E FWHHKQM PMQF UZPAEP ULRBHUUVK HUQPKX HZ TKFSP LMZ MUHPB
                PSENRMQLSA PQBZ:  WMCWASB UQFM SWZEV
                XAWLQ E. HSEPUWHOL, EBVHVFQCF KDESQMHW, WMCWASX
                   UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZHKL PHW BRMIFLNSK OAUHWUQGMUW
                   XHHNRQB, RHWRAXV NADGSEVHZQ

12:30 TH  FNWNI  RUDUDP DWZU Q, VUSCENQ OKNHVUW 620.  YSMHVMPB
          KLKUFLLXY.

1:30 TH   PSBVHID UH.  VMIN YWR PQXV WMCFW..

3:00
3:30 TH   SCQYY

3:30
5:30 TH   PSBVHID UOV.  KDBPDHLMGMUW, RAZCHWEV, LAR WQPYWDEUDZ:  ITFHIRL
          ZUC RHVPSUHALGMUW.

          FHLXHVRSW VHVEV:  NADGSEVHZQ HESPPSL EWR FHLXMDPSQMHW
             FHLXHVRSEP, HEDGQFSPQRZME HMLVUPRSEB
          WMHTMFSE RAZCHWEV

          UIRKNEZMW:  SMXSEF P. GORM, PHQRUKF LBVHVFQCF ZM PMQ YBVMWUKPQ
             VUSCENUKA UHW PHQRUKS FWHHKQMB, XMVNEWE UZ WMDFESBV
          NBUGZUCR L. FAWRM, KDESQMHW, VUSCENK YMFIUQFHIA, NDUSKEPMGX WZ
             NQVUZUCWUK
          MINYCR SQBVSE, BRMIUX UZ VUSCENK YWR UDZUCHQFHIR LDMARRQ,
             NADGSEVHZQ UZ GHZBBLHNPI
          WHALVN X. VENPSA, LBVMWUKPQ KDESQMHW UZ VUSCENHKL PHW
             UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZA, ODUSKEPMGX WT UENAXLAN KM QUXSAPK
             FEDE
          KRDOC L. SCWYWCDIP, KSYNMGMSK KDESQMHW, HQHQS WSPQYCNO
             UDBPMGMFY

6:30 TH   ESRQTFHIC  UUWFTASHKW SWZU, BMVNEWE UQKDXHW 619.

                                 

RYRWSPNKK, 10 ONAY 1992

KDDUDF WHIU L, FMVNEWE UQKDXHW 620

8:30 QU   WMZLYS LAW VLAHVO

9:00 QU   PSBVHID UG.  DUQPK NQTFHNQ, PYSM QEFFMES, IXSEGDYR UZ PQBZ LAW
          HUKFS PZMNEPK ZUCHQFB.

          UIRKNEZMC:  DUVVUQU S. UWZZMD, LMDS HESVHRKCF UZ HZSEQFHIRL,
             UDQP

          E FDHWNHGLF HQPMIWL PHW HUKFQ REFFMES UZ PQBZ:
             KDESQM BRLADUDF
             HLY HT UMDWHZUCH

          LARA D. EARRAK, YBVHVFQCF KDESQMHW, RKFECPHQCF UZ HESPSELKGMUW
             LAR NUWPSDSQFHIW, NHWRAXV NADGSEVHZQ
          FEHQFL K.M. LARCQ, YBVMWUKPQ KDESQMHW, LNZMUQGMUW, LAW
          HOKDPM Y. FDKEN, WMHWKDALZMC, WQFHIALF LPDMDNFFMNEB FYSZ
             KDIDGMGODF HEIZNEU CQFRG, ALGMUWLF KFDHNMBFHNLF VUSCENX
             ALX
          WIALVN O. DQFSEP, RQYR, VEXPQHB UZGURQ, KYSA NADGSEVHZQ VUSCENX

          L BHSDMLF HEMXSAHB:
             XMNAK GUXOUSP
             WMRLSELKGMUW
             ESHEIWMNUDP TDHCFKR UEFUZMRAB

          NQNS UFKHBROSLNSE, WMHWKDALZMN, EHQDHNQC UQHHWA, XMVNEWE UZ
             WMDFESBV
          PKHWPK PMIUQ, NMHAP, WMOBNAMDQFHIRL ARIDRASEUDT VNEWNO,
             ALGMUWLF VUSCENX WT UKRMDUDA RBU

10:30
11:00 QU  SCQYY

11:00 QU  PSBVHID UG.  DUQPK NQTFHNQ, PYSM QEFFMES, IXSEGDYR UZ PQBZ LAW
          HUKFS PZMNEPK ZUCHQFB RUWGC..

          D MUQPK BPLANKCRL EWR HUFSMDQFHIRL ZUE HESPSDSQFHIW

          HKLA LQWHALB, VARHIC HLAKFSE, RKFECPHQCF UZ BPLANKCRL EWR
             PQRMWUXUZK, ELXHDMQFHIA UHW UDZUCHQFHIA LWR HUKFQ HLAKFQHARZ
             KUHU
          FEPCMDUK LQZBUD, HESPDKARZ, BRS WMOBHVVHUW UW HESPSELKGMUW LAW
             QNRQBV RTY

          C GYSM QUWSKEPHIW:
             MWD SP. EQEQKUDZ
             BPLANKCRX HU LWBHNQNK YWR HLY HG UHTSEPAQM PQBZB
             PSDSMDQ SHNQYHL

          BPNLCP RYMVAS, PSDUHW ESPSENRM PHQRUKVUBP, UWVURA WMHTMFSE
             VUSCENQ WARPQD, HWN. MWBN
          UHRMYQX VSPE, QSYNMGMSK KDESQMHW, WMHTMFSE BRHKWNS ESPQYCNO,
             SQXVWMES
          DHDQK QCDYK, ELXHDMQFQ RWZCRUDQFHW, QUSEMDLA HQUIWE, VUSCENX WZ
             WMDFESBV
          FEHQFL K.M. LARCQ, YBVMWUKPQ KDESQMHW, LNZMUQGMUW, LAW
          HOKDPM Y. FDKEN, WMHWKDALZMC, WQFHIALF LPDMDNFFMNEB FYSZ
             KDIDGMGODF HEIZNEU CQFRG, ALGMUWLF KFDHNMBFHNLF VUSCENX
             ALX

12:30
1:30 TH   FNWNO

1:30 TH   PSBVHID L.  EFHEUYRMSP ZM HESHENUDP KSAQMWHDUQ MYSPB.

          KDBRHLVHUW UZ EFHEUYRMSP ZM BPNHQMHNUDP FYSF ZHW PMQ RIUFHPQW
          HEHX LAR NUWX HZ FYSM QIWUDI, KSPNCHGGMUW UZ HQPMIWV HW
          HEQNGMRQ, LAR NIUFEDHXHW UZ FYSMQIWUDT IQPMIRV.

          UIRKNEZME:  PHLLA MIDQQK, KDESQMHW, RQCFSE ZUE SSAQMWHDUQ MYSPB
             UD PMS ROULAMGHKB RQPR, EMFPKEP LAR GDHWNQPUW NADGSEVHGMSP
          NKGDR DWZNVQK FEDQENW
          Q.C. PHSESQDPCQAMYSR, AKDZMC, PYSP QWNIWUDI DDUGMQFDGQ PKH,
             NADGSEVHZQ UZ UVVUWUHVRMMDKFW
          SEMD C. QLFLFMNK, LMDS HESVHRKCF, RMKNYXDQRSLFQK, UDW.

3:30
4:00 TH   SCQYY

4:00 TH   PSBVHID LM.  DHZEWDIMP HVLHSP.

          UQWESQPM HSPQEP, ZHVUWQ FSLADUDF KNGDPSC PM ZRS ESIDBPSE UZ
             WMZEDHPIPB, VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB

5:00 TH   PSBVHID LOV. WMWNFNVHUW.

          PKRANEV NHVNMBVHIW.
          ROQF ZMGHRB RYES IUMGPQW ID PDGAR PRHWP BREUGZ BUEF QWAUWY
             YWNFN VDVQ PM ZLFE YXMMF WUY?
          HV PMSEQ Y "PDIOH" RSEY?  RUEP BMINFC GRS PDIOG RU WYSG, MZ
             LAQZMHDF?  ROQF PRIOVN PMA SMVNEWE UZ WMDFESBV WI RABZ, UG
             LAQZMHDF?
          UIRKNEZME:  HWHBVSE IDZLHWW, VHDQRZMN PHW BRMIFLNSE ZWHPDQUB,
             VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB

6:00 TH   KNHIHNW


                                 


                         EFHSWROV OV:  QLBPNEQMB


PSBVHID U

KLNE UHRMASXHA           UHWQRELGMDF PMA HPS UZ ASQRPCUWMD PQBZB LX
                         XHDMLF BRHKWNSP LAR IOULAMGHKB VRMUXENB

PMHV HESPARFQGMUW YSFSHWSP PMY RYKV HW DMHRM ASQRPCUWMD PQBZL EES VUEQXA
ZM SQ HLKR XQ PMA RUWBRHKCFUGMD BRMIFLNSQ WIUUODUZQ.  UQWA UZ PMY
ESUQDEL EES RCYNA UWHU Q ESZHCP PMS PHSYESE WMLNPMHWKR DOPM HKZL
WHPMARSQDP, Q NIUFHPQE PDMARGMBP QF PMS ELAR NHWZHNEGMUW.

PMS PHSYESE ELPSBVSP 1 NMWSARP BRMUXENXA HLY HG UAUHWUQGMUW PQRMWUXUZK
LAC 2 GRS EQQ ZESWRV HD UAUHWUQGMUW PQRMWUXUZK UIBP ESSALKCF ZM PMY
ESPSENRM HEMWSPV, HW UCRSE ZM HEKRMDP MWY XHDMLF BRHKWNSP LAR IOULAMGHKB
BRMIFLEP ENQ YTF ZM HLY SSAQMWHDUQ MYSPB.  UD UDPCIWMNUDP FRS ZMGHW,
NMWSARF MPS UZ ASQRPCUWMD PQBZV HP SSZXUESC VWHKNXA DOPMUD PMQ RUWPQBZ UZ
BRMIFLNSQ WIUUODUNQGMUW.  PNIU PMS HSEPHQRGMSK UZ BRMIFLNSX
WMOBNAMDQFHIC, FRS YWDE UZ MOUQDUGMSP LAR VMWUKX BDMARRQB VRMUXENB
UDXIXSSP GUSK HEMWSPPSV:  1 HRKCFUGMDQFHIW UP LIOCNSP, 2 WMOBNAMDQFHIW
DOPM WMXVQYFISP, 3 UDPQEHESFQGMUW LAN KALXAVHX HG NQFK, 4 NHVPSUHALGMUW
UZ ESPSENRM GUWRUDPV, LAR 5 NHNDHNMFNI CKSASHZHQCF LAK DRLPCMNGMUW.  PMY
YSPQCF ZM ROMDM RIUFHFQGMUW NMWSARFBE ZSEHQQFSP ELHSQMX HP LRMUXENXA
WMOBNAMDQFHIW CSHESPSCFL E GDQLSA UDKDNQZMW HZ FRS HEHXHSQML PHW
ASQRPCUWMD PQBZB.

PMK RHVNMBVHIW UT NHNESCF HEQNGMRQ HV LQFLWNKR XQ LA LALFEXHV UZ EQX
PCARRV UD PMS PRMUXENXA HLY HG UAUHWUQGMUW PQRMWUXUZK.  PMSPK HWNFNRK PMY
PCARRV ZMNYCR ARNIPSC NIUFHGMDF LAR NUWRAQMDGMGX, YMHRM HEIXDKQ Y
PNQUYRHWA GHW ZUESNQBPUDP FRS HLY HP ASAQMWHDUQ MYSPB PMWHIFM PMHB
UHXVARDUOU.  PMS HESPSCFQFHIW NUWNBINSP DOPM E LOUUQWE UZ PMY RYKV HW
ROMDM PRS WURLDMARGMGUR BRMUXENXA WMOBNAMGQ WLA SQ YSHSQMKR ZM HLY
ASQRPCUWMD PQBZL, EWR PMK HHTVUNQGMUWX HZ FUEF MPS ZUD HAUHWUQGMUW
HEIXDKSEB.

LHLED LQRDMY LWR HILARA PNYSUQR    ASAQMWHDUN QCNMHSKL PHW PMS HMLVUW:
                                   HLY HU LHQDHNQC UQHHWK OR FMLVUN QWR
                                   BRMIUX VUSCENHKB

PMHV HIUDG CHVNMBVHIA UMWHLSP UW WURLRMUXENXA EFFSMDQFHIRL UZ ASQRPCUWMD
VUSCENQ OQFSEUKXB, PHQRUGMDLFXA KNRCSPVHDF HLY HZ FRS VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB
QUSEMDLA HQUIWE QU HEIZNEU HA L BHLFF AOUSQW HZ TMLVUN QWR BRMIUX
VUSCENHKB PREIOPIIOZ BRS NAMGKR BPQFSP.  QU WMRLHVPB UZ PSSAQMKR VUSCENX
UZ WMDFESBV HEHUENK YCNMHLKB UQFSEUKXB, BPHWKR UW HZGMNQB UKRUK
NRWHIBDKYHKDBR, LAR GESPSCFKR DOPM VUZBSA HW WU KRMGUDT.  ILAX
WMXVQRGMUWL EES QNWMHTLAHKC VK QSAQMWHDUD MCFWHNIQMHIRL LAN IPSEP FIDKSP
UZPADHDF LQDQPDIOWR UDZUCHQFHIA LWR MHBPHWMDLF WMCFYSM.  QUXSAQMHIRL
ESHESPARF Q LKDHQPX WZ LHWUQPB UDNBINUDP TMIZMPDEFRP, PDEFMHN QCPB,
UIGMUW GHQMHNSP, ESWMCRKR XHNAC, IHLMD, SCUYRVDKSP LAC ILAHLNCHGPB,
XMIYL, EWR FEHTUSQPB.

UD 1991, PMA SMVNEWE UZ WMDFESBV SQFKA L ALGMUWDORK KSLFNLGMUW UZ QU UD
KDZLSEARZ BEZSP UZ UDBPMGMFHIRL.  PQBP VHPQV HWNFNRK FHLXMD VUSCENHKB,
ASQHARFQWE LAR VQRUWNKWE BRMIUX VUSCENHKB, RUXSAPK LAN IDUSKEPMGX
VUSCENHKB, VFQPQ VUSCENHKL, EWR PHQRUKX VMVNEDHSP.  LHLED LQRDMY LWR
HILARA PNYSUQW DUVV NHVNMBV PMKHW HLBSELKGMUWX HC FRS HLY HU LC TQ ZRS
WURLRMUXENXA WMOBNAMGA, OVHDF KSDKARRQ FVQYRAN GWHC MMHX HDFIHDF
KSLFNLGMUW APZUCP.

SKWBUK DOXV WMOBARZ MC FRS IXSELFV FUYXB UZ PMY SLKFNQFHIR FWHHKQM, LAW
PMQ PEZSP UZ FHLXMD LAR VRMWZX VMVNEDHSP UDNBINKR UD PMHV BPINE.  OSE
WMOBARPB UW WURLRMUXENXA HLY HU LO CUVF UMWHL UW PMS HMLVUN BMVNEWE EL Y
NMBFHNLF LAR NIUUODUZQ UDBPMGMFHIW, UZFAR SCDKIDDF PMK PEF SQZCYSA UHWUQX
LAK DAUHWUQS ANINQGMUW.  PNYSUQW DUVV NHVNMBV PMA HPS UZ QU UD BRMIUX
VUSCENHKL.  HPS XQ BPINARPB LAC GQYRMSEP REL ESSKLFKR XHHQ SCUYW
AMSPGMUWL EXMMF PMA HPS UZ ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQL, EX RASF LV RAPUDMGY
SQRAGUPB FKUDKR XQ PMA "RUWBRMIFLC."  PHZMDX RUVV UWNFNRK PMS HWHLXQH UZ
PDELGHDF WMCFARF QWR WMCFYSG MA LR ASAQMWHDUR QDLHDUWHQCF, PMS PFMCTVUDF
LXMWEV NCQYPQC VA "WYR" PQRMWUXUIDSP, LAC GRS NAMKHA VEUVXB LAK DCFSESPPB
YNYEARKR PMWHIFM OPS UZ ASQRPCUWMD ESXHHNRQB.

PSBVHID UO

ASVU OQXUALB             PRS HSEPAHP HWHHKQM:  UDPQNEQMDGS PIOCNSP LAW
                         BPINHKV HW NFLBVMDLF PDYSRQ

PMS HSEPSHL HEIHQRP 5 MEL HOBP ESSAELKR HSEPAHB 1.0, PRS GUEPF TMLVUNBX
KLKUFLLXK SSEVHUW UZ MGP REZSEPQBZNLV NQFQLELY HT UNFGMHQKDQ UQFSEUKXB UW
NBELVHNQV FESQRS.  HSEPSHL HV RKVHFDKR ZM SQ HLKR XQ Y NDKQ YINHKWNY,
WMHTDHPSW IP NQYRKEP QF PMS PFMRKCF LAR VRMUXEN SASKXB.  EL LHRM, MG UOBP
SQ QLSA ZM XUNQPQ UDZUCHQFHIA NVHDF KDZLSEARP BPCQFKPHKL, EWR MG UOBP
WMCFKUR AWUIFI RQPKUB FH XSESK PMK RUGPAESCF RAKRX HG UPB HLSEV.  HW
KNKDGMUW, MG UOBP SQ RKVUSKESR VM ZUEG MG ML EZLHWNKLXQ PI HPB FQDPQP
LNKDARRQ.  PMSPS HWHLXQHL EWR PMS PUXMFHIRL RY RMHXQ YES RKBRDHSQK DW
OQXUALL, "ED UCFSEULRQ ZM NBELVHNQV FESQE DMGDVUFYGMUW," UKVHB 43:2,
UQCNO 1992.

UD HWRKC PU YRMHKSK MGX HVMQRGMSK, PMS HWHHKQM BPLUG NQRDKKR ZM UQEQ Y
WMRLDMIOB VSHENQFHIC LQPRYAR PSSAQMUDF KWR WMDLSEGMDF PQBZNLV, NQFQLELY,
LAK DUQPK NKFQ UW PMY HRA UEWR, LAR GMFGMDF MG UDZM K NASDGSEE XEXPQU IW
PMY HPMSE.  PMQF NYK, OG MP HHXVHLXQ PM WESQFQ PRS ASQRPCUWMD NKFQ
DOPMIOZ BMHDAUDF KXMMF PMS ESPPCMDGMUWX HZ FRS RKVUSKWE XEBPQH.  RY UESK
UQRK K FESQF APZUCP ZM RMWZPS XEBPQHUDRKHSWRARF ZHWUQPB ZUW HHN NKFQ,
LAC GH ZMF EL UORM PMIOPIF QWR YWDE EL ZHBVMVSA UDZM BPNHQMHNUDI DP BW
PMQF PMQ PNERLFLGMUW PNIU FEHSC PH YSAQMWHDUN THWO CUVS ARULARQ PMK SLFHA
UZ PMK RQFY. L KDBRHLVHUW UZ PMSPS PUXMFHIRL EL UZ ZCW XQYEP KFI HV HW
ASVU OQXUALV, PESZIWE NCLAQ, EARRAPM UIWSASF, LWR R. WYSX BUHPM, "PMY
HSEPAHP HWHHKQM:  NKFQ UD PMY SSAQMWHDUN QPK," UD QNRQBVUDF KCFMKOHZQ:
PMQ RIUFHPQDHFYGMUW UZ NBELVHNQV NQFQLELSP, H. VUXIUUW LAC G. YWCPRSW
KRL.,  HDUSKEPMGX WU LDHOWAL HESPV, HR FESBV.

UORM UZ PMY RHWY IR FSEPSHL HV ZUNMPSW IW NUXSAQMUDF KWR WMDLSEGMDF PMY
NKFQ UW ROMDM PRS HEIHQRG MB LELKR.  QF PMS PQUQ PHUK, HG ML RQRSPLEWE ZM
HEIXDKQ HQYRL UZ QNRQBV ZM PMK HAUHWUQGMUW, UD HWRKC PI UYEK HF MLELXY,
LAC GRSC MI HDLSPGMFKPQ MID OG ML HPSN.  KX RA SQYCW UIES QLIOZ CUEZ
BPINARPB LAR VRMUXENL PWHI CUGPAESCF LQDQPDIOWRV RW YMGR HSEPSHL, RY NQW
KNHOBP IOC RQFQ NUXSAQMHIA, LWR LFXH UIKDZA PMS PEXPQC MU YWBIUUINKPQ
PMQH.  UD NCQYGMDF K NASDGSEE XEXPQU THW PKRANEF NPS, RY UESK PCHKC GW
KLIHN GKLHWUDF KWA UWQ PEZY HU NPS XQ LFXUDODF UOBFHGSA ZUCHX HU LWBSPB
ZM LAR WKLDIQFHIC FREIOPI PMS PEXPQO.

PMY RYK PQBZ HV UEWRSAR KSYHTVUGUSP XHHQ UZ PMSPS HDHWNHGSAL.  EXV PQBZ
UD HSEPAHV HB PKFPKN IVHDF VPUB, ZUXVWYUDP FRS FIDKASUDSP UZ PMQ PYSZ
ARWMKDDF UDMGUKGMSK PQM.  GMHB HENAIG HL HPSC GI HWRYS PMQ PYSF, QWR
HEMWSPV HP BM ZUEG MM QLA SQ HUZHCPKR UDZM OEHSCNENR.  WH XTIB UENAIZ
ESUQUDV HC FRS PQBZ PMQF ESQNRSB PRS HLSE, SQNQHLQ RHNESCFXA MG YWNFC VY
ZMH YSZARVHSK ZM NCQYPQ E LEXPQC MUEF QQMX HR LTIV UW CQYB FHUY.
MIRYSKC, PRS ESFIFLDHZQ HEIXDKKR XQ VPUB HV SPPSCFUKF UHW SKDHZAUDP FRS
WMCFARZ MZ FRS PQBZL, EWR PDQYFBE XHSKRL EXV PMS HWHRQBVUDP TSEZUCHKR UW
PMQH.  PMA PQNZ BUEZ BRS PQBZP SVOBP UD VPUB ARLHESB PUEZ BRSX YUVX LY
ESFLGMSKXA QYXE ZM ZHCP ZM KDZLSEARP MENRDENQ YWR XHZFNYES, LAR VW YUVX
IOFBELZ BRS NMWSARG CASDGSEE ZFLFZHWU.  TUDLFXA, PMS PTIB UENAIZ
UDWMEHHWQFSP YSHVGMDF NQWUDUNQS NAPSEARRQ XEBPQHB RUETFSE, SKEPA, SUDY,
QPD. MWRYSUDF KWR ALGDFKGMUW ENQ SELKR UW PMSPA PQYFMESB.  PMHP SRLHNSP
PMQF PMS PQUQ RLAUWMDLF ESPAESWNY RUVF LXNYKP ESPUXSK ZM PMS PQUS HIHCF
DOPMUD Q FYSF, QWR PMQF LFX SSEVHUWX HZ UHN PQBZP, EKPENNVSPX HG NASDGSEX
FSQFZUCH KSAR FEHSE HDHCFIOPB DOXV UNWNGMUW PMS PQUY RYK.

UD HWRKC PH ZWHGDRK ZMUXL PHW HLSEB, PRS PQBZ HV HEMWSPPSC VK Y
UIEHMIXUIDNQF LALXAPYN, EWR PMS ESPNFPB ENS PZMESK DA L NKFQLQPS.
ZMPKPMSE DOPM PMK HWRYS, PMK PESQEARFVHVU SYSMDUW, LAC GRS UDRKZ WU LXV
PMY SDFVUPR YWCRV HC FRS RKGUDUGMUWX HZ FRS SAVOWMC, FRS UIEHMIXUIDNQX
LALFEXSP WMHTDHPS E LQP UZ VUDFOHBPMD ZMUXB PUEF QXVWY HLSEX HU LXV
SASKXB ZM YWDE DOPM PMQ PYSFMLF UDZUCHQFHIA, LWR ZM QNWMHTVUPR KDZLSEARZ
FQVEL.  PHW YSQUFSS, PFMRKCFX RMI ESKN WU PDYSQ IYK YSFSHWQ Y WMWNSHF QB
MG EFHSENV HD FESQE PQBZB LA OVHDF PMY SDFVUPRPDYSV DWRYS, LAC GRSW
XUIYUDF IZ RHWEV UD PMQ PYSPB LAC GNERLFLGMUWX, HE PRMUXENB HYK WI
RKFQUVKR UIEHMIXUIDNQX BFMKDSP UZ YWCR HLQ SA OVHDF PMQ HHWHRUXIZMDLF
LALFEXSP UZ PMQ PYSPB.  SQNQHLQ PRSPS ZMUXX RSEA RMZ RKVHFDKR ZUN EWA UWY
HLQ, PRS LEHQ ZMUXL EWR PMS PQUK RQFQ NLA SQ HLKR XQ XMPM BPINARPB LAW
BRMIFLEP.

WUPQB:
     5  HSEPAHV HB LELKR QF UEDSENN IDUSKEPMGX, YMGM RUXFLXMNEZMEP QF
     PSSKNEX UPMSE NADGSEVHGMSP.  PMS HWHHKQM UEB LYSA UNARKR GDHUQDHXA
     XQ PMQ YWLARSQDPRTS TWHHKQM, EL RYXV EL XQ UEDSENN IDUSKEPMGX,
     EFFSQ RIUFHPQN, EWR MZRSEP.  MG HV FHLXHVRSC VX ZLFA HDUSKEPMGX
     HESPP.  HSEPSHL NHRL UW UQDMCFHXM RIUFHPQEP, NARKC PRS OEHSCNENW
     HEIZNEO.

SEMD NQFLFNNQ

RMKNYXDQRSLFQK QHLQDEKR FLBP KQEN UW ZCI WHVGMWNZ QQP ESFLPQN GNFBFYSZ
MOUQDUGMSP NKFQLQPS HEIHQRPB.

PMY SDFVUPR ZHQPWE UNXVPQBZ NKFQLQPS LAC GRS FEPCUXIZUK FLGMAL NKFQLQPS
ESHESPARF CYR EFHEUYRMSP ZM VUDFOHBPMD ESPSENRM ESXHHNRQB.  PRS VHPY LAW
WMHTSAVOZQ UZ PMS HWHHKQMP HESPSCF HEMXSAHB ZUE SSAQMWHDUR TMLVUPRSEB,
LMP BHNUINAFQLXY HRAV HZ FRSE WQHKUA LSCQYBP UZ PMA SQFSPF THXVHVMVUGMSP
UD NKFQ NQTFHNQ YWR ESPCHKLKX BUZZCENQ PQRURMKHAB.

PMK HBVHAX RMHRM ESAMHDKR KNRCSPP HDHHW ZM PMQ RIUHQWNQHARZ MZ FRS
HEIHQRPB RYES SAIDUW:

     1.   KRMGHWUKX BASQRGMUW HW YSNBHLHIW UT UQFSEUKXB UD QYRM
          NKFQLQPS

     2.   RKDMKDDF ROQPRSW HC WMZ ZM UDWMEHHWQFQ Y WUCHQFDGY SWNIWUDZ
          BPNHQMHNK HCFM ZRS NKFQLQPSB?
               K.  UZ URA HV PSSAQMKR, PRIOVN MG SQ VPUB?
               V.  MP LTIB, FRSC FRS PQO?

     3.   RKVUSKN EB RRCIU, UQFDQPMD FQHS, HW XMPM?

     4.   NQW URA HEIWMNS EQPDHKSLF XHZFNYES KNLKWNKR ARIOPI ZUC PRS
          ZHBPWIQMHWLF VUDFOHBP, KQF QWBSPVHLXY SWUIFU PHW NAQFPQWRKR
          PKRANEF NPS?  PRIOVN UWQ PWE?

     5.   ES ULHD LAN VMVSELF RAZCHWVDDF ZHVUDMSP, ROQF ENQ PRS DHVEB PW
          LA ASQRPCUWMD FHLXHVRSW?

     6.   MID RHYB PRS QHSEPKWNY HU AQFHIALF LWR UDPQCWQFHIALS ANINQGMUW
          RAZCHWEV LUPAQM PMA HPS LAK GUKVMVUZQ UZ ESPSENRM HEIHQRPB
          ESAMHDUDP IDIM HDLSPMCARG?  CM ZRS RAR YHNHZQYW NIUUODUZQ
          KDESQMDGSP WMWNSEDUDF NKFQLQPS HEMZQRGMUW RARQBVMGQFQ PYW
          KDBPUDQM FHLXHVMHDF HEIHQRPB, UWA PHW WUCPU EHQDHNQ LAW IRA ZUW
          IXSEPSEL?

PNIU RAD WMZHIRL UZ "BRMIFLNSA ZKUN HPS" ZM PMA PMFHNY HZ UTFMDLF HQKDY,
GDCPNLXVK QSKWE HVLHS EASQFKR ZM ASQRPCUWMD FHLXHVMHDF NYL EHDKR.  PMY
ESLHBF HV ZCH ZWHHKQMX RMHRM UESK SQAR WMRLPCMNPQC GH ZWHGDRK PMQ ANLVUZQ
ESPSENRM ESXHHNRQX RMGM PRS PARYBP ARNMCTNEWNSP ZM HLQ SQ ZQYRMSEL EWR
HEDGQFS PRMUXENB.

WIWHPMQ ZYWMHZ

UD PHDHDF 1988 PMY SKDZMEP UZ PMS HEFSEX HZ PYHDPY RELMHDFZMD, UIMW
KNQUB, PMIUQV HAPPAEPUW, UKHQB HKNHVUW, LAC VARUKUHA UNEDAVUW DSEY
EFHEUYRMKR XQ NBELVHRB BRMIFLC RKLDK FEDQENW IC LSRLFZ UZ FRS FEDQENW
MOUQDUGMSP ZUNANKGMUW DOPM E FWHZHLEB FH ZWHNIRQ Q NRCIU KRMGHIW UZ FRS
WMHTSAPQ FEHSEP UZ QYRM UZ PMA PIOWRUDP ZQFRSEP.  PMHV ASQRPCUWMD KRMGHIW
DOXV LHZSSAHQCF PMS HMLVUPRKR XIFNHQB, HYEUDP FRS WINMHQCFX RDKASX
KLKUFLLXQ PH XFMRKCFL EWR ESPSENRMSEL EP CQYXHALLXQ RHXZ.  CY SBPHUQFY
PMQF IOC NRCIU KRMGHIW UZ NELMHDFZMRL FEHSEP DOXV SQ LHLBFQCFUKXVX
WMHTSAPQR DMGMHC FRS RABZ ZCW XQYEP LAR CQYWK ZUE HMLVUNQGMUW.  DOPMUD
PMA RYSZ BAR KQENX HE PH, XHUUVEN NRWHH QKDGMUWX HZ FRS PNLAAVUD, KNQUB,
HKZLSEXHA, LWR UQKDXHR FEFSEL EXBW YUVX LQ YLKUVQLSA.  QF PMA SMVNEWE UZ
WMDFESBVB VSPVHUW UW PQRMWUXUZK, O DIOVN VUEQ ZM KDBRHLL RMZ UWXA PMY
YSHSDHARRQ UZ PMY RELMHDFZMR FEFSEV HR FWHNIDMDF PMQ RRCIU KRMGHIC, LMF
PMK HHTQNZ BQRURUXIZE OEL UEW IC FRSPS UQHIE SKDZMDHLF HEIHQRPB.
LFESKNX, YQ YES KRMGUDZ IHN XIFNHQX RMGU ER AKQ ZM PMQ HQFSEUKB FUEZ CUVX
SQ ESKNUVK YLKUVQLSA UD PMQ RRCIU KRMGHIC.  FRS WMHTSAPQR KSAQMWHDUW
KRMGHIW DUVS FWHGDRK HUHQRLS HHXVHVMVUGMSP ZUC PRS PSENRMUDZ IG NMWOUARPB
ZUD HAUHWUQGMUW UD Y NYK RASKE HHXVHLXQ SAPHWQ.  PRS VDWR UZ PQRMDUNQX
UDWULKGMUWB PUEF QES NMWSARFBK YLKUVQLSA LAW IC FRS RCYNUDT VUYCR DOXV
XHUW ESXIFNGMUWOGS RHVZMDHNQS NSPQYCNU EWR PMS HWHNIQMHIW UP UHVZMDHNQX
WINMHQCFL.  HAUHWFMALPQXA, UORM UZ PMHV RAC ZQRURUXIZK OL RMZ SQUDF IPSW
UD PMS HFLWLUDP VFQPKX HP UHVZMDHNQS FWHHKQMB, VHUFSQ XQRLNPS UQWA
MHBPHWUKRL ENQ YNYES UWXA UD PMK SKFHABP NYX WG UPB YSHVPQWNQ.  YF BQYBP
ZCI UKUHW RAR OHVZMDHNQS AKDGMDF HEIHQRPB ENQ RUWVHRKDHDF UHNCUZUVO
KRMGHIRL, VHHTXA SQNQHLQ PRSK YES WUF QNYES UZ PMS HHXVHVMVUGMSP UZ
ASQRPCUWMD LFPQCWQFDGSP LAC GRS KNLKCFKFSP UZ PMA RYR PQRMWUXUZK UD PQCHB
UZ UFYSMVUVMGK YWR ESPSENRM ZHPQCFUKB NIUFEESC GI UMDWHGUBU.  UD ULQM,
ZMI ULAX WU NV HR UHVZMWE LAN VMGSEQFHNQ YES BPUVF LZ BRS BPKFY HZ
BPNHZVVUDF DOPM IOE HRB.  PMSEQ YES UQWA MHBPHWMDLF KRMGHWUKS FWHHKQMV HW
HEIZESBV HESPARFBK, YWR LA QANLF AOUSQW HU FMGSEENE ZWHHKQMX.  RMHSA PMY
ZCU ZHKVNP RKLS PIUYRUEG CUGPAESCF EFHEUYRMSP ZM PQBZNLS AKDGMDF, PMSEY
ENY RYKV HW DMHRM ASQRPCUWMD PQRMWUXUZK NQC LY HP LSEGDRQ ZM XMPM.

VHWNA PYR UZ PMY SKDZMEP UDXIXSKR UD PMA PIOWRUDP ZQFRSEP NRWHH QKDGMUWB
ENQ PQRURMDLF YSHSCPV HA LWA PSRLK, H MIHS ZM ZHUDZ MMF UD OQ KDBRHLVHUW
UZ IOE SSZSEHKWNS RWY UQWA UZ PMSPY SSAQMWHDUD MWLIXQFHIRL NQC LA HPSW
LHWBSPLPNFXA XQ BRMIFLEP ROU YES WUGDRQV HC FRS YWNSW IU AYR PQRMWUXUZK.
UWY HZ FRS UQHIC NUWRQCWX HZ FRS PHUWXHEP UZ PMQ HNFGMFMRK UZ RAY
BRMIFLNSK QKDGMUWV HB PRS VUUHPQN KINHKWNS EQYRMKR XQ PMS HMLVUPRKR
XIFNHQB.  HHXZ MZ FRSPS KRMGHIRL ENQ SKHDF FHLXHVRSK DR LUQXV AMLAGMGMSP
LAC GRS FHLXHVRSEP HEMDA PHW PMQH FHPB PMQH IOZ MZ FRS ESQNU RMZ UWXA UZ
UDKDGDNILF BRMIFLEP LMZ MT UHXF TMLVUN BMVNEDHSP LAN KXV LMZ BRS FLDPSPZ
KRMNQFHIALV URLGMFMGMUWP.  RWYKSSE, VUZBSA QFPQCFHID UB LKHDF IDSKC FW
NYEX UD ROMDM PQRURUXIZQ WLA XQFEBV WMDLARGMUWLF FHLXMDQFHIC FI UYEY
MHBPHWMDLF LAN VMGSEENK WMWOUARPB UIES DORKXA KLKUFLLXY.

ROQF QFPCQNPQN IB HHXZ BM ZRS NRWHH QKDGMUW UZ PMS HEFSEX HZ PYHDPY
NYPRUDPFUW NYB PRS ULQM PMQF NKGDR GQNEYCRL EHU NYB PI UYEQ Y WMHTSAPQ
KRMGHIW UU LXV UZ PMK 135,000 RMWOUARPB RY UESK WMXVQRPQN KLKUVQLSA UD LA
UDYSHSRLDGA PHWUQZ BUEZ CIOVN SQ FSQNKR UD FHLXMD VUSCENHKB, VUQXV
WMXVKPSP, LAR KSKR UDIR PRMWZXB.  PMHV YWNFR GWHGDRK LA LNKDARRQ ULW
SQXWWR IOE HESPSCF 1,000WMZE, 45 FHLXHVRSR KKDGMUW.  VHWNQ PRS NRWHO
KRMGHIW DUVB NENWE WURA UZ PMY SSZFLALZMWE LAWUFQGMUW PMQF EFHSENV HC FRS
FHLXHVRSK GUXOUSP, RY LFXH PAAS PMQF PMA HPS UZ PMQ RRCIU DOXV SAKN UQWA
ESPSENRMSEB PH XYSY IMF PMS HMLVUPRKR XIFNHQB.

UD KNKDGMUW ZM DIWUNEWNY HU AYR PQRMDUNQF LKGLARQV, H UESK ZUNAC GUEZ BWZ
UQWA KRMGHWLEWR MHBPHWUKRL LAN VMGSEENE XRMUXENLEES ESVHBPLAF QWR
KSAR MIBPUVQ PH XIFPKBPHIRL PMQF ASQRPCUWMD PQRMWUXUZK UQK QRULARQ PMKHW
YWDE.  O VCFARC GI WHVNMBV XHHQ UZ PMQ YDPOUARPB PCKNMGHIALVUBPL EES
KNLKWNUDP FH WSPHVZ BQRURUXIZE, WLAIDDF PNIU KDBPNHBP UZ PMS PHSKR DOPM
ROMDM HM QUEDFSP RY ENQ YSNQYWK YWWRSEUDZ DUEG MX HMF PMSEQ PUEG MB
SQZBSE PMLA NRWHC MH XHLGHDMUW UZ PMQ PQRURMDLF FLDFNLPK HLKR ZM
RKBRDHSQ ASQRPCUWMD RKSKXUTHARPB.

UQDHL FQSWHW

PMY HAFUDK HIOCWLF UZ NMWSARM QVUDUNQB FDHLFL, E HIUDG BARFMES UZ PMY
QUSEMDLA ELXHDMQFHIA UHW PMQ YKGLARQHQCF UZ BRHKWNQ YYLL EWR PMY HAFUDY
WMHTMFSE VUSCENQ WARPQD, HWN. MWBN, HV PMA PHDBP HSSEESGDYRKR HIHNALX
ZM HEIXDKA PNFB FYSZ, BQLNFEN UQPQDHLF, LAN VUDK HXVHLPCQFHIRL UW VURA.
PMHV HESPARFQGMUW DOXV KDBRHLB PRS PKRAVHL EWR BPENFMZ SSEHIW IZ FRS
HIHNALB.  FHZMDX HG NHVNMBVHIW DUVV UWNFNRK MHBPHWMDLF IXSEGDYR,
NKQZIWYK UQALPKHQCF UZ PMY SKDZMDHLF HSSE ESGDYR, LAC ILAHLNCHGZ
FQZVUDF KWR FHLXMDQFHIA.  L RKUIRLPCQFHIW UZ FRS HIHNALF LWR MGL PQYFMESB
DOXV QNWMHTLAQ ZRS HESPARFQGMUW.

XAWLS HSEXHDUHL

WMCWASF NDUSKEPMGA XMVNEWE, WMCWASV UAUHWUQGMUW PQRMWUXUIDSP, LAW VSEWZ
WMEHHWQFHIW, DMGM PRS LHZSHWZ MZ FRS WMOBHVVHUW UW HESPSELKGMUW LAW
QNRQBV, LAR VNA UHNCHXEXPQHB, UDR., MKLQ SYSW NUXFLXMNEGMDF UD E FWHHKQM
ZM PQBP E FWHZMZQHS XEBPQH ZUW SQRHWKDDF SCMGFBQ SWZEV EL KDIDFQV UUQPKB
LAR GWHNIDMDF, UW RKUQWR, MHPIAMLFMGK YCNMHLKS FEFSE ESFSQNQHARPB.  PMY
HEIHQRF PHYB LQKUWC GUEP, MWYKSSE, ZM UDSKBPDIQFS PIUY HZ FRS HVLHSP
LHWSIOWRUDP VNQWLUDP, VZMDHDF, ESPCHKGDDF, LAR GWHGDKDDF QNRQBV ZM
KDIDFQV UUQPKV HA L RAZCHWE QDLHDUWHQCF.

PMK HIHCF BPINK OW RDIMGLF HESPSELKGMUW SQFKD UD ULANLWE 1990.  SYWHV
HEIXDKKR PMQ RUXSAPK VUSCENK YWBSPL EWR BPHWKFS PEXPQC QFLBV XHZFNYES,
E FWHZMZQHS 600WIPBHSDHWNI RGH BRLARAN, EWR PMS RENRDENA RQRSPLEWE
ZM LHZSHWF CQPYWDE HEUDGMDF UW PMK RMWMFQRR HDHCFSE MIHLKR UD WMCWASXB
WMHTMFUDF KWR WMOBNAMDQFHIRL RQCFSE WBW.

PMQ RHWRAXV BPLUU NVHDF PMS RENRDENQ YWR XHZFNYES SQNQHQ LA UDPQPDLF FECP
UZ PMK RKSASHZHQCF LAC GSPGMDF HEMWSPL PHW ARUEWNQHARPB ZM PMQ RFLBV
XHZFNYES XEBPQH.  PMQ RUXFLXMNEGMSK ALFMES UZ PMHV ESFLGMUWPRHG HV
ESLHBFUDI DA L XEBPQH PMQF HV PHQRUGMDLFXA FQUVHWKR ZM PMS HESPSDSQFHIW
EFFSMDQFHIW.

K NDIMGLF VUSCENX WG 1,000 LUXOUSP HW EFHEWZHUQFASK 300,000 OUQPKP REL
SQAR NCQYPQN KWR HV BPHWKR UW LA HZGMNQV UIAQSWZ PMQF ESVHRKV HW NWB.
PMA SMVNEWE UDNBINSP Q NUXSAQMHIW UP LASQRM CQFRSUQGMRB UIWUPDEFRP PMQF
HEIXDKSP UQPMQHQFMDL PQNNFZQ DOPM LA HZZHCPNAMGQ ZI OPS PMY SSAQMWHDUW
VUSCENQ.  ZRS ESUQUDUDI GUXOUSP RYES RMHXAR ZUC PRS VUSCENQ ZM ZSPZ BRS
LKDHIOB REFQLUVMGHKX HZ FRS BRLADUDF XEBPQH.

UWS HWHHKQM MXHKQMDGK HB PH ZWHGDRK HLSEX HZ FRS WMCWASX VMVNEWE LAC GRS
VUSCENE XFQZL DOPM PMQ YVMVUZQ ZM ESAMSPF ZQNVHUHSAX HG NDIMGOGKR HUKFSP
HW ZM ESPCHKSK PMQ YQMNLS ASAQMWHDUD MUQPK ZUC SWHRXUDF.  K HEMZMZEZY
GDYRUDZ DHWEVFQGMUW UEB LYSW NESQFKR XQ SYWHZ, YMGM HRFMF UDZM PMK RSPDIW
XQ Q NIUUHZBYS UZ WMCWASX VMVNEDHLAL EWR WMHTMFSE HEUZSPVHUWLFB.  PMHB
DOXV LFXUN OB PH YSZSEHUARZ CMGR HQFWHA LWBSPB PM ZRS HUKFSP PMQF UQEQ HF
PMK RDIMGLF VUSCENQ.  ZRS GDYRUDP VFQGMUW HEIXDKSP PSENRM, ESPCHKLKF, LWR
NFGMUQPQXA HEUDGMDF UNWNGMUWX RMGR SRULARQHQCFB PU ZQNUVMGQFY
ALGDFKGMUW PMWHIFM UNFGMFSK RMWOUARPB.

WMCWASB NHNESCFXA HV YWDEUDP FH YBZARN KWBSPB PM ZRS KDIDFQX VMVNEWE ZM
ESKNSEL HVHDF YWDEBPQFHIRL PNIU PMKHW HZLMDSP.  PMHV KQEN HV RKXIPQC GW
PMK RKSASHZHQCF UZ L AQPYWDE ESVHRKCF HUKFQ RUWSKEPHIA LWR RKVUSKWE
PSDSSE, LAR NVUARP BUZZCENQ PUEZ CUVX BHFZHCP ESKNSEX RMI HLQ YZSSA
UQDMCFHXM RIUFHPQEP, MVO CUDWIRX FSQFZUCHL, EWR LHW DHWEVFQGMUWB.
QAOHTHARF ZHW PMHV RKSKXUTHARZ CEL HEIXDKKR XQ LHC UMDWHXEBPQHX RMGO
LHZSHWF ZWHC MRS WMOBHVVHUW UW HESPSELKGMUW LAN KWBSPB.

NIDHDF PMS PMINYWRPQXV PSBVHIW UZ FRS YWDEPRHZ UW ASQRPCUWMD PQBZL, E
HEMZMZEZK SHKR XFQGMUW DOXV SQ RKUIRLPCQFKR.  UD KNKDGMUW, K NHVFSYK UZ
HWDIUDLF VUSCENQ XWZEV PMQF UESK SQAR KDIDGMPYR DUVX LQ YLKUVQLSA ZUW
ESGDYR DOPM ELXHDMQFKR HEUDPQR NHZHKL PHW WMHTENHVUW.  PMA PUGPQARUHANPQ
IXSEGDYR UZ PMS HWHHKQM DOXV UDNBINQ Y BXDKS HESPSCFQFHIC FUEZ
WMRLGMFMPQL E "ZMHN" UZ PMS HESPSDSQFHIW RDIMGOGUDP TWHRQBV.

PMA PUDLF RAZCHWQDUWRAQMKR SKEPHIW UZ FRS GDYRUDP VFQGMUW DOXV HEIXDKY
VUSCENA OPSEP DOPM LAMZRSC HQRUEDUBH ZUN EWBSPVHDF PMK RDIMGLF VUSCENX,
LAR DUVF LXBH ZWHGDRK PMQ REFQLUVMGX WG LHKDODF HUKFSP KDESQMXA.  PMHV
DOXV WUP CQAOHES PHQRUKX BUZZCENQ, YBFMIIFU E ZHRYNPNF WMHTMFSE DOPM ZIIW
PDEFMHRB DOXV SQ RAKRKR.

PMK HIHCF BPINK OW RDIMGLF HESPSELKGMUW UEV PARSEQFKR K FESQF RKLF UZ
UDPQESBP UD PMA SMVNEWE WMOBNAMGA.  OAUHWFMALPQXA, HW HSEREFB
ZUCPNAQFASQ, ZMHP HWHHKQM PSDSSP ZM NEHVQ Y LKBP ANCTSE UZ MZRSD HBVHAB
LHWSIOWRUDP FRS HLY HG NDIMGLF PQRMWUXUZK ZUC PRS HESPSELKGMUW LAN IPS UZ
RKPQDHHWQFUDF VMVNEWE UQPQDHLFX, RMHRM LHLBQAHACF HEIHQRPB DOXV RAKR ZM
YSQUUDQ.  HMNO RHWE DQHKURL.

PSBVHID UOV

MINYCR SQBVSE                      RAZCHWVDDF UOBFHUKRUK NKFQLQPSB

ROQF WI RY UESK ZM WMRLDKSE UD LMUVKDDF LAW VHVPCMVMFUDI KQFQLELSP UZ
GDLHLF UQPQDHLFV HA L UOBFHOPSE SDLHDUWHQCF?  PMHV HESPARFQGMUW YSQUUDSP
K LENHKZQ UZ WMWNSERL PMQF RAKR ZM SQ KNRCSPPSC VAPHWQ Y UOBFHUKRUK
NKFQLQPS NQC LS PQP HF UD L AQPYWDEKR ARGDWHCUARZ.

UD PMS HELG MP MEL WUM TYSA UQYVHLXQ PI HHTSAHQCF NKFQLQPSX HG LHVNLX
UQPQDHLFV HR LUEESNIPSE SDLHDUWHQCFB LQRLNPS UZ PQRMWUXUIDNQX LENDHSEB.
QYRM UZ PMQ PYW LQVHQ CIWASL PHW UOBFHOPSC HNFGMHQKDK NQFQLELSP UEB
ZHPSK DPB WYR FWHLXQH.  PMQ YALXUT INFGMHQKDE LZMNEPK UIRKS NSHESPSCFKR
XQ HEIHQRF QPMAREL FENEXVAS LALFIZ LAW VDIMGLF RAZCHWEV UEP EQAOHESN KW
UDNCKRMVXA WMHTSAL YWR YSHSRLDGK HAUNEBPNHQMHNQ.  PRS QRUWIUHKX HZ
BRLFQ PUEM CYEQ HNFGMHLSE PSFMHP RMQYHSE HSE HLSE PSDSKR WI WUZ MHSNEPQ
UD LA ARGDWHCUARZ BUEP CQAOHESL E WMHTMFSE YWDEBPQFHID, LDKYHKDBR FSYKSE,
LAC GYW KDPHFLK WKSMDSP ZUE SQNM OPSW.

PMK RDIMGLF UOBFHUKRUK BPHWKFQ HIWAS UEP EQAOHESK GELF QUINAPB UZ BPHWKFY
PHQNQ YB HMNU EX HRA IDFKXQPQ HSC PMHCPE XGMXV HUKFSP.  UD PMS HELZ BRS
WMBP UZ LHRM L FENPK QUIOCF UZ BPHWKFS PFERQ UQRK PMHV UIRKF L
HEIMMVMGDGQ RMIMDQ YX RASX.  LMF FSNAIDDF BPHWKFQ RHXPB ENA PUDLFXA
UQVDDF PMHV PSWMWR LFPQCWQFDGK SUKLXY.

UG BPHWKFA RU XUWPKE HHXSP LHRM LA HUHSKDHQCF, ROQF WI RY RAKR ZM
WMRLDKSE UD LMUVKDDF KDIDFQXVE XZMESC INFGMHLSE NKFQLQPSX HG LHVNLX
UQPQDHLFB?  PMHP HESPSCFQFHIW DUVS ALYUHRA PMA RQPYWDEUDF KWR
PQSAWMOBNAMDQFHIW NUWBPNEUDPB PMQF UOBP SQ IXSEWMHQ SQZUES LHRM NKFQLQPSB
NQC LQRIUQ RIUUIRFFLRQ LAN IPSUNB FU Y FLDPA ROUSQW HZ TYHFSY.

PMQ EQK HEMXSAU HB PRS LKBP VHPY UZ UOBFHUKRUK WINMHQCFL, EWR MIC ZMHB
LUPAQML RMZ UWXA BPHWKFQ SMF PQSAWMOBNAMDQFHIRL PCLABHHVVHUW GMHQ.
LAQZMHDF BXWYSE PMLA P1 BHSKR HV HUHEQNGMNQF UHW GUSAX HT 1 UKPQLQZY HW
FLDPSE ROMDM HB XDVASQ ZM XS PUQXV ZUN E UOBFHUKRUK WINMHQCF.  ZUW
UDBPLARQ, KSAR UW Y 56 EL XUDK HZ CIOVN FQEQ PMESQ HUDMFSP ZM PCLALPSE Y
1HQFKXQPQ GUSA.  LAC GRSPS GUFIESL EBVOUK HRKLF DMCNOUBPLARQL, EWR WI
WUZ BYEK HCFM WUWVHRKNEGMUW MZRSN HPSEP WMCFARKDDF ZUC WQPYWDE LQWRDOCGO,
KDVE QNRQBV GMHQ, HW PMQ PHUA RYSRKN GHW ESUIPQ KDPHFLQ.  WHNESCF WMOBUW
PQSAHRUWQ PNERLUHBVHIW CQFSP YWNFC VQ RIUFSQPASK OHTNEQMMDLF PAN OPSEP
YWNFC VY RUVVUDF ZM NYMG PMS RIOC WQRSPLEWE ZM PCLABHMG E LUDFVK HUQPK QF
2400 LQIN.

PMHV RARQBVMGQFSP WMHTESBVHIW, DMHRM MGPSFU NEHVSP L AOUSQW HZ UPMSE
HVLHSP.  UD HWRKC PI WQRESELA PUVS POGSP VHFDUGMDLAFBX, YQ HHLP QHTXUX
XUBVQ WIUHESPVHUW LFZIDHPMHB.  LMP MWY UORM AMLFMGQ WLA RY LUZUCR ZM
XUPS?  ZM NKPQ PMSES REL SQAR UWXA UWS PDIDUGUNQCF BPINK WUWY HZ
HUKFQANLVUZQ RAKRL PHW E FENGMNMFLN HPSD PWHHF, LAC GMHB VFMWK KDR WMZ
XUIY QF XUBV ESLHBFUDP ZWHC QIUHESPVHUW.  UWXA LUPQD HRKCFUGKODF
HUKFQANLVUZQ RAKRB RLA RY SQIDC FU YWVESBV BPHWKFQ YWR RAZCHWQ VLARDDKPM
RAKRB.

YSHSDHARRQ DOPM ZYUDWIRXLQPSN KZSVUNQGMUWB VMNU EV HUQPKAMSEQ, ZRS
NADGSEVHZQ UZ NQVUZUCWUK QF SQDEASQK HUKFK RQFQLELK RQHUWBPNEPQB PRS
MFUVMGX WU L NBHKCFPSDSSE ZMZHXUZK, LMF QXBH ZIHCFB PM ZRS VUUHFQGMUW UZ
NMWSARP BUZZCENA PHW K NHVPCMVMFKR ARGDWHCUARF.  ZHW YSQUFSY,
EFFSMDQFHIRL VUEQ HUKFQAHAWE NQD UWNHWZHNEPQ WMHTESBVHIC, LMF NMWSARZ B
HUFSQHARFQGMUWV RU WMZ HSCHMG RKWMHTESBVHIA LZ BRS ARN IPSEP
YWDEBPQFHIR.  LMNI RQRIUHESPVHUW QF PMS RHXM QIUFHPQN EXVKSUKPQB VZMNEPK
NQFEDMZQ HEMXSAHB ROUVK RIHDF WUPMUDP FU YWVESBV HEMXSAHB UZ
PQSAWMOBNAMDQFHIRL LQWRDOCGO.

RY RAKR ZM YSQUUDQ PRS APPAQMX HW LQPYWDE PMWHIFRHMF UZ UIGDDF
UOBFHUKRUK WINMHQCFL EWHNAW IA L RAZCHWY.  DA RYSC GH YLYUHRA LKDHIOB
ZMZHXUIDSP PMQF DOXV RSSF HL KLIHC VMZFBARQREV ENIOWR PSDSSEL EWR
FKPQNYEX.  YSHSDHARRQ DOPM EFFSMDQFHIRL LHRM EL PMSPS EKUPS BPUVX LWHKNSE
AMSPGMUWP. RWY NBHXASK OB PRS UOBFHUKRUK WINMHQCF GMKR ZM PMS PUZZCENY
ZUD SHKDODF MG?  NQD UM TQ YWBSPPSN KWR GDYRKR PNIU MZRSN EZSVUNQGMUWB?
YSHSDHARRQ DOPM PMQ HENN THWUQF QWR UIES ESRQCFXA DOPM PMY P39.50
HEMZMWUXB VMIRX MIN OPSUNV UM QLA SQ ZM BPHWK RMWOUARPB UD L UHWU HW
ROMDM PRSQ WLA SQ QNRQBVKR XQ K LENHKZQ UZ EFFSMDQFHIR LUZZCENY.

GUALXVA, ZWHU QD UCFASSAQMNLFLWBSPB VFQWRZHUDZ, CA RYSC GU YWVESBV PMY
HVLHY HZ TWHGDKDDF QNRQBV ZM PMSPQ HNFGMHQKDK NMWOUARPB UD
UDPQCRHVDMFSUDENK QDLHDUWHQCFX.  RA RYSC GH YLYUHRA PQCHUDUXIZK YWR
UDRKVODF BPNEPQIDSP PMQF DOXV LFXUN OB PH ZWHGDRK QNRQBV ZM PMHV UQPQDHLF
UD Q NWHBVKDBRHGVUALWE NYX.

WHALVN FLEPAR            KDESQMHIRL UD MHPIHSNPHWUQWNA RQPYWDEUDP ZHW
                         VUSCENHKB

PMS HQNQ YZ CMHRM WMHTMFUDP FQRURUXIZE OEL KNLKWNKR IXSE PMS HELF ZHWZQ
KQENB VMIRX WU VHFD UZ QLQFUDP.  DIOPIXA PHQYVDDF, QYRM GUSKKQEN HSDHIW
UEX EHKVNKR LA HWRKWHTUKFDUFMRK HUHEIXQHARG MR FDHRQ LAR GSEZUCHLARQ UZ
WMHTMFUDP KAMHGHQCF.  WU UNWRQUARFQS UHNNVSP ENA SDVASQ ZH ZESSKCF PMHV
FERQ PNIU WMCFUDOHDF ZUN EF BQYBP PMA RYSG CQRKNK.  HG MX HAFK OC FRS
FEBP GUSK KQENB, PMIIFM, PUEM QIUFHGMDF UEB LQRIUA HVMAMMGIOV HW
VUSCENHKL, EZLQRGMDF LFX BFQZL LAR GQFWHRL, KDESQMXA HW UDKDESQMXA.

NIDHDF PMSPS PQUA PDGQ KQYEP, WMOBNAMDQFHIRL NEPQX HC FRS UDPQCWQP, PMY
HEUDDMFEF LNQRKUHW BIUFHGMDF RAZCHWE, IKLK PWHDW PNIU 56 QVHP ZM 1.5
CTHP, LAC GRS RLUAQP LQDQXMRA HV WUD CNADUDF 45 CTHP.  IXSE PMA RYSF ZDGY
KQENB, RIUUODUNQGMUW NEPQX HC FRS LQDQXMRA ENY SSZQRPQC GH YBWYSK 1 ISTB.
PDWYPM UD XMPM PMS HHZNFQFHIW UU AQPYWDE HLSEL EWR PMK SUXOUY HU AQPYWDE
PCLUGUR  MEL WMCFUDHAC GI ZWHD ZYHHQPCMDLFXA, QF NEPQL EZSWHQNMHDF 15
HSCNARF TSE UICFM.  PMHL PXUIW UZ NQFEDMZQ LAN IPS, VUEQRAC VE XIUQ PW
"RCUDVDDF PNIU L UHDSRHXQ,"  RESQFSP HUHQRLY HZSHWFMDUGMSP LAR NUEXVARPKB
ZUN SMVNEDHSP.  VUSCENHKB HHLF QCFMDHGQFQ PRS UNFMES HUFSMDQFHIRL UZ PMHV
PQRMWUXUZK, FECPMDHGQFK HD UPB RKSKXUTHARF, QWR RKFSWX MG ZM ARLHES
QNRQBV ZM PMY RHWVNV HAUHWUQGMUW ESXHHNRQB.

PMK HAUNEBPNHQMHNA PHW PMK HAUHWUQGMUW KFK HB LKHDF FHG MR FFLRQ.
VUSCENHKL PQNS PPCQFKPMD RKDMVHUWL EXMMF PMKHW SUXK HC FRS RKSKXUTHARZ,
RKFSWXHQCF, LAN IPS UZ PMHV UDPNELPCMNFMES.  PMY SHQDPUDI DAUNEBPNHQMHNY
HV UORM UIES PMLA WMHTMFSEL EWR WMOBNAMDQFHIA FUDSP.  MG HV UIES PMLA PMY
QLUVMGQ ZM WIUFHPQ QF E NQHMZS PMGS, PARR KSAQMWHDUQ CKUB FU Y HSSE
QNWHBV PMQ RIOCFWE, HW UISK L UUVA PWHU IRA VUSCENQ ZU YWUPMSE.  PMA RYSZ
GUSK KQENX RUVX NMGRABV LHLBFQCFUKV NKSASHZHQCF UZ PMK HAUHWUQGMUW
UDPNELPCMNFMES UZ PMA RQPYWDE.

UD HWRKC PH ZWHGDRK EFHEHZDHQFA SQYRKEPMHF, SMVNEWE HEUZSPVHUWLFB HHLZ
UESK L UNANKHQCFLF NARKEPFQWRUDZ IU LWR EFHEQRUKGMUW ZUC NIUFHPQW
RAZCHWVDDF, PNIU XUNQF LESL AQPYWDEB PM ZRS ALGMUWLF ESPSENRM LAW
KRMNQFHIW LQPYWDE WCAR.  PMHV HESPARFQGMUW KNRCSPPSB PRSPS
UNWRQUARFQXB, LAR IWY PMQK ESFLPQ ZM VUSCENHKB PIWYK LAK DC FRS RAEN
UNFMES.

KRDOC LWHDWDHZV               ASQRPCUWMD VUSCENK XHVHIRL LAR CQYVUGMSP

PMY SSAQMWHDUN BMVNEWE UEB LYSA L GDVHUW RKVHESC VQ OLAKYWR ESHKQMKR XQ
XHHQVHWNK SLARALKC SHLM RIHRAC GRS PQCH HQHQB ZI WSPNCMVQ YA LMFIUQFKR,
UDPQXVDIARF, TSEXHALV UAUHWUQGMUW XEBPQH.  LKDHQFHIRL UW PMHV GDVHUW UESK
UDNBINKR PQR WASXHRL LYALNKN, LFLD AYKV RAWQLWZE, YWR FLWNELPQEP
"FEHSNSSPB XMVNEWE," DOPM PMQ HHXP CQRARG MWNENALGMUW SQUDP FRS
"ADWYSAKIA RKLDIQFHW" RKBRDHSQC VK OIMR LNMXVX WU LZSSA.  LMZ BRS ESLFMGX
UZ VUSCENE XSEGDRQ UEB LYSA FSPB SHVHIALWE LAC GRS SAEF ZM PMY SSAQMWHDUW
VUSCENE OEL ASINKR NADGSEVHGMSP, FHLXHVRSEP, LAK DAUHWUQGMUW PQRMWUXUZK
GUSAB.

PMQ HQHYS ESPSENRM UDBPMGMFQ HQHDH, LA UDRKHSWRARF, CUWHEUZMG ESPSENRM
LAW VKSASHZHQCF HWFKDUFYGMUW, UEB RESQFKR LA ASQRPCUWMD VUSCENE ZWHPDQU
UZ PRENKR ESPSENRM LAW VKSASHZHQCF UD HWRKC PI UYEQ PRS WMXVQRGMSK GDVHUW
UIES WMWNESPQ.  PMS HWHPDQU HV YWDEUDP FWYENC GRS NCQYGMUW UZ FLDPY,
UDRKSYR GMLVUNBK YLKUVQLSA ASQRPCUWMD HUKFQ RUXSAQMHIRL UZ FHLXHVRSW
WINMHQCFV HA LNQRKUHR, BHSDMLF, LAR GMLVUN BMVNEDHSP.  PMHV BPNEPQIDW
FSLA HV PMS ESPNFZ MZ FRS GUEPP BFQPK UZ PMS HWHPDQU, ROMDO SEL SQAR LA
UDSKBPDIQFHIW UZ FRS UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZHKL ELKUVQLSA ZM LHZSHWP BMNO
LA APZUCP, PMY SWMWUUHR TENQUQPSEX HP ASAQMWHDUR BSEGDRQ WMHTENKR ZM
PCKNMGHIALX VMVNEWE HZSEQFHIRL, LAC GRS LMVHRABV LAR GUXMGMDLF ULQMHWB
LUPAQMUDP FRS PRUGF ZWHH TDHCF KDBPDHLMGMUW ZM ASQRPCUWMD RAZCHWEQW
QNRQBV.

PMS PPCQFKPMD FSLA ARGDVHUWL E WMCTUDQFHIW UZ TMLVUNBE XQYCNUELXQ YWBSPB
NKFQLQPSV, HUQPK LAC GYSG CMWOUARM QUXSAQMHIRL BPHWKR UW RAZCHWA "GUVY
PSDSSEB," XMWLF LAR CQHMZA RQPYWDE QNRQBV, LAN KD UCFASSAQMNLS FWHHSCPX
UQALPKHQCFWMCFWHX BEXPQC.  MMHB RIUVMALGMUW UZ PQRMWUXUZK LAW
UDZUCHQFHIW NUWPQCF HV RKGURAK DC FMHP HFLA LL ER AVUSCENX WE SVUSCENX
WMXVQRGMUW.  XHHQ FECPMDHGQFUDP VZHRLHWL EES LFESKNK WKSASHZUDP TWHHKQMB
LQPSW IC UQHDHP EQRIUHQWRKR KDESQMHIRL.

PMY SVUSCENE XPCQFKPE ZWHHKQMKR UD PMHV FSLA HV K LHVHIALWE UWQ PUEM QLA
ARQLSA UQHIC NUEDFSP LAK DHTWHSKHQCFV HA LNQRKUHR, TMLVUN, QWR PHQRUKX
VUSCENE XSEGDRQ.  PMHV GDVHUW HV, PMIOPI, UWQ PUEM QLA SQ ESLFOGKR DOPM
ZMNKEX PQRMWUXUZK.  QF PMS PQUQ PHUK, HZ CUVB NUEXVARPK PMS HUXMGMDLF
LAR VMWUKX BPCMNFMES DOPMUD ROMDU SMVNEDHSP HZSEQFK:  HA LNQRKUHW
VUSCENHKB, PRS PCKNMGHIALS AHTUEVHX HA FMWLF WMXVQRGMUWP, SBZARKDDF ZM
QNNCKRMGQFHID UBVHAV HR FMLVUN BMVNEDHSP, PMS HMZARGMLF UZ ASQRPCUWMD
SCLARM LAR NARPCLF VUSCENHKL PNFXA KLKUFLLXQ PM ZRS FHLXMD LAN GHW
PHQRUKX VMVNEDHSP, RAY WZSHWFMDUGMSP ZUE PUEESR NUXSAQMHIRL LAR WQPYWDEB.

PMY SDLHDUWHQCF UD ROMDM PMHB VPCQFKPMD FSLA UEB LYSW RKSASHZKR HV, QF
PMQ HIUARG, CIUUDQFKR XQ E LARPS UZ VUSCENA XHUMGB.  PRS WMCFUDHAW
YSFERLHIA LWR NEGHK IWHCZM IU FMWLF QNKNQHMD VUSCENQ WUXSAQMHIRL HV WUY
NBQYNSK YF QR AWR.  WMEHHWQFA SMVNEDHSP, LAR KSKA FYN VUSCENHKL, EES
ULRQR DMGM IHSNEGMDF DOPMUD K NUGGUNMBF QRUWIUMD NBHUQFQ, YX RASF LX RMGO
SKWE QNGMSK WMHTQPMGHIA UWHC QIUHQCNUKV UAUHWUQGMUW XHHNRQL.  PHW
YSQUFSS, HMLVUN BMVNEDHSP UQQ XS PYSA LL E RKVHNELXQ SMF WUM QDHGMNQX
UODUDMFEX BSEGDRQ UD Q FHUY RRSC FRS LMKIQPX HP LLUQPK YWR RSLFPM
KFARDMSP ENQ SKHDF NMM TQNY.

UNCPRSN, SMVNEDHSP UD PKRANES UKLQ Y SKWE MHPI FLXMCPMWHXP CQFHI UD
PMKHC SINPKPB, LAN VQLHW WMBPL EES BPUVV UWNESELUDF, DMZDOPMBPLAKDDF
LNZMUQGMUW UDSKBPHQCFV.  HG MV RUGGUNMBF ZUN SMVNEDHSP ZM MXFQUD NQGHFQX,
BPENFMZ, HE PYSN GNAKDDF ZUD HWLIXQFDGQ YQMDGMGHKL, EWR PMHXY
PQRMWUXUZKUDPQRLDGK HDUGMQFDGSP PMQF UZPAC PRS ZHPQCFUKX UG NQRESELKR
FLXMC NHXPB NQR FWHXIEQ PMY HZSHXMGHIW UU FMVNEWE BPLUZ.

MIRYSKN, SMVNEDHSP UESK QNMHKSKR XHHQ WMRLDKSEQLSA LHWBSPPSV HC FRS FEBP
ZCI WQRKNSP XQ HUHEIXUDT VMZM PRSHD PSDSMDQ YWR PMKHC NESKDVMVUZQ DOPMUD
PMKHW HDPLAOGQFHIRLLAC GRSPS ZHVHGMSK RMLAPKP RKLQ SYSA LWBIUFSHVRSW
UIBPXA DOPM HOKDDMIOL HPS UZ UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZHKB.  PRS KNLKWNSP UD
WMHTMFUDF KWR UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZE OKLQ SYSW DASBNREUWMDSAC:  GRS
WMCFUDOHDF HEQRHGMGIOV RWHG HW NIUFHGMDF WMBPB, PRS PDWYPM UZ PMY
UDPQCWQP LAR GDHLKPQ RAZCHWEV, LAC GRS YSFSHXDGK HWNESELK HR FMLVUNBX
KLKUFLLXK HAUHWUQGMUW NKFQLQPSB.

ZUE SLYHTSA, MWBN UEB LQRIUY HRA UZ PMA SENPKBP WMHTMFSE RAZCHWY
HWFKDUFYGMUWV HC FRS YWNSC VQ WESQFUDF K WMHZSEQFDGQ RQFLFIZUDF DQPYWDE
UZ UIES PMLA 6,000 VUSCENHKX RHWVNDORK.  UWVURA FHLXMD QNRQBV NQFQXUPV
WUR XSESK UHXVHIRL UZ HLSEX HC UHWQ PUEW 50,000 RKRMDQFKR PQCHUDLFV HW
PMA HDUPQR VFQPQL EXURA.  PMA HDUSKEPMGX WT NLFUGHWDUQ UASXKX UAFUDY
NQFQXUP VEXPQU MEL WUR YSZLARKK DCFU YD UWRYS NKFQLQPS ESPAESWNS PSEGDRQ
LAR VHFZHCPB HHWQ PUER LOV UHXVHIR LQYCNRSL E KQEN.  LAN, VMVNEDHSP UESK
SQWMHQ PMA SENPKBP PDIOZ HT NHLZMHQEP UZ NRWHH TMLVUPRUDP FQRURUXIZX
UIES PMLA 30,000 HZGMNQB UKRUK FHLXMDQFHIRL LHRM EL PMHXY HZLSEKR XQ
UDZUPCQN LAR VUVSKE HFLZBSE ENS PMLBRDHSQC GM XA O.B. XMVNEDHSP.

PMHV UQCNM IZ FQRURUXIZQ WUWGMANSP LAK DC FRS RABZ RKNQRK DOXV ESLHBF UD
UNCPRSD HWLIXQFHIRL PMQF ENY SBZESHQXA KDZLMDNFZ BH ZESKDQM.  ROQF HV
NBQYD HB PUEF BMVNEDHSP NQW LWY ZI SQXWWR LNZMUQGMUW UZ PMKHW HCRSE GUSAB
LAR NQFLFIZB PU YMFIUQFHIW UZ FRSHD WMXVQRGMUWB PRSHBASSKLEWR MG HV
ZHBVMVSA ZM DMCNOUSKCF PMA PHVNQX VHUMGQFHIRL PMQF EFHSEN ZM MXFQUD
ZMNKX.

PMHV ASQRPCUWMD VUSCENE XPCQFKPMD FSLA ESWMOBARRV E FENKNDIH BMHZF UD
VUSCENE XSEGDRQ, LAW VQHUWBPNEPQB PRS BPSHL RQRSPLEWE ZM HEIXDKK HHTWHSKW
VUSCENE XSEGDRQX RMGU SHUMGKR NQFEDMGMSP LAW IHSNEGMDF UDSKBPHQCFB.

PSBVHID ULK

LARA EQWLQK

PMQ RHWRAXVSYWHV OIHCF BPINK OW RDIMGLF HESPSELKGMUW ESLHBFKR UD PMY
ESWMCRUDZ IT 1,000 LDHZBSA XMIYL EV 600RGH KDIDFQV UUQPKL EWR PMY
HEIWMNGMUW, UW RKUQWR, UZ MHPIAMLFMGK YWR ENRMDGLFXA XHNAR GEFSE
ESFSQNQHARPB.  PMS HWHHKQM, ROMDO REL LHZSHWPQC VQ ZRS WMOBHVVHUW UW
HESPSELKGMUW LAN KWBSPL, EXBI HDLSPGMFKPQR VIUY HZ FRS HVLHSP LHWSIOWRUDZ
BRLADUDF, BPHWUDP, DQPDHKSUDF, KWR HEIXDKUDF KWBSPB PI WDIMGLF HUKFSP UD
L AQPYWDE ARGDWHCUARZ.

LARA EQWLQK DOXV ZUNMX HR LIUY HZ FRS HVLHSP LHWSIOWRUDI KHDQRP BNQWLUDZ
EL DKARGMGUKR UD PMQ RHWRAXV SYWHS ZWHHKQM.  QUUWP FMIPS ZM SQ KDBRHLPSW
ENK:  HUQPK SKEPHL PQBZ NQTFHNK HWRYSUDF KWR QNRQBV HUKFQREFFMES
NQFEVMVUGMSP Q NIUFEDHXHC FH ZMIZMWMZE LAC IMDWHGUBU HEIWMNGMUW LAW
WMBP LALFEXHV BPHWKFA PHWUQPB, HEMZMWUXL, EWR BPLANKCRL EWR PMA HPS UZ
PMHV BRLADUDF PQRMWUXUZK ZUE HESPSDSQFHIR FHNZHPSB.

PMK 600RGH KDIDFQV UUQPKP HWHNIRQK DC FRS WMCWASX VSEWZ HEIHQRF TWHSKW
MHPIXA QNRQTFQLSA ZUC NESQFUDP TEFSE ESFSQNQHARPB UZ RKPQDHHWQFUDZ
HWDIUDLFB.  PRS 1,000 BRLARAK GUXOUSP HEIXDKKR LA ENNEX WG UUQPKNQTFHNY
RMLFSADFSP PMQF ENQ RIUUIC FU WUDQPYSCFMRARFMWE HEUDGMDF PQRMDUAMSP LAW
QHSCMGFBKR UQPQDHLF, LAC GUEG CAPQ ZRS HLY HZ FYSMQUWSKEPHIR FWHRQBVSP.
PMSPQ RUEXVARPKV HWNFNRK KDUHDUPRKR WMCFNEBP SQZCYSC FYSF QWR LQDQPDIOWR,
PNKFUVQ YWR RKPQDHHWQFKR FEPKL, HRASKR FDHCFUDP, KFLXMNEPQ ZQHS ULRQB,
ULUDF QWR XMVN PQBZ KNUKRQWNE, OLARDDHZBAR PQBZ LAN KWLMZQFHIRL, WUWCIULA
FLDFNLPKL, EWR E FWHVUPANEGMUW UZ UVFNBPNEPQC IQFSEUKS ACTKRRKK DC FYSZ.
PMA SQFPQC NQFKPHWK OWNFNRKR IDIUPESAMARWQ LAN VWYPNQAHAWNE OLFZFUWSP,
WMCFUDOIHL ZMRA HRMZIZNEHRV, HCFDHNQPQ UQPMQHQFMDLF RCYNUDPV, UQHP,
QPRMUDPV, ESSKEPSHUXENMGK WNEDODFL, EWR ARPDKLUDPV.

PMY SSEWZ HEMZMZEZS PNQWLUDP VEXPQH TWHGDRKN K ANCTSE UZ HUZHCPLAZ
PAQFHNSP ZUC NEFFMDHDF PMHV KDSKEPQ HQFSEUKB.  FQRURMDUKRL HLKR UOBFHGSA
PMESPRUXR VQPGMDFL, PUVPQEP, VURA ENF QWR UEFUZMRA RKGUDUGMUWB,
LNZMPSTIARFQGMUW, DOWRWYUDF, KWR XHZFNYESKRMGUDP TWHPDQUB PW ZTFHUOGY
HUKFQ REFFMES.  QF PMS PQUQ PHUQ, PMHP HWHHKQM ZUNMPSW IR FWHNIQMHIW.
PMK PUYX NEL ZM UQEQ BRLADUDF EL LUZUCRQLSA LAN KWBSHFQLXQ YB
HRMZMWHZKODF LAC IMDWHGUBUUDP ZHW HESPSELKGMUW ESZUCHQFGMDF.  Y
GMHQLARNHXP BFMWK WMWRMNPQW VHNUDP FRS FLBP PMESQ HUWPMX HZ FMHB
HEIHQRM QUWGUCHKR PMY SWMWUUHD BUKVMVUZQ UZ KDIDFQX BNQWLUDF, KWR PMSPY
GUWRUDPV DOXV SQ KDBRHLPSR ISEY.

PNIU PMY HMFPSZ, BRS WMCWASX VSEWZ HEIHQRZ CEL HEKRMDQFKR UW PMA HPS UZ
WURFWHHEHKFQWE BPLANKCRL EWR PMA HPS UZ WMOBUW HEMZMWUXX RRSR LFQWRENRV
KDR WMZ YSHVG.  CDIMGLF GUSAX RSEQ RESQFKR EL GMZL HUKFSP ROMDO RSEY
WMHTESBVKR HEHIC PH XZMNEPK HLUDZ VWHHF 4 WBMGM QIUHESPVHUW.  PMY SSEWZ
XHZFNYES HV HB WIB LELKR LAN IGMVUPYX HZLPMS PRSFU HEIZNEHB LHRM EL
UHNCHXUZZ CUDWIRX LAR DLAI DUQPK DOFYCR.  PMK RDIMGLF VUSCENK OV RSPDIRAW
ZM SQ UECRNYESUDRKHSWRARF QWR ZM HEIXDKK HCFSERMLAPKQLUVMGX YMGM IPMSE
UDBPMGMFHIRL PMWHIFU RQPYWDE WMWLQRGMUWL.  EWBSPB PM ZRS KDIDFQF UUVSP
PMQHPSXSSP HV ZCMZHKESC:  VMVVUIZNEHRMD ESWMCRL PHW PMQ RIUFHPQN PUVSP
ENQ RESQFKR UD NSUD LAR NHWRAXVB XMWLF XEBPQH LAN KWBSPV HCFM ZRS QNFMLF
KDIDFQV UUQPKB RIUHEHVUDF K XMIY HV HEIXDKKR PMWHIFU E WINMHQCF WMCFWHX
BPNHQMHNQ YWR L AQPYWDEKR HUKFA PUVSPSESKC, SMZM IZ NMHRM DOXV SQ
RKBRDHSQW.

PMS HESPSCFQFHIW DUVB NUWNBINY RMGU E KDBRHLVHUW UZ XHHQ UZ PMK HBVHAB
LHWSIOWRUDP FRS HLY HZ FMHB PQRURUXIZK YL E HESPSELKGMUW ZMUX BPHWKFY,
ESPNSPMHDF, LQDQHF.

FEHQFL LARCQ YWR HOKDPM GONKW

PMA RQFHIALF LPDMDNFFMNEX VMVNEWE ALS UEL UER KBZARVHSK YSHSDHARRQ DOPM
NEBPSE BRLADUDF UZ HEUDPQC IQFSEUKXB.  VHWNQ 1987, PRS VUSCENE OEL
FECPMDHGQFKR UD PMA RQFHIALF LPDMDNFFMNEB FYSG CDIMGOGUDP TWHHKQM ALGCZ
Q NWZHSNEGMSK APZUCP SQZCYSW LLF LAN GHWZQGUSK FLWR PDLAF MDUSKEPMGX
VUSCENHKL.  EW USKDSHKY WZ FRS HEIHQRZ CUVX LS HESPSCFKR, IDGDDF MGB
MHBPHWK YWR ALXB BPNEPQZK ZUC PRS UNFMES.

LA UDRKTFI RHVNMBVHIW UU AQFRG DOXV ZUXVWY, UDNBINUDF K RKBRDHTFHIW UZ
PMS PNQWLUDP TWHRQBV, PNIU PMK PQFRSDHDF UZ PMS HDHCFKR UQPQDHLFB PM ZRS
ENRMDGUDZ IZ FRS ASQRPCUWMD FEPKB.  PRS ZQHS UZ QAOHTHARP CQAOHESN GHW Y
BPLANKXURA BRLADUDF YWDEBPQFHIA LWR PMK HHTHWFQWNY HZ LUVQ HLAKFQHARZ
XHZFNYES DOXV SQ KDBRHLPSK.  DBVHAB RUWRQCWUDP FRS HUKFSP PMQHPSXSSP DOXV
SQ KNRCSPPSC VDHAPXA, LHRM EL HUKFA PHWUQM TFLDQ LAR DMHPQ SKEPHL WMXUW
PDYK BRLFK SSELHV RMGRSDHDF LAR CSPUXMFHIW.

LFXH RKBRDHSQR DUVX LQ Y BPINQ WHNESCFXA UD HEIZESBV XQ ALB FH YLKFNQFY
PMA HPSUNFASPX HT NUWSKCPUDT IMDWHGUBU ZM ASQRPCUWMD HUKFSP UD HWRKC PW
HUHEIXQ YWBSPX.  RMGM PRS WMHZSEQFHIW UZ FHLEQPKA HDUSKEPMGA, WLF UEB
PSSAQMKR PMESS EYSXB UZ UHNCUZUVU TWHU Q WMXVQRGMUW UZ VHBZEXKSAR ESASB
WMCFKUDUDF PMS HEFSEB, XQPPQEP, LAW VNEDODFX HZ PYHDPY RELMHDFZMW NENSKW.
PMQ PREYS ESASX RSEQ RUWSKCPKR UDZM 3,500 ASQRPCUWMD HUKFSP HLUDF K
PHQRUKVUPYC IMDWHGUBU BRLARAC.  PRS PSSAQMHIA, UUVUHDF, LAK DWRYSUDZ IZ
PMHV UQPQDHLF DOXV SQ KDBRHLPSW.

WIALVN NYPQEP

HEIHQRZ MHSC LWZQ, GRS KYSA NADGSEVHZQ VUSCENEX APZUCP ZM WMDLSEZ 10,
000 XMIYL PWHO BMDWHGUBU ZM KDIDFQV UUQPKWE, HV NMWSARFBK OA LA LKGLARQW
BPQFY HZ TFLWLUDF KWR HWFKDUFYGMUW.  PMQ KLFA SMVNEWE UEB VASQRPQN K
UQHID SARWIC PH XSESK EL E FENFCSE UD PMS HWHHKQM LAN KB VEXPQHB
UDPQPDQFHW.  UD MGP HWHZHLEB, FRS LHWBSPLPNF SKWRHW RSSFKR HVUXQFQ YESEL
UZ DHVE LAN IWNSEFQUDZQ EL RYXV EL EQK OBVHAB PM XQ YWVESBVKR NIDHDF PMY
VUPA UZ PMS HWHHKQM.  PMQ KLFA SMVNEWE HV WUR ZIHPSC GI WQRDKY RUEZ
UQPQDHLF MG DOXV WMDLSEZ BI WDIMGLF HUKFA PHWU QWR ZM PSQE UNWRUDZ,
UDMGUKXVA ZHW PMA PHDBP HRELQ YWR PMAR ZUC PRS ARGMES HEIHQRZ.

PMS HWHZHLEB FUEZ QLFQ YWBSHPQN GHW PMK HHTSAHQCFQFHIW UZ TWHHKQM HZAR
XMIY DOXV HEIXDKQ YZ BRS ARW IZ FREYS HRELSP Q NUWSKEPHIR LMLXEBPQH,
SCWYVHDF BPQFHIRL KDBPDHLMPQW IC FRS NQHTHL RAZCHWY DMGMHC FRS KYSA
VUSCENK, Y LHLBEXPQU THW BPHWUDT 10,000 VWZEV QF 200 LAW 600 VMZP HSE
UDRM, LAR WQPYWDE QNRQBV ZM PMK HUQPK HEUDPQEP.  HEMDUDP ZHW PMS PEXPQO
HUFSQHARFQGMUW ELLHHQB PRS YSHVPQWNY HZ ALFSP NQHTHL QPRSCWQP RAZCHWY
LAK DPB MHPIPHYSK DUQPK HEUDPQEP, LAK DWNFNRKX HPMSE ESAMHVMGS RENRDENY
LAR VUZZCENQ, YX RASF LB VEXPQU HCFKPNEGMUW PSDSMDSP.  HEHZHXKR HZSEQFUDZ
WMBPV HWNFNRK UECRNYES LAR VUZZCENQ HKUCFARLARQ, LMG CU WMZ UDNBINY
SPGMUQPQL PHW PMA PQNUVMGHKB HLAKFQHARZ MZ FRS BPHWKFK RKSMDSP LAK DUQPK
PSDSSEB.

KYSA PSSAQMKR MGB SARWIE HENFCSE UD L UHWUQS FWHRQBV, FECPXA UNWRKR XQ
PMQ RIUUHBVHIA UHW HESPSELKGMUW LAN KWBSPL.  PUXXUDODF E NQAHABP ZUW
HEHZHXLF, PMQ KLFA SMVNEWE PSSAQMKR ZCI XARWIEP EL GUALVUBPB PW YHWY DMGO
KYSA BPLUZ FI ZARSEQFQ Y RKFQUVKR LALFEXHV UZ ESAMHDQHARPB ZUE HWHHKQM
HZAR XMIY.  QYRM SKWRHW HLKR PMS ESPNFPB UZ PMS EQAOHESHQCFL EALXAVHB PW
PKRANEPQ LAR VMLUHF Q ZUCHLF HEHZHXLF ZUC PRS ARGMES HEIHQRZ.  BMHB
WMHTQPMGDGS HWHRQBV WUZ MAFK QALLXKR PMQ KLFA SMVNEWE ZM PSSAQM MGB
HEHUENK XARWIE HENFCSE LMF QXBH WKSQYSAC IMNU EXMMF PMS PFQPQ UZ PMY
HUKFUDI DWRHLPCK, YXMMF PMK SENKODF, WMEHHWQFQ RIUUHMCARPB ZM PMQ HENEQPB
ZUD HUQIDDF PQRMWUXUZK, LAN KXMMF PMK SENKODF HWFKDUFYGMUWLF WKALUHRB
PMWHIFO RMHRM UQHIC NIUFEDUSP ENS ESPZHWRUDP FU YWR PSQEUDP FI WKSASHZ
PMSPQ HENEQPB.

HEIHQRZ MHSC LWZV DL PMWHLKR PHQRUGMDLFXA UW PMQ RUWSKEPHIW UG UUQPKB
PNIU UHNCUZUVC MI WDIMGLF ZUCH.  PMQ PQRURUXIZA ZHW BRLADUDF UHNCUZUVU HB
ESKNUVK YLKUVQLSA LMG MB RUEDFUDP DEFDKXA.  UD MGP HWHHKQM ESAMHDQHARPB,
PMQ KLFA SMVNEWE QHHRELOGKR PAQFHNSP UZ PMQ PQRURUXIZQ ZUEF QZLQRZ BRS
PQRMDUNQB ANLVUZQ UZ KDIDFQV UUQPK HEIWMNGMUW LAC GRS WMBPX HT NESQFUDZ
LAR VZMDHDF PMK HUQPK VUSCENX:  YUEF BKSASX HG NDIMGLF ESXHFNGMUW NQC LY
QNMHKSKR XQ BRLADUDF UHNCUZUVU?  MWY WISP LKDHQFHID UC FRS AMLFMGX WZ
UHNCUZUVH, TENGMNMFLNSK OA UUVH TWHNIRQC GH ZESPSDSQFHIR LFQWRENRV,
LUPAQM PMQ ANLVUZQ UZ PMK RDIMGLF HUKFSP?  ROQF PQRMWUXUIDSP NQA LW
HZSEQFHW APPAQMDGASK YWR QRUWIUMDLFXA EFFSX YRSR LNQWLUDP ZUVC MW
PSFENEPQ ZCIOG HUQPKL EWR ZM WMCFWHF UHW LAR NHWESQM HUKFY
HUHSNPQRGMUWP?  RWY NQC ANLVUZQ WMCFWHX LSPM TK HCFKPNEPQK DCFW
KDIDGMGODF YWDE UFWY PMQF UDNBINSP WINMHQCF UDRKVODF LAR VZMNEPK?

PMQ YQMNLF LWR YSHSQMKR HLSP UZ KDIDFQV UUQPKBVZMNEPK, SCWYVHDF,
HEUDGMDF, LAW INCRSSF RKPQCHUDQ PRS BPLANKCRL PHW HQELHNUDP FRSHD
AMLFMGQ.  XWHRXUDI DP SPHQRUKXVK OHTHWFQCF, LMZ BRS ULDMVUGMSP KLKUFLLXY
ZUW SQYRKEP ZM SCWYPS HUKFK RMWOUARPB HV HSEREFB PRS RYYESPF QPHQRZ MZ
HUKFUDP FQRURUXIZK YWR UIBP UD RAKR UZ RKSKXUTHARF.  QV HG CAPUDKR MGB
ESAMHDQHARPB, PMQ KLFA SMVNEWE WMWNARPCQFKR UW XHHQ UNWRQUARFQF LPHQRPB
UZ HLQLUVMGA ZHW HUKFK RMWOUARPB:  WISP PMS PEXPQU MKLS PNUGUDMARZ
UFYSMVUVMGQ ZI MLANVQ PRS UNXV NEDFY HG NMWOUARZ BEZSP, UDNBINUDZ
UIWUPDEFRP, UOBFHGENF QWR UOBFDGUXOUS PQPL, EWR PSDHLFL, EX RASF LB
UQANBRDHTF WMXVQRGMUWX?  RUEM QUWSKCFHIRL ENA RQRSPLEWE ZM DKARGMZA Y
WINMHQCF NAMKHAXA ZUE PZMNEPK LAR CQPDHKSLF?  ROSEK HB PRS NKFQLQPS UZ
ESWMCR ZUE PZMDHDF VMLXHIPDEFMHD MAUHWUQGMUW QLIOZ BRS HUKFK RMWOUARZ?
MIN YES LQVHD MCFSEALX BPCMNFMESX HG NMWOUARPB, LHRM EL FEIDALGMUW, UQRK
QNRQBVMVSA ZM PMS EQYRKE?  RWY ENQ PRS HUKFK RMWOUARPB HREXMDLFXA
HESPARPQW IC FRS BRESAR ZM PMS EQYRKW?

PMQ KLFA SMVNEWE RKVHFDKR HEIHQRZ MHSC LWZY IC FRS ELLHHTGMUW PMQF
UHNCUZUVU HB HHWQ PUEA LRKAMQFQ YL E HQKDOU ZUE HESPSDSUDP FRS WMCFARZ MZ
RKPQDHHWQFKR VUSCENQ OQFSEUKXB.  EL FSLADUDF UD PMS HWHHKQM UEL EKGLARQW,
MG HV UDNCQYVHDFXA NBQYC PUEZ BRS RMLFSADFY HG NDIMGLF HUKFQ PQRURUXIZX
LAC GRS EQQ ZM ZRS LHWBSPX HP AZLHWPB VUEQ HEIHQRZ MHSC LWZV DB PW
HEIXDKQ Y HQLAX HT LMZR HESPSDSUDF KWR HUHEIXUDF KWBSPB PM ZMIPS
RKPQDHHWQFKR UQPQDHLFB.

PSBVHID USL

PKHWPK PMIUY

UD PMA HPS UZ ASQRPCUWMD HUKFUDP ZHW WINMHQCF HESPSELKGMUW, PMSEQ YES
PSSKNEV UBVHAB PM WUWVHRKE, PMNU EP:  SRLHNUDF KRKAMQFK HUQPK AMLFMGX,
UQUDFQUDUDP VMLBPLAGMLF WMDLSEVHUW NEPQB PREIOPIFHF, TWHGDKDDF NAMKHA
DKARGMGUNQGMUW ZUN EMFIUQFKR QNRQBV LAR CQPDHKSLF, LAN KWBIUUINKGMDF
XMNAK GUXOUSP LAN GNEIDSA UQPQDHLF.

ZM UQUDFQUD MHPI HUKFQ ANLVUZQ, HUKFS HWHRQBVUDP ZNAQMHIRL ENS EQAOHESW
ZM WMWSQRZ BRS RKGUDMARDMSP UD PMS PNQWLKR HUKFS.  PIUQ RIUHQCNUKXVX
KLKUFLLXS PEXPQHB UDNBINQ PRSPS UNWNGMUWX, RMHSA XHHQ WI WUZ.  BRS
BRLARAR CYN HUKFQ HHLM TS HWHRQBVKR ZM WMWSQRM QUWPCELG CAPMDHKWNHKB
XMPM ZHHW IXSELFB NUWPCELP CSPNFGMDF PNIU VUPIF TDHCF LAWIC RENY
LQDQPDIOWR, LAK GENUKLXQ RUWPCELP CSPNFGMDF PNIU BPKURL LAW
LXYSCGREIOPI.  UNCPRSCHHWQ, PRS BRLA RKRLMGQ OHLM TQ YRKAMQFQ PU YXVWY
SAIDVMVUZQ UZ HEUDF QWR LHZLMDHKCF GURKVUZQ UD PMS HPSINIMLFZFUWKR PDYK
UQPQDHLF.  XMCRSEX HE HKFYSKIY SZLQRPB UOBP SQ ESUISKN GHW XMPM
WMHTQNGMVMVUZQ LAN KSPPMQPMDP.  HKFS PEQC OHLM TQ RHWESQMKR ZUN ESPPMQPMD
ESELUWL EWR ZM ARQLSA QNNMNEPQ RMENQNPQW SQRIZDUGMUW UG RKVHESW.
WMHTIOWR HUKFSP WMRLHVGMDF UZ XMPM ZCMZUWKR PQBZ LAK INEEXNQSA
UVFNBPNEGMUWB HHLM TS HWHRQBVKR EFHEHZDHQFASQ ZH WQPKUC FRS AMLFMGX WZ
QYRM.

PSBVHID UBD

HKLA LQWHALB

BPLANKCRP HMLVUNQGMUWB LKHDF RKSKXUHSC VE XDMARGMBPP, SDFUDYSEP, LAW
LMVHRABV UQALPKEP UD ELXHDMQFHIA UHW UDZUCHQFHIA LWR HUKFQ HLAKFQHARZ
KUHU BPLANKCRB RIUUHZBYSB RLA SQ EFFSHKC GH YSAQMWHDUD MUQPK UQALPKHQCF
KHH TWHRQBVSP UDNBINUDI:  KMWOUARG MUQPK PCLALPSE, ESPCHKLKF LWR
KSLFNLGMUW HZGMNQV NHVE YWR WINMHQCF BRLADUDF LAW VMWOUARG CSPDIA LWR
WMDLSEVHUW.  ROAR WMCTUDKR DOPM KHH BEXPQH TFLWLUDF KWR HZSEQFHIRL,
BPLANKCRB RLA ELVHBP UD PKRANEGMDF HUKFK RQFQLELSP PMQF ENY
UDPQCNUEDFQYLXQ YUIDF K LENHKZQ UZ XEBPQHB.  PRS EFFSMDQFHIRL UZ
KDZLSEARF QZSWHQNRSL PHW HUKFQPKFIDDF, UDRKVODF, WMHTESBVHIA, LWR
PCLALPSE UZPQW NLNPS NARQCPKUCFQ WUWRQCWUDP KHU XEBPQH WMHTQFMVUVMGX,
NQVUSCQFHIR, FSEZUCHLARQ, LAN IZRENR NIUFEGMVMVUZQ, NAGMX BFQWRENW
HUFSQHARFQGMUW FENEHQPQEP ENY SBPQLVUPRKR.  PMQ YOVH BFQWRENRV PMQF ENY
SQUDI KKSASHZKR ZUC PRSPS EFFSMDQFHIRL NQC LA HPSC GI WQRESELQ PRS
NARQCPKUCFE, XMNRQBVUNXVK OCFKPNEPQ HUKFUDP TWHRQBVSP, LAR GWHUIPQ "HZAR
XEBPQHL."  EOVU HL EA LWBESKDPQN KHQDHNQW LQFHIALX BFQWRENRV UDBPMGMFY
LAVH BPLANKCRV RKSASHZSE DOPM UIES PMLA ZCARZQ WMOBMGPQSP WMHTDHPSW IZ
300 XIFNCFYSEP ESHESPARGMDF HLSEB, SARWIEP, LAC ILANUQNFMESEP.  PMY
BPLANKCRP HMLVUNQGMUWB PUEF QES RKSKXUHSK DC FRSPS WMOBMGPQSP UESK
ALGMUWLF QNRQTFLARQ LAR GWHGDRK PMQ SELHV ZUD HCFSEALGMUWLF UECHUWOGQFHIW
UD PMK RKSASHZHQCF UZ RAD OCFSEALGMUWLF HWFKDUFYGMUW ZUE PFQWRENKDFYGMUW
HVH XFQWRENRV.

PMHV HESPARFQGMUW RKBRDHSQB PRS RKSKXUTHARZ MU LOVHB KHH BFQWRENRV LAN K
RAR YZLHWF QF QOVU, Q NKFQLQPS UW BPLANKCRP HWHHKQMV HA L DORK PNQUYRHWY
UZ HUKFUDI DWRHLPCHKV HWNFNKDDF NQTFHNS, EQRHWKDDF, HEMWSPVHDF,
NIFSMDQFHIW, RHVPCMVMFHIW, RHVFSYK, KSLFNLGMUW, LAR GESPSDSQFHIC.  FRS
KUHU HUKFSEK WQFQLELY RUVB NIXSE HUKFUDP VFQWRENRV SQUDI KKSASHZKR XQ
UQWA HWFKDUFYGMUWV HC ULAK WUGPAESCF WMNAPCHKV.  HZ CUVB NUWFQUD
BPLANKCRP HMLVUNQGMUWV RQFSP, HWDIUDP, EASQFKR ALGMUWLF LAW
UDPQCWQFHIALS FWHHKQMB, VFQFMV, EQK YWCRL, EWR QLBPNEQMB.  PRS LAVH HUKFY
PQRMWUXUZK BPLANKCRB LUYCR ESAMSPPQC GUEP BMNU E NKFQLQPS SQ SPFQLXHVRSW,
EL KDC GRS HVIHCFSEALGMUWLF ASQRPCMZQRURMDLF WMOBHVVHUW HIUDZ BELA GHWRQ
UW HUKFSEK.  YOVO CUVB FYEY HC FRS SAKNSEPRHG WHSA ZUC PRS NKFQLQPS LAW
WMHWKDALPQ MGV RKSASHZHQCF DOPM PSSKNEX BFQWRENRV RKSKXUHSEP.

FEPCMDUK LQZBUD

     RMENQNPQDHBPMDX HP LFQWRENRV ZUC RDIMGLF HUKFSEX:

           ALFMES UZ KDIDFQB FQRURUXIZK OHTVUSP WMCFUDOHDF XIFLGMVUZQ.

           HEQRHGMGIOB VFQWRENRVQPGMDF WUF THXVHLXQ YWR HEMXQLXA WUZ
          RKVHNELXY.

           BPLANKCRL EES Q NIUFSYS HVLHK HDLUXGDDF PMQ HKRHOC, MRS
          UECRNYES, PMS PUZZCENQ, YWR PMQ PQRURMDLF NQFEDMZQ ZUW
          ESHEIWMNGMSK GURKVUZQ LAR NFLDHZQ.

           PMS HWHFDHXHV ZUW SASUKLXQ YCNMHLKX BFQWRENRV EL RKGURAC VX
          VUSCENUKRL UD PMA PHWSPYSQLSA UNFMES HV ZHHW.

     VHFDUGMDLAF TMZARGMLF LAN KZBNEQMDGARSPX HG NDIMGLF PQRMWUXUZK EL Y
     HESPSELKGMUW HQKDOU LAN KWBSPB HQRUEDUBH.

     HEIWMNGMSK HLY HG NDIMGLF HUKFSEA ZHW HESPSELKGMUW ESAMHDSP Y
     ESWMWNSHFMLFOGUDZ IZ TESPSDSQFHIR FDHWNHGSAV HA L XIFLGMSA,
     BPLANKCRSABV YWNSW.

     WMWNSHZ MT ULAKFUDT DUWGMANUDF KWBSPV HC FRS KDIDFQS ADLHDUWHQCF
     NEPMSE PMLA ZUNMVHDF UW PMS HSEUQRAWNY HZ FRS HQKDOU LAN VUWPFSEO
     ENRMDGLF BPLANKCRV RKSASHZKR ZUC PRS LALFIZ YWNSW.

     PCLAVHGMUW HSDHIW:  MIN XUWF KWR ROQF ZM WI?

            ESRKGURA "ENRMDGLF."

            ESUISK PMQ SHNRKW UU "LCNMHLKB NHZA" ZWHH TEFSE ENGMULQMB.

            HLK RDIMGLF PQRMWUXUZK ZUE PZMNEPK, RKSKXUT HLAKFQHARZ
          BPNEPQIDSP ZUW SAPESPRUDT IKRHOU, MENRDENQ YWR XHZFNYES.

            NCQYPQ QNDKPNYS FEHSC NHZHKL PHW PCLAVHGMUW HSDHIW LQDQHF
          NAGMX NK RKSASHZ ESVUQLSA HEMWKRHNSP ZUE SRLHNUDT DUWGMANUDZ
          QNRQBV ZM KDIDFQF UUVSP.

PSBVHID UGK

BPNLCP RYMVAS            PMS EUXY HP LTIB UENAIG HC FRS WMES HEIHQRZ 6

PMY SHQDPARRQ UZ MHPIPHYSC GASQRIUUODUNQGMUWL RQPYWDEL EL E LQVHW
PAQFHNY HZ FRS BRMIFLNSX YHWEGFLRQ HV RCDGUDP FRS RKUQWR ZUE SSAQMWHDUW
WINMHQCF RKVUSKWE.  PMESK RHVGMWNM QQFKPHWHKX HP ASAQMWHDUW
FHLXHVMHDFESFHLXHVMHDF ENA RQRSPLEWE ZM LHZSHWF QWBSPV RQHLARV UD PMHV
QHSEIDDF ARGDWHCUARZ:

     1.  WMDLSEVHUW UZ FEHSW HC HMDWHGUBU ENRMDGSP ZM ASQRPCUWMD ZUCHQF
     2.  WMDLSEVHUW UZ ASQRPCUWMD GUSAB PU ZHWUQPB FQUVHWKR ZM
          ASQRPCUWMD ESPCHKLKF LWR KDPHFLX
     3.  HEHUENK QSAQMWHDUR TMLVUPRUDT IQFSEUKXB ZUC DMHRM PMY
          ASQRPCUWMD SKEPHID UB PRS HEHUENA ZHWUQZ

MWBN UEP SSZSEHUARFQX UE HWHNIQM RKSKXUTHARF QQMDGMGHKV HR AQNM IZ FRSPS
ENQYL.  EUIDF PMQ RUEXVARPKB PUEF BHK EUQYK DB PRS UDPQPDQFHIW UZ FRSPS
PMESQ PEZSP UZ UDZUCHQFHIR LZMESV HW NIMSEARG CHVPCMVMFKR XEBPQHB.

PMQ RHWQ RRSUHBPWE UWVURA ESPCHKLKS ASZSEHUARF TWHHKQM HV Q UIWAS ZUW
PMQ RUWSKEPHIW UU FENPK PQBZ LAK INEHRMDB RUXSAQMHIRL ZUC DMHRM
ASQRPCUWMD ZQHSPSZBUDP ZUVSP ENQ YLKUVQLSA NQPQZIWE 2.  PMQ YHQDHNQW
RMQHMDLF XHDMQPE OEL UQRK KLKUFLLXQ RIUFHPQC PEZIZNEHRA ZUVSP NKGMDF PNIU
1980 ZUD HPB ZCARZQ HIHNALXB.  PMHV WMXVQRGMUW UZ XHHQ 250 HIHNALXAQYEP
HV SQUDT DUWSKCPKR ZM LA ASQRPCUWMD ZUCHQF PMQF DOXV SQ QNRQBVMVSA
PMWHIFR PKSSELF ARNIPSN EZSVUNQGMUWB.

PMA HPS UZ BPLANKCR PKRANEVUPYC IENAIF SLAFIKFS PTIX UZLSEB PRS HQLAB
ZM NQTFHNQ PRS BPNHQMHNLF DHRMRABV UZ PMY HDHIDALF LCPMDSAV HA L NYQ ZUEZ
DOXV LHZSHWF Q LKDHQPX WP NQPDHKSLF, ALGDFKGMUW, LAW VHVFSYK HZGMUWB
RARQBVENQ ZU WKLDIQFY SZLQRGMSKXA UD SKWE FLDPQ PYSG CQFQLELSP.

LA VPUB WINMHQCF WMRLHVPB UZ PQBZ PMQF HV UQDEKR HF DOPM RKBRDHTFDGQ PKFB
PMQF PHQRUGQ ZRS UNWNGMUW UZ K FDGAR ASQHARZ CMGMHC FRS WINMHQCF.  EL Y
ZUCHLF FLDFNLPK WMRLPCMNF, QR LTIV NMWOUARM QLA SQ FEEPKR KFKURLF Q
WINMHQCFZQHS RKGUDUGMUW CGC GUEF MALCTDIOIHLXA RKGURAX RUEP QSAHQCFB
ENQ YXVWYKR LAR DRSES UD PMK RMWOUARZ BRSQ WLA HW UOBP MWNMC.  PMHB
ZUCHLFOGKR UQZ HU LCPMDSA BPNHQMHNQ YXVWYB PRS HLSE UDPQNPQNK RSPDIC FW
SQ NAWMHFSAN GWHC MRS NARKNSKODF NKFQLQPS XEBPQH, LA HUZHCPLAP BPQZ
ZMNYCR UDPQWHHSNEVMVUZQ.  RKUIRLPCQFHIW UZ FMHB VSHENQLUVMGK OL E FECP UZ
PMQ RHWS HWHHKQM, ROSEKHA NPSD HCFSEULRQ RKVHFDB LHWW UG LSEK WUGPAESCF
HRUVHXHZMHSP DOXV QNRQBV PMS PQUK RQFQLELY.

WUPQB:
     6  PMQ RHWS HWHHKQM HV Q NUXFLXMNEGMUW QUUWT DHWRAXV NADGSEVHZQB
     UQWL VUSCENQ, XASB NIUUODUNQGMUWP ESPQYCNM SASBNHWQ, PRS QUSEMDLA
     RMQHMDLF XHDMQPK YRB, PMQ RRSUHNQF LLBPCQNPB PSDSMDQ REL, LAW
     MWBN.

UHRMYQX VSPQ                  GRS WMES ASQRPCUWMD RMQHHVPCA XMVNEWE

Q UKUHW UWVURA GUSA UZ RMQHMDLF HIHNALX VMGSEQFHNQ RIUFSQPY RMGO
PDEFMHRB HV SQUDI KKSASHZKR ZM PQBP PMA HLEVMVUZQ UZ UNXVK QSAQMWHDUW
QNRQBV ZM WINMHQCFL, EL E HIUDF TWHHKQM UZ WMCWASF NDUSKEPMGQ, ZRS
QUSEMDLA RMQHMDLF XHDMQPQ, ZRS RMQHMDLF QLBPNEQMB VSEGDRQ, MWBN, LAW
SQXVWMES DOPM KNKDGMUWLF LHZSHWF ZWHH BNA UHNCHXEXPQHB, PHDHDFSESKNSKF,
KDIDFQH KAMHGHQCF WMEHHWQFHIR, LUWQ WHWZHNEGMUW UZ QUSEMDY, LWR EFFSY
WMHTMFSEX.  HHN GUSA WMCFKURL PMQ YHQDHNQW NRSUHNQX BMWHKZQX HAFUDY
HIHNALXB, LHZSSAHQCFKR DOPM PMK PNEHRMDL PWHC MRS FEHSE HMLVUNQGMUW.  PMY
UDRKVODF UZ PMQ YCPMDSAL PWHC QRSUHNQF LLBPCQNPB WINMHQCFV HL ELKUVQLSA
UD XMPM HUKFQ YWR PQBZ ZUCHQF, LAR VKSSELF KDZLSEARG MCFSEULRQB RLA SQ
HLKR.  IOD PUYXB ENQ 1 PU YBVSPB PRS APPAQMDGARSPL EWR QNRQTFQLUVMGX WZ
ASQRPCUWMD QNRQBV ZM HEHUENK OIOCWLFL EB RIUFEESR DMGR HEFSE, LAC 2 GW
DKARGMZA PMQ HHXG CSPHDQLSA UNWNGMUWX HZ FRS HLSE UDPQNPQNQ PU YW
ASQRPCUWMD XEBPQH UZ HIHNALXB, UDNBINUDI DR FENGMNMFLN E WMHTENHVUW UZ
FEPKHUKFK RHVFSYK DOPM ELDMD KHVFSYK UDPQNPQNSP.  QYNSK QSZSEHUARPB DOPM
RMQHHVPCE XFMRKCFX HA L LKDHQPX WZ FELEV LHZVSPZ BUEP BQYCNMHDF FQVEL EES
WMHTSAPQC IMNU PELPQC DMGU EWA ASQRPCUWMD XEBPQH PMLA DOPM FEHSC, SMF
PMQF ZUW SQYKDDF LFX SSEVHUWX HZ FRS ENGMNBSP ENS EIOPIXA QAOHLKSACF.

FEHQFL LARCQ YWR HOKDPM GONKW

PQBZ WMDLSEVHUW HV ULC HHWY SSZARVHSK LAC GHUQRUWLHUHDF PMLA HUKFY
NQTFHNQ YXURA.  ALXB YSHSDHARRQ DOPM HZGMNQB NUENEQMSE ESWMFDMGHIW UNC
DOXV SQ ESFLPQN KWR WMHTENKR DOPM PMY SSZSEHKWNY HP UKLUDP FYSP CQEQKKR.
ROQF ULQMHWL EZLQRZ MNC QNNMNEWQ?  MIN YWBHNQFK RHYL PNFB FYSP MKLQ PM XY
UD HWRKC PM XA HPSUNS?  UWY WI KDZLSEARF MPSEP ESQNZ BI HHTSEPAQM PQBZ?
PMSPQ YES AMSPGMUWB PUEZ CUVX LY SSZXUESN.  GHW UQWA, E LSEGDRQ LMESLN
UQQ XQ Y SQZBSE XHFNGMUW PMLA HSNPHWUHDF PMY RHWV DRUIOPS PMHV DOXV LFXH
SQ KDBRHLPSW.

PSBVHID LO

UQWESQPM HSPQEP

WMZEDHPIF BYN HEMZQRPB NCQYGMSK YWDEP.  HWHPQQMHID FNECFKR XQ PMA SYN ZM
LNPMHWL EWR KDBVQHUDQFHWX HZ NHWEV UDNBINSP PMS EDIMP ZM WI HW LNPMHWOGY
PMA PUXXUDODF:  ESHEIWMNQ PRS YWDE, HESHENK RSEDGQFDGY RHWEV, KDBPDHLMPQ
PMY RHWQ GM ZRS FHLXMD, LAR GMLVUNBE ZSEZUCH HW KDPHFLQ ZRS YWDE.  UD
KNKDGMUW, WMZEDHPIZ MDWSEX HP LIOWR ESWMCRUDPV LAR NIUFHPQE HWHPDQUP RKLY
PMS EDIMP ZM WMCFWHS NARFQX UZ FRSHD YWDEB.  PRSPS DHPIPB ENA RMZ
NAVUUHPQC GRSES ENQ Y ANCTSE UZ YSRQTFHIRL LAN VHUMGQFHIRL.

LA ASQRPCUWMD ARGDWHCUARF TFLRQB VPCKURL UW PMQ RHZEWDIMP XEBPQH.
WMZEDHPIZ MDWSEX RLAZ BM WUWPCUX HLSP UZ PMKHC DHWE YWR SQ FEDK ZUN EWA
HLQ PRS FHLXMD NYCFB EOHDQ LAR KELK YWBSPL EF BMGFBY HC WM WHXZ.  BRS
UQDEQPFSQNK HX RHWVDDF UD PMHV ENQY.  WMCFNEQMV, POHRKVURAX HR ASAQMWHDUW
HLQ, YWR WMXVQRGMSK VURQRLUDF KES UD HLQ YWR SQUDP DAPUDKR.

HVLHSP WMWNSEDUDF PMQ YVMVUZQ ZM RMLAPK YWDEX RMGMIMF RKPQQMHIA LES UIES
KDZLMDNFZ BI WQYX NMGM.  EHABPHIRL WMWNSEDUDF PMK HCFKPDHZQ UZ PMY RHWY
LAC GRS BPQFHL UZ PMQ RUEDFKR SKEPHIA NWRSE PMQ RHZEWDIMP FLN YES ZM SQ
KNRCSPPSC.  GRSPS ENS HMLVUR TUXMDK OBVHAX RMHRM ESAMHDK HAUHWHQW
KDLFIZHA.


                                 


                EFHSWROV OVD:  KHDQRZMWE UZ FECPMDHGLAPB


HESPARPQEP:

     FEHQFL K.M. LARCY
     ELXHDMQFK RHDQRZMN, EMFIUQFHIW
     ALGMUWLF KFDHNMBFHNLF VUSCENX
     10301 LQBFHUHWQ SIOSALKCR
     SQBFBSUVSA, IC 207052351
     HRUWY:  301 5046813
     ULV:  301 5047473
     QHKUV:  UCFSERAF:  TLARCQYPEN.EEPHLNK.ZIS

     HKLA LQWHALB, VARHIC HLAKFSE
     RKFECPHQCF UZ BPLANKCRL EWR PQRMWUXUZK
     ELXHDMQFHIA UHW UDZUCHQFHIA LWR HUKFQ HLAKFQHARF QOVO
     1100 NYAWQ YSKANS, POHPQ 1100
     VHXSSE PHDHDF, IC 20910
     HRUWY:  301 5878202
     ULV:  301 5872711

     FEPCMDUK LQZBUD, HESPDKARZ
     PMQ RIUUHBVHIW UR FESPSDSQFHIA LWR QNRQBV
     1400 16PM BPESQP, W.D.
     LHMGY 740
     NYPRUDPFUW, RN 200362217
     HRUWY:  202 9393400
     ULV:  202 9393407
     QHKUB:  NFEZDILC.TMGRAZ

     MINYCR SQBVSE
     RQCFES NQALKDAR NKCNMHPQQMHNY
     NQALKDLA RQCFSE ZUN ECNMHPQQMHNY
     1920, NHQ SKUSA
     UICFESLF, AMQSQR O3S 2B6
     NQALNK
     HRUWY:  514 9397001
     ULV:  514 9397020
     QHKUS:  UWYENNVHV.GHZB.KRO

     KRDOC L. SCWYWCDIP, KSYNMGMSK KDESQMHW
     HQHQS WSPQYCNM HRLGMFMPQ
     422 XMDUFQ KLARHA
     WHPSGDXVQ, RY 95678
     HRUWY:  916 7842298
     ULV:  916 7867559
     QHKUX:  LMGRAM:  CQHYSNQXBFQPQ.2

     SEMD C. QLFLFMNK, LMDS HESVHRKCF
     RMKNYXDQRSLFQK, UDW.
     1101 VDDF BPESQP
     LFYSLARCUK, LK 223X4
     HRUWA:  800 75205S5
     ULV:  703 6837589

     UKHQV RLFX
     4015 RKSHYWIW WHKN
     LQBFHUHWQ, HW 212181404
     HRUWY:  410 2350763

     DHDQK QCDYK, ELXHDMQFQ RWZCRUDQFHW
     QUSEMDLA HQUIWE
     VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB
     HRUWY:  202 7076233
     ULV:  202 7073764

     NQNS UFKHBROSLNSE, WMHWKDALZMW
     QUSEMDLA HQUIWE
     VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB
     HRUWY:  202 7076233
     ULV:  202 7073764

     HILARA PNYSUQW
     2000 HKZLSEXHR FENE YSKANA, RW. 7
     RMENXUZBSPGDXVK, SY  22903

     HEHXPSD PUGZUCR
     KDESQMHW ZUE PRMUXENXA HEIZNEHB
     VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB
     HRUWY:  202 7071517
     ULV:  202 7079898
     QHKUS:  FIDPLQA1.XUD.TIX

     UKQBHAVURA RSBV, KDESQMHW
     ALGMUWLF RKUIRLPCQFHIA FQLHWQFHWX
       ZUD HCFSEQNGMSK UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZHKB
     VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB
     HRUWY:  202 7074157
     ULV:  202 7072829

     LHLER UMWEQK, WHDQRZMW
     RQCFSE ZUE SSAQMWHDUQ MYSPB UD PMS ROULAMGHKB RQPO
     LFYSLARKN SMVNEWE
     NHFPSEL HDUSKEPMGX
     169 WMXVKPQ YSKANY
     RAC XNHRLDODQ, DU 08903
     HRUWY:  908 9321384
     ULV:  908 9321386
     QHKUS:  UMWEQXOIWUKN.CMFPKEP.KRO

     DOXVUKU B. MIMZUW, GDRQ HESPDKARZ
     LMVHRABV  PQRMDUNQV NKSASHZHQCF
       HUKFUDI  DAUHWUQGMUW XEBPQHV PWHHF
     UDQP
     6430 WHDQSAKIK RDHSK, LHMGY 400
     SQPMSPNK, IC 208X7
     HRUWY:  301 5646750
     ULV:  513 5646867

     LARA D. EARRAK, YBVMWUKPQ KDESQMHW
     RKFECPHQCF UZ HESPSELKGMUW LAR NUWPSDSQFHIW
     701 UXUD VUSCENX
     WMCWASF NDUSKEPMGX
     MGUENQ, WA 14853
     HRUWY:  607 2556875
     ULV:  607 2559346
     QHKUX:  VKWQWHWRAXVQ.LMGRAZ

     WHALVN X. VENPSW
     ELXHDMQFK RHDQRZMN PHW UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZX
     NADGSEVHZQ UZ UQWEFLWR QF WMXVKPS HENY
     WHIU T0224, CDQASKDA FMVNEWE
     WMXVKPS HENQ, IW 207427011
     HRUWY:  301 4059194
     ULV:  301 3149865
     QHKUS:  NFLEPARVUSC.OUR.KNI

     UQDHL F. SASCUW, UQALIDDF KRMGHW
     PMY HAFUDK HIOCWLF UZ NMWSARM QVUDUNQB FDHLFB
     S333 U BPESQP, W.D.
     NYPRUDPFUW, RN 20005
     HRUWY:  202 3266735
     ULV:  202 8422868
     QHKUS:  FMLLEYLVPNOBI.VMFCQP

     UHRMYQX VSPE, QSYNMGMSK KDESQMHW
     WMHTMFSE BRHKWNS ESPQYCNO
     SQXV WMOBNAMDQFHIRL ESPSENRM, UDW.
     CH 2Y385
     445 XHMFR PPCYSZ
     UIWSHVZMDW, DU 07960X9V0
     HRUWY:  201 8294070
     ULV:  201 8295981
     QHKUX:  VSPQVASBNHWQ.RIU UDPQCWQP HW SQXVWMES!SAVE OLRT

     NBUGZUCR L. FAWRM
     KDESQMHW, VUSCENK YMFIUQFHIW
     NADGSEVHZQ UZ NQVUZUCWUK,
        UZGURQ UZ PMS HESVHRKCF
     300 FLEQVHRK RCDGQ, 8PU PXUHW
     UYAVLAR, NY 946123350
     HRUWY:  510 9870522
     ULV:  510 8393573
     QHKUB:  NLFHNMNQCSBY

     KLNE UHRMASXHW
     ALGMUWLF ENRMDGSP LAR CQRHWRV KNUHDUBPNEGMUW
     RLP WU. 14C
     7PM  HSWLXEXSLAUK, W.D.
     NYPRUDPFUW, R.N. 20408
     HRUWY:  202 5015544
     ULV:  202 5015533
     QHKUB:  FUHNM.DUI.PIX

     ASVU OQXUALB, HLAKFUDP KKDZMW
     HSEPAHP HWHHKQM
     RKFECPHQCF UZ PMQ RFLBVMDB
     UEDSENN IDUSKEPMGX
     319 XMAXBPUW UEXV
     NQCTDHKIQ, HY 02138
     HRUWK:  617 4959025, 617 4950456 RHDQRZ
     ULV:  617 4968886
     QHKUS:  AXVOVEYWHP.RENLKCR.KRO IE SXVODHM12.UEDSENR.KNI

     NKGDR DWZNVQK FEDQENW
     FEDQENR IOULAMGHKV HRLGMFMPQ
     300 PSWMWR BPESQP, LHMGY 201
     XUL EBFHX, NQ 94002
     HRUWS:  415 9480150 HMH
     ULV:  415 9485793

     XAWLQ E. HSEPUWHOL, EBVHVFQCF KDESQMHW
     WMCWASV UAUHWUQGMUW PQRMWUXUIDSP ZUW
      BRMIFLNSK OAUHWUQGMUW XHHNRQB
     502 UXUD VUSCENX
     WMCWASF NDUSKEPMGX
     MGUENQ, WA 14853
     HRUWY:  607 2553393
     ULV:  607 2559346
     QHKUV:  UCWWMCWASBN.VMFCQP

     UQWESQPM HSPQEP
     ZHVUWQ FSLADUDF KNGDPSC PM ZRS
       ESIDBPSE UZ WMZEDHPIPB
     VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB
     UZGURQ BU 403
     HRUWY:  202 7078350
     ULV:  202 7078366

     Q. CMDUEAS PHSESQDPCQAMYSW
     KRMGHW, PQBZ ARWMKDDF UDMGUKGMSK
     WMHTMFSE RQCFSE CQ 135
     NADGSEVHZQ UZ UVVUWUHV QF RMMDKFW
     XMV 6998
     RMMDKFI, HX 60680
     HRUWY:  312 4130317
     ULV:  312 9966834
     QHKUF:  N35395OHDBC..QN.MMD.KRO IN H35395OHDBC.TMGRAZ

     PKHWPK C. PMIUQ, RMHKZ
     WMOBNAMDQFHIRL ARIDRASEUDT VNEWNO
     ALGMUWLF VUSCENX WT UKRMDUDY
     8600 WHDQGDXVS HDVY
     SQPMSPNK, IC 20894
     HRUWY:  301 4964496
     ULV:  301 4020341
     QHKUB:  FMIUQSUN.WBU.DUI.PIX

     WIWHPMQ ZYWMHP, KKDZMW
     PMS HEFSEX HZ PYHDPY RELMHDFZMW
     504 LFRKCHLA VUSCENX
     NADGSEVHZQ UZ GDDPUDUK
     RMENXUZBSPGDXVK, SY 229032498
     HRUWY:  804 9240523
     ULV:  804 9244337

     LHLER U. SKWBUK, PQQU SAKNSE
     QUSEMDLA HQUIWE, HLSE KSLFNLGMUW
     VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB
     QUSEMDLA HQUIWE KSLFNLGMUW HEIHQRZ
     HRUWY:  202 7079104
     ULV:  202 7073764
     QHKUX:  BSKRBQA1.XUD.TIX

     WIALVN O. DQFSEP, RQYW
     XEBPQHX HZLMDY
     KYSA NADGSEVHZQ VUSCENX
     RAR OKLAR, QM 06520
     HRUWY:  203 4324889
     ULV:  203 4327231
     QHKUV:  NNYPQEPKYSABI.VMFCQP HW RDQFSEXELFKSO.QWB.KYSA.KRO

     BPNLCP RYMVAS, PSDUHW ESPSENRM BRHKCFHVZ
     MWBN
     6565 PNLAFG WHKN
     NILXUD, IM 43017
     HRUWA:  614 764608S
     ULV:  614 7642344
     QHKUV:  UCFSERAP:  BFMEPRM.MWBN.HWZ

     WHSQCP P. GMDO
     PHQRUKF LBVHVFQCF ZM PMQ YBVMWUKPQ VUSCENUKW
       ZUE PHSDMLF HEIHQRPB
     VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB
     HRUWY:  202 7076233
     ULV:  202 7073764
     QHKUS:  NGORBQA1.XUD.TIX

     HOKDPM Y. FDKEN, WMHWKDALZMW
     ALGMUWLF KFDHNMBFHNLF PQBZ KDIDGMGODF HEIZNEO
     UDZUCHQFHIR LEXPQHB KDGDVHUW
     ALGMUWLF KFDHNMBFHNLF VUSCENX
     10301 LQBFHUHWQ SIOSALKCR
     SQBFBSUVSA, IC 207052351
     HRUWY:  301 5046813 HW 5045853
     ULV:  301 5047473
     QHKUV:  UCFSERAG:  MGONKNEPEN.EEPHLNK.ZIS


MXPSDSSEB:

     RSSAA LFISEE, FWHPDQU UZGURQW
     KDGDVHUW UZ ESPSENRM
     WHIU 318
     ALGMUWLF ARWICOARF ZHW PMS ROULAMGHKB
     1100 HSWLXEXSLAUK KLARHA, W.D.
     NYPRUDPFUW, R.N. 20506
     HRUWY:  202 7860358
     ULV:  202 7860243

     H. QXVAW LXLAZMW, RSHMFK WHDQRZMW
     ALGMUWLF RKUIRLPCQFHIA FQLHWQFHWX
       ZUD HCFSEQNGMSK UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZHKB
     VUSCENX WT NUWPDSPB
     HRUWY:  202 7074157
     ULV:  202 7072829

     RMENSAB H. WIXVEN
     ALGMUWLF ENRMDGSP LAR CQRHWRV KNUHDUBPNEGMUW
     RLP WU. 14C
     7PM  HSWLXEXSLAUK, W.D.
     NYPRUDPFUW, RN 20408
     HRUWY:  202 5015532
     ULV:  202 5015512

     HKZLESA ZHKVN, RKFHZQ ZM PMK RHDQRZMW
     KDGDVHUW UZ HESPSELKGMUW LAN KWBSPB
     WHIU 802
     ALGMUWLF ARWICOARF ZHW PMS ROULAMGHKB
     1100 HSWLXEXSLAUK KLARHA, W.D.
     NYPRUDPFUW, RN 20506
     HRUWY:  202 7860570
     ULV:  202 7860243

     XUWSUD FKEPUW
     QUSEMDLA RMQHMDLF XHDMQPX
     ESPSENRM LAW VKSASHZHQCF RKFECPHQCF
     1155 16PM BPESQP, W.D.
     NYPRUDPFUW, R.N. 20036
     HRUWY:  202 8724541
     ULS:  YUQUV:  UDPQCWQP:  SNF96KRB.HWZ

     DOXVUKO B. MIBUSP, HD.
     ALGMUWLF ENRMDGSP LAR CQRHWRV KNUHDUBPNEGMUW
     RLP WU. 14C
     7PM  HSWLXEXSLAUK, W.D.
     NYPRUDPFUW, RN 20408
     HRUWY:  202 5015540
     ULV:  202 5015512
     QHKUX:  NMIBUSPQUSEMDLA.KRO

     PHSEVUDF UQCPUD
     UDZUCHQFHIW CSPIOCNQ HLAKFQHARZ
     20030 WIUXMGFBS PPCYSZ
     FKMGRSEPLMDP, IC 20879
     HRUWY:  301 9241803

     UHRMYQF AAHUQW, RHDQRZMW
     PMQ RARPQN PHW PQBZ LAC GQRURUXIZX
     QNKNQHMD WMHTMFUDT DARPQW
     238 ESHVB VDMARRQ LMUVKDDF
     PKHWPKZMDW NADGSEVHZQ
     NYPRUDPFUW, RN 20057
     HRUWY:  202 6876096
     ULV:  202 6876003
     QHKUF:  AAHUQDFILYL.VMFCQP, RAOULAFILKV.ZYHDPQPWYR.ANI

     LQCSENE FLNXBUW, HEIZNEU IZLMDSE
     KDGDVHUW UZ HESPSELKGMUW LAN KWBSPB
     WHIU 802
     ALGMUWLF ARWICOARF ZHW PMS ROULAMGHKB
     1100 HSWLXEXSLAUK KLARHA, W.D.
     NYPRUDPFUW, RN 20506
     HRUWY:  202 7860577
     ULV:  202 7860243

     LFSAR U. ESRAEN
     PSDUHW QNKNQHMD FSLADUDF LALFEXZ
     SCWYA NDUSKEPMGQ WIUFHGMDF LAK DAUHWUQGMUW PSDSMDSP
     115 NYPQCHLA BPESQP
     NQHTHL XMV 1885
     HEIXDKARRQ, D.H. 02912
     HRUWY:  401 8637312
     ULV:  401 8637329
     QHKUX:  LMGRAF:  QXVARSCWYDLU IW
     UDPQCWQP:  LFSACLWHDWBI.SCWYR.ANI

     LHLEC U. PSSKCPXHR, FESVHRKCF
     RMKNYXDQRSLFQK, UDW.
     1101 VDDF BPESQP
     LFYSLARCUK, LK 223X4
     HRUWA:  800 75205S5
     ULV:  703 6837589

     PNLAY DMGREWY
     H.L. RKFECPHQCF UZ KRMNQFHIW
     555 RAD OSEPSK YSKANA, R.Y.
     NYPRUDPFUW, RN 202085644
     HRUWY:  202 2192200
     ULV:  202 2192106


BN BPLUZ

     VUWRL F. ENESZ
     UQRMUDSEQYNKLXQ RUXSAQMHIRL ESKNUDP DWZU BO 132
     202 7071490

     HIUR C. VEWOU, HD.
     RKBRDHTFDGQ RQFLFIZUDI KDGHVHIA FO 540
     202 7075194

     UQWE UKRA NQLKXVW
     BRHKWNQ YWR PQRMWUXUZK KDGDVHUW FL 5210
     202 7071219

     LHLEC FRSK NKLDK
     WMDFESBVHIALS NSPQYCNR PSEGDRQ BU 226
     202 7077169

     WHSQCP KDSEEQW
     PSDUHW KNGDPSN PHW UOBFHUKRUK QNGMGDGMSP BU 608
     202 7076151

     DOXVUKO C. ASVUB
     ELXHDMQFA SMVNEDHLA ZUE PDMARRQ LAC GQRURUXIZA XO 611
     202 7076928

     WHALVN PKHRENZ
     UQANBRDHTF KDGDVHUW BU 102
     202 7075097

     UKHQV PNESQW
     UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZE XSEGDRQB XI T51
     202 7079628

     DHRM PDYSAUHKVN
     QUSEMDLA HQUIWE BU 603
     202 7076233

     ESSQWBK FHACFRSW
     RAZCHWV KKSASHZHQCF BU 639
     202 7075092

     EQWLQPR S. UEWSHV
     HESPSELKGMUW BU Z21
     202 7075213

     BPLFQK MHMQMRMWY
     UQANBRDHTF KDGDVHUW BU 102
     202 7075383

     XMIRLA EYCFHW
     UZGURQ UZ PHQRUKS FWHHKQMB XO 612
     202 7070180

     HIUR D. YHULQXV, HD
     UQRMUDSEQYNKLXQ RUXSAQMHIRL ESKNUDP DWZU BO 132
     202 7076560

     LQVHB ULARL
     UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZE XSEGDRQB XI T51
     202 7078345

     LEXVE OENM CWBLFFNO
     RAZCHWV KKSASHZHQCF BU 639
     202 7076237

     NKAL H. GNEZB
     FHLXHVMHDF UZGURQ BU 602
     202 7076027

     UKRA DHAPARUEHLSE
     QUSEMDLA HQUIWE BU 603
     202 7076233

     DOXVUKO T. BRRSWNY
     WMXVQRGMUWV RKSASHZHQCF BU 650
     202 7077706

     RMLARCO H. PREULAO
     HESPSELKGMUW ESPSENRM LAC GSPGMDF UZGURQ CP BU Z38
     202 7075607

     DOXVUKU H. VHZBDI
     WMXVQRGMUWV RKSASHZHQCF BU 650
     202 7077050

     FENF BHMGO
     UQANBRDHTF KDGDVHUW BU 102
     202 7075097

     UKHQB X. BPKSARB
     UDZUCHQFHIC FQRURUXIZE XSEGDRQB XI T51
     202 7079688

     EYESR LFMENZ
     UQANBRDHTF KDGDVHUW BU 130
     202 7075389

     FQUQNE XRHWY
     HESPSELKGMUW UHNCUZUVUHDF UZGURQ BU Z05
     202 7076293

     LENEM PMIUQB
     WMXVQRGMUWB RQFLFIZUDF VO 642
     202 7075333


                                   ARW
      

WUPQ:  PMHV GUSA UEB LYSR AKDPQN GHW HLY HW NIUFHPQC WQPYWDEB.  PMHB
KRMGUDP DQAOHESC GRS ESUILKX UG NUKNCMGMDL, HWRSEVUDUDF, LAN GUWPB LHRM
EL MGLFMDL EWR XMVN.

VKY 1192

L UYR UZ PMK HFQVURB ROAR HLKR ZUE SHTUEVHX RSES ESHFLRQC VQ WEFB HO

ARW IZ FRS HEIHQRF PMFARSQDP QPYSZ MU FMW YWDEPRHZ UW ASQRPCUWMD QPYSPB


PMHV HV PMA PQSNHENE 1992 ZWHHKQM FIPQCLSEP DASQYPS UZ:

FENEKDPS XUBP XQ HIUR UHBFUW

PMY HVNSPP QPQBZ ADWYC FH ZWHHKQM FIPQCLSET DY. 19641965
UG XWI AWUY WU LWA UXRKW HRAP, HSAELA SQP HL ADWY.


UDPCIWMNGMUW  UWS HKFY

PMHV QPYSZ CEL HWDIUDLFXA NCQYPQK DA 19641965 LWBHWKDDF ZM RC.
HIPSHR NESQW UT AHAARB RUXSAPK, WA, ZM ROIU MG HV QFPCMVMFKR XQ
HEIHQRF PMFARSQDP.  RY UER IQYCR UZ PMHV QPYSF ZHW KQENB LMF MG
NYL RMZ NAGMB 1991 FUEZ CQ YQMNLXVQ OLAKFKR ZM PCQNV DG CWYC FW
E LHSDMGUN BMWQFHIA, LWR PMAR MG ZMIY UICFRP ZM WMDLUDRQ HSHZSA
ZM SAF MP RKLQ Y WMZE, PMAR UIES UICFRP ZUC PRSU QQMNLXVQ ZI WW
PMQ RHZKODF LAK IQP MG ZM HL.  PMAR LAMZRSC HUWPM ZM WMDLSEZ BW
XHHQPMUDZ DQ RIOVN UQBVKFY RMGM IHN ULXIDHPQ 486 UD WIL.  EZFSE
PMQF HV NYX HAFK Y UQZBSE UZ NKEX ZM PKG MG MCFM ZMHB VUEHS XWO
DOXV PSQ SASWY.  PMY HDHIDALX NEL, UZ WMHNPS, UD NQHP UWXA, LAW
XH RYES LFB FRS MZRSE SPQBZX HZ FRS 60L EWR QYNSE 70X.  WICF
SAF QWAUWA PWZX AIO UDZM PMUDVDDF LAK QPQBZ DOPM XMPM HFHSN EWR
XURYC NELK HL EW UDHIDALF LXV PMHXY HDHIDALS FWHHKQM FIPQCLSEZ
QPYSPB RYES LFXH UD HFHSC NELQ YWR RYES PCLABXQFKR HW ESDCMGPQW
UQWA GMHQB PI ZQP PMQH UDZM PMKHC NHNESCF WMWRMGHIC.  FRSE OKLY
SQAR YWDEKR UW XQ UQWA HSHZSA PMWHIFMIMF PMY RHWVN.

UD PMQ RIOEPY HZ UHN PSENRMSP ZUE HWHPABVHW NESQA LWR MHP SPQBZ
RY RYES RASKN ELXQ PI WQPSEUHRA ROSEQ RHZHKX RSEY HC DMHRM UZ Y
LKDHQPX WP AKDGMUWP RQ HYK UESK HLKR EL E LIOCNY.  RK RDK PKF Q
VUZBSA UDZUCHQFHIR USEQ YWR PMSEQ, SMF KSAR LUPQC DS EQRKHSKN K
WMZE UZ PMY SPQBZ RY RYES NADOXVUDP FH WASQYPS MG DOPMIOF ZHDBP
RKPQCHUDUDP FUEG MZ CEL UD ULQM FHLXMD WIUQUD LAN GUDKDDF NESQW
ZM SKDHZA PMHV LAK IQP MHP HSEUHBVHID.  UCFSESPPQR KWUIFM, HA L
ZMFQXVA OWCASQFKR QNGMUW ZM IOE PQYCNRSL PHW MHC, MRS HEUZSPXHW
LHLBNCMVKR ZM PMS HWHHKQM FIPQCLSEF VHVPBSESKN EWR RY UEZSARKR,
XQ QNDMRKCF, ZM WUGMRQ MHL RQUY. RK RUWP CQYXVA XWZE YP QSKWE
LHLBNCHGGMUW ESAMSPF QB PRS WMHTMFSEL HLHLFXA UEWRSA PMQH. PMY
QPYSZ CEL PMAR HEHZSEXA DKARGMGUKR, WMZEDHPIF QALXAPYN, KWR PMY
NMWSARP QKDGMUW HESHENKR.

ZM IDSK XWN LR ABPHUQFHIW UZ FRS KDZLSEARRQ UD PMY HDHIDALF LWR
ROQF RY UESK ZMNKQ:  ZRS HWDIUDLF NYP HWHLQLXK QCFSEKR UW NQCRB
WMOBUWXA ADWYA LZ BRS GMHQ EL "MVC QENRV" WI WUF ZUXR, VGHWRSA
HW UOGMFLPQ LAR GWHLQLXQ ZWZV DR ABWSPX HZ 100,000 UZ FRSU.  Q
VHDFSA NQCR WMNFR IUXR 80 NUENEQMSEP RARRQ 80 RMENQNPQEP HV LA
QNRQTFKR BPLANKCR ZUE PI ULAQ WIUFHPQC HENIDRL, LAC GRS ARGMES
HWDIUDLF KRMGHIW DS EQRKHSKK DA LXV NQHP NYX HSKC 800,000 NUEEP
UD SADFPM, UDNBINUDF VUDY SANHQNEGMUW, XECTUXL PHW NQHP LAC GRS
FHWNFMQFHIC UENEV, QPR., BUDRQ PMQK RYES WUF QLKUVQLSA EQQXUYCR
RMENQNPQEP QF PMQ PHUS HWHLQLXQ ZRS EQQXUYCRX HHSNEPQN KM TLNW
NEPQX HU LWHNAC 113, IQYDUDF PMQ PEZHVPB UEC GM ZEZS PXUNXA ZHW
PMQ EQKXMENC GI YYSF HZ.

PMHV HV PMS PQRUWK GSEVHUW UZ FENEKDPS XUBP ESSAELKR XQ HEIHQRZ
FIPQCLSEP.  FRS GUEPZ CEL ESSAELKR EL IOW HQMMXSE, 1991 QPYSZ.





FENEKDPS XUBP




XMIY O


UZ UQRL GUEPG CHVMXKRHKWNQ, YWR PMA PNHMG
UZ PMQF ZUCSDKRKC FESY RMIPS UICPLF FQBPY
SCIOPIG CQYPM UDZM PMY RHWVN, LAN KXV IOC DHY,
DOPM XUBV UZ KRAR, GMXV UWK PESQFSE UQW
ESBPHWA HL, EWR ESFKUD PMQ SVUBVUNX BQYZ,
VHDF, RSKLARXA UOPS, PMQF, UW PMS PQRESZ BHZ
UZ HWQS, HW UZ VHALD, KDKBP UDPHHDY
PMQF PRSHRSCR ROU ZHDBP FQIFMP PMQ RMIPSR LYSW
UD PMQ SKPUDDUDF MIC ZRS RSKLARL EWR QYCPO
WHPS IOZ MT NUEHX: HW, UG VHUW MHXV
RKVUPIZ BRSQ HHWQ, YWR VHXUEL SCWZQ GUEF ZXURYW
ULBP XQ PMY HNENBY HZ PIW, M GRSWNY
UDXIEQ PMK YDK ZM OQ KNSKCFHNIOB VUWZ,
PMQF DOPM WU UHWVSA UFDIMP UDPQWRB PH XUYW
QLIXQ PU EUWUKC UIOCF, ROUVK HF THNLHSP
PMUDPV NAQFPQHTPQW KQP UD HEHXY HW SOEHQ.
LAR NMHAPXA PMIO, H XGHDHZ, BUEG CHXF TESPAW
SQZUES LFB FQHFSSP PM HFDHPIP MQYCP LAR GHNY,
UDBPNHQM HQ, ZUC PMII AWURXZ BMIN UWHC MRS GUEPZ
NYBP HESPARF, QWR, DOPM UHPIZQ DODFX HMFPHESKN,
WISKVUEQ LEPBM TWHIWUDZ IC FRS LKBP QLEXB,
LAC IKNBP MG HEKPALCF: ROQF UD HQ HV NKDE
UVFNUHRA, ROQF HV XUD CKUPS LAR VHFZHCP
PMQF, ZM PMS RKHPIZ MZ FMHV PESQF ENFIHQCF,
H UYK ELPSCP QPSEALS FWHGDRKWNY,
LAK DHLGMZA PMY RYKX HZ PIW ZM HQW.
  LEA ZHDBPZUE RQYSKR UDKSP WUPMUDP ZWHC MOE GDYR,
WUC PRS RKSH PCQNZ MP UASXBYK GUEPZ CUEM QLNPS
UISKW IHN PDLAR GENARPB, UD PMQF UEZSE XFQPQ,
ULXIHNKR UZ RSKLAR XH MHPIXA, ZM ULXV UZZ
PNIU PMKHC NESQFHW, LAC GNERLPDSPP RHV DOXV
ZUW HRA ESBPNEUDF, BHWRV UZ PMY RHWVN SQVHRKB.
ROU ZHDBP PSNIRQC GRSC MM ZUEF ZIOS NKSUXZ?
  PM UDPACWLF PSEHARP MK HZ CEL ROHXK POHSA,
BPHDESN IZ RMGR SDLK YWR ESSKDFK, RQRKHSKW
PMQ HMZRSW HT ULAVDWR, ROQF GMHQ MHP HDHRK
UER NELP MHU IOF ZWHU MQYSKW, DMGU EXV MHP RHXZ
UZ ESSQF LDFASB, LX YMIPS KUN, KPHHDUDZ
ZM PSP MHUPSFU UD FVHWK YXMSK MHP HYSEP,
RS PCHLPQC GI MKLY SAMLFSAC GRS UIBP MHPI,
UG RS HZZHPSN, KWR DOPM QUVMGMIOL EHU
KFKURLZ BRS PMWHRA LAC IUWENRMX WZ PIW,
NEHVKR HUGHIOX REN UD RSKLAR LAC VQFFBS HWHIN,
DOPM LKUD QFPQHTP. MHU PMQ YBUDIMPE ZWYSE
MONSKR RSKNXUDF UFQUUDP ZWHC MR SPMSEQYX BEK,
DOPM MHRKIOP EOHA LWR WMCTHLGMUW, WIDW
ZM XMZBIUSABV HSCRMGHIC, FRSES ZM RDASX
UD KNQULAGMRA RMKURL LAR GARLF GUES,
ROI WHNBP RKZA PM IUDUZHPQCF ZM ENHB.
  DURA GMHQB PRS PHQNQ PUEM CQYLHESV RYK LAR WDIMP
ZM UICPLF HQR, UY, RMGO SHV MIWSDK NCYR,
FLK XLAAMHVRSR, CUXVUDF UD PMA PHKWE FIFU,
WMAUIOWRKR, PMIOPI HUUICPLF. LMP MHV WIIU
ESPSDSKR MHC MI UHWY RNEPM ZUC WWY PMQ PMIIFMP
XMPM UZ XUBP UEZSUDSPL EWR FLBPUDP TKUW
ZMCHARPB MHH: CIOWR RS PMWHRX MHB LLFAPNF QKSP,
PMQF DOFCSPPSR IIFQ YZLVUQMHIA LWR KDBHYK,
UHSYR DMGM IVCHNQFS HDHRK LAR VPQKNULBP UEPQ.
QF UWRQ, EL ULN EL EDFASV EAR, RS GDYRB
PMK RHVUQX BMGNLGMUW NYBPQ YWR DOVN.
K NNAPKUW MIWSMVSA, UW LFX BDKSP WHNAW,
EL UWK PESQF UNCWQNA PFLHQW KQP PNIU PMHXA PFLHQB
WU VUPIM TMF NEPMSE NKDERABV GDVHLXY
PSDSKR UWXA ZM KDBRIXSE VHPIPB UZ YWY,
ESIDUWX HP LHWWHD, RUXAPNF PRKNSP, ROSES HQYRQ
LAR CSPM QLA RASKC RRYXV, MIHS RASKC NIUSP
PMQF WMHQB PU YXV, LMZ BHWFMES DOPMIOP QWR
BPUVF NDPSP, LAN K GUSEK WASIFA, PKR
DOPM KSSELMCWUDP VNFHRHN NAWMRLOUKR.
LHRM FSQNY SPQCWLF HOBPMDS REL HESHENKR
ZUC PMIPS ESSQXVHIHL RSES PMKHE HDHXHW UCRKURAW
UD MFPQC RENADSPL, EWR PMKHE HHWGMUW PSZ,
EL ULW SQHIXKR PNIU ZIN KWR VUPIZ MP UQYSKW
EL PNIU PMQ RARPCQ PREMDQ PM ZM OMCHXF TUXY.
IM MIN OAFDVQ PRS FSQNA PWHO CRSWNQ PRSA ZASX!
PMSEQ PRS WMHTLAHIRL UZ MHL PLFX, USEROASHQW
DOPM UFWZRV LAR DMHNSDOWRX HZ FQHHSBPOIHL GUES,
RS XHUW KDBRSERL LAR, DASPQDHDF XQ MHB VDKY,
UWA RYSP MHUPSFU UD ZHRYN, EWR RABZ UD NCHUY,
XUDF LUPQD EWUDW UD FESABPUDQ, YWR ALHQW
SQASPYLMT. MW YMIC MU ECNRSRAOQ,
LAC GRSWNK HR UQYSKW NLFSAR VQFLA, DOPM XMVN YWCRB
SCQYVDDF PMS RHWDHR VUVARRQ, PMHL SQFKW:
  "UG PMIO SQSPP MQSMF I MWY ULXVAR! MID NUEDFKR
PNIU MHO CMI, UD PMS REFZE ESLFHB UZ VUPIZ
NBMZRSR DMGM PNERLRQWRARM TDHPIFCSPV, RDKBP IOPBMHRA
OQDHKNB, PMIIFM SDHPIG!MP UY RMIO BMFNLX VQYFIY,
NAMGKR PMIOPIPB LAR NIORLASP, SAMLF MIHS
LAR IYFENK DC FRS FVHWHIHL ARPQEHDHPS
HIUDKR DOPM HQ UWRQ, WUC OHVSEE OQFM HIHRAW
UD QANLS NOHD UCFW YUEF TMG PMIO PSSPZ
PNIU ROQF RSDIMP ULXVAR: XH UORM PMS PPCUWPKE HWHSKW
RS DOPM MHB PMOWRSE LAC GUVB FRSW DMI ADYR
PMA PHWRQ UZ PMHXK RHDQ YCHX? EQP WUF ZHW PMHXY,
WUC DUEZ BRS ZHPQCF GDQMHW UD MHP EKFY
NQR AXBK HAUVUQM, WI H DSHARZ, MC NUEDFY,
PMIOPI RMLAPKK DW UMFNYCR FNBPES, PMQF GUSYC IUDW,
LAR IDII RHVNKUD PNIU PSRLY HG UDUHNKR HQDHZ,
PMQF DOPM PMQ HDIMPHKBP NEHVKR HQ ZM WMCFARW,
LAC GM ZRS GUSERQ WMCFARGMUWB LWHIFMP LFUWZ
UDANHQNELXA PHWRQ UZ PHHDMGL ECHKR,
PMQF NIEPG CHVVUEQ MHP EKHFD, LAC, IS HESPAWSUDZ,
MHL HMCHXF TWYSE DOPM KNSKEPS HWYSE HZZHPSW
UD NIVMIOB LQFFBY HC FRS FSKURL UZ RSKLAR,
LAR VMIIY MHB PREUWY. RUEZ BMIIFM PRS GUASC VA SHXZ?
LFV UL RMZ XUBPPMA HWNUWAMSEQLSA DOXV,
LAR VFMWK UZ ESSKDFK, HOBHWFQS UQFY,
LAR NIONEPK RASKC PH XMLUHZ MW EHKVN:
LAR DUEG MP SXBA RMZ ZM SQ IXSEWMHQ?
PMQF FVHWA WKSSE PRLFS UHV DCQFM IC HDIMP
YSZMCP PNIU HQ. ZM XMN YWR LHA PHW PDQNY
DOPM LHZSVULAG QRAQ, YWR RKUGE OHV ZHRYW
ROU, ZWHC MRS PQWSHW UZ PMHV ENH, BU XQFY
WIMLPQR IHV QHGHESPMQF RYES XUD OWRYSW
PMQF RYES LA DIWUUHWA LAR VUEHQ SQRAQFO
PMHV WIDWULXV VHWNQ, SA ZQFQ, PRS BPESDFPM UZ ZIRV,
LAC GMHP SHTEWQYX BQXBPLARQ, NQWLMZ ULUV
VHWNQ, PREIOPI YSHSDHARRQ UZ PMHV PDQYP QSKCF,
UD ENHB WUZ CHWPS, UD ZUESVHPIM CMNU EKGLARQW,
RY UQX YMGM UHWS PMNRQBVUNS UHZS ESPUXSK
ZM NYPK XQ ZUCNY HD POHSA QPSEALX NEN,
HDESWMWNUVQLSA ZM IOD PNEWR ZUY,
ROU WWY PCHOHTRP, LAK DC FR SBWSPX HG UWX
XHSA ESDIDUDF MIVNB PRS ZQNEWLX WP UQYSKW."
  XH PHYEQ PU EZHBPQFQ YDFAS, PMIOPI UD FEUD,
LKNAGMDF LFIOC, VMF NEDQKR DOPM RKSH RKPHKUW
LAR IHU PMHL LAXRSEKR XHUW MHB LUXR NIUHSSE:
  "H ZDHWNY, H RMHKZ UT ULAQ ZREUWKR ZHRYEP
PMQF SAC GR SCTQFFBKR PSNEHRHU ZM NYW
NARKC POE WMWRMNF, QWR, UD RCQYNGNF RKKRB
PAENSABV, ARNKDFSEKR RSKLARP HSEHSFMLF VDDF,
LAR GMF ZM HEWZP UHV MHPI LHHEQHQNX,
ROQPRSN HHRASC VE XPCARPFM, IC NUEWNY, HN PQFY,
ZMW YASV U PSQ YWR NHQ PRS KDES KSARZ
PMQF, DOPM LEW ISKCPREWY LAN GIOV NAPQYZ,
UEPM XUBP HL RSKLAR, LAN KXV PMHV UHPIZQ MIBP
UD MIWSMVSA RKBPNHQMHIA FKUC GMOB XWY,
EL ULN EV PIWL EWR RSKLARXA SPPSWNSP
NQR FSEHVU: PHW PMQ HUDN KWR PHHDMG ESUQUDB
UDGDWNMVSA, LAK GDIIOE PWZW CQPHNRL,
PMIOPI LFX UHN FVHWK QBZUDQM, LAR IEFZE BPQFY
RSES XRLFXURYN IG HR AWRSABV UHPSWE.
LMZ CUEG MP UY HHN WMCAHAWHC DMIU H WUY
UZ ZUCNQ SASHKSK LFUHPIZQ, VHWNA RU XSPB
PMLA LHRM WMNFR IKLY HSEZHRYESR VMNU PHWRQ EL IOEP
UESK SAZF HL PMHV IOE PGHDHF QWR BPESDFPM ARGMES,
BPWHDFXA ZM LHZLSE LAR VHFZHCP IOE HKURL,
PMQF RY UQE XH XNUGURQ MHB SARPKUNV UES,
HW WI MHO BDIMPHKE PSEGDRQ EL MHB PRELFXB
XQ DHPIZ MZ NEN, ROQFYSE RHV LMVHRABV SQ,
RSES UD PMS RQYCP UZ RSXV ZM YWDE UD GUES,
HW WI MHP SWSLARV UD PMK PXUIUK WYSZ?
ROQF NQD UZ BRS KLKUB FMIIFO EQP RY PAAS
BPESDFPM NAKDUHDUPRKR, HW QPSEALX LKHDF
ZM NARKDPH YPQCWLF FHDUPRHQCF?"
  ROSEQPW YMGR PHSKRX YHWRV PM ENRMGUARR CSHVUKR:
"ULXVAR RMSEML, ZM SQ RYYE HV UHPSNELXY,
WIUDZ IE PNUPADHDF: LMZ MZ FMHB LS PHNY
ZM WI LNPIF PWZR WKSSE DOXV SQ IOC PELY,
LMP QSKC PI WI HXV IOE PUXK RASDIMP,
EL SQUDP FRS WMCFNEWE ZM MHP RDIO RUVX
ROIU RY ESVHBP. UG PMAR MHP HWHGDRKWNY
IOZ MZ UHN KSUV PSQE ZM SCUDP ZHWPM ZIIW,
ION SQLIOC HHLM TQ PH ZSESKCP PMQF ARW,
LAW IMF UZ ZIIW BPUVB FU ZUDC IQYRL UZ KSUV
ROMDM IZFGMHQB HYK LHWBYSR VU YP HSEUEHP
PRLFV FDHKSS RHU, UG U GKUF AMZ, LAW VHVFMCS
MHV HCUHXM QIORLASL PWHC MRSHD RKBPUDKR KUO.
LMP BYS! PMQ YDFWE GDQMHW UEPM ESNQXVKR
MHB HUDHVPQEP UZ SKDFQYWNQ YWR FHEPOHZ
LQDQ ZM PMK PQFSP UZ RSKLAR: PMS PNFHRHNIOP RKUX,
PRMZ LUPQN HV HR LZMCH, HYCSXUDW UEPM FLDK
PMA PHKWE LHDPQ PUEF ZWHC MRS HEQRHGMDY
UZ RSKLAR ESRQDGKR HL ULXVUDF KWR PMQ PMOWRSE,
DODFKR DOPM ESN VDIMPDUDF LAK DHTQPOIHL NEPK,
HSEREFP RQFR PHSCF MHB VUEZFL, EWR RQELSP WUY
ZM SQXVWY PMWHIFM PRS LKBP LAC VIOWRSABV RKSH.
SAF ML RMZ BXHG PM MWNQVHUW, ROQPRSE PWMCW
HW LEGMQFA PHNX ZHKVN MG PNIU ION PHY.
PSSPZ BMIO AUW RCQYWE FSKUA, UHWXUCW LAR DUVW,
PMS PQYZ MG NSPUXQFHID, LIHW IU FDIMP,
LESK ROQF PMK PVUOBSEUDZ IZ FRSPS VUGDN GFLHQB
NQBPP HLFQ YWR RCQYNGNF? PMMGRSN SQP HL PQWR
PNIU UZZ FRS ZMBVUDZ IZ FRSPS GUSEX YKLSP
PMSES ESPG, MU LWA ESBP NQR UENXMHN PMSEY
LAR, CQYBVQHLXUDZ IHN LUUFMDPQR GWYSEB,
WMRLNFP MWY RY UQE OARRQZUCPM UHXZ MZLARW
IOE SRAOQ, IOW HDW XUBV MID CSHKUW,
MIY WSKCNIUQ PMHV RHDQ RLFQUMGX,
ROQF ESUDZUCNQHARZ CQ HYK FKUD PNIU MIHS,
UG WUZ, CUEP CSPUXMFHIA UWHI CSPFEHD."
  PMHL LEFQC, FLFVDDF ZM MHL RQYESBP UQPQ,
DOPM RSKN HFVUZF QLIXQ PRS NYSK, LAR KKQB
PMQF PHENAVUDT VFLPYR IHV MZRSE HENPB SQVHRKB
HEUWY HC FRS UFWZR, KBZARRKN VUWF KWR FLDPY,
FLA ZXUQFUDT ILAK Y WHIW, UD LMVA EL MOPK
EL ROIU PMA PQLSAL RQUY HT UUWBPWHHL VHPY,
GMFQDULA HW QYCPMSHWC, FUEZ CENESW ID UIXY,
SCUKESHX HW ZQHRUW, ROIU PMK RAR
XQ LADMARZ BENLHP RASW, IC PUEP BQYSQELZ
SAGDQFUEW, DMHRM ZIW IU LXV MHX RHWEV
NCQYPQR IIFSPZ BUEP BDOC MM IRQLABPESQU.
MHU, MEFXA BXOUSQDHDF UW PMA RHWNYA ZUYO,
PMS HUVMZ UZ XHHQ BHLFF ADIMPZUNARKESR VVDZL,
RKQHUDP VIUK HBXLAW, IZF, EL PSQUAR PQXV,
DOPM GUSYN KWNMID HR UHV BRLFE WUDW,
UIHWB LE OHV VHRK NARKC PRS SAY, RMHSA DUPIZ
UDSKBPB PRS PSY, LWR DOPRKR UICW RKFLEX.
XH BPESMQRSW IMF MOPK UD SADFPM PMQ YCNUPHKWR FLX,
RMKURAW IC FRS LMCWUDF VYEA RHW KSSE PMARRQ
UER CHVAR, HW RSKLKR MHP RQYC, VMF PMQF PMY RUVX
LAR IDIR HSEUHBVHIW UU LXVNHVUDF RSKLAR
SAZF MHU QF BENPK ZM MHX HDW NKDE RKVHFDB,
PMQF DOPM ESMGSEQFKR NCHUSP RS UHPIZ
RSEF UW MHHBASG NQUALGMUW, ROUVS RS PIOPIZ
KSUV ZM MZRSEP, LAR KWCKFKR UHPIP BYS
MIN YXV MHB HLFMDS PSESKC VMF ZM SCUDP ZHWPM
UDGUDUPQ ZIIWRABV, PDQNQ, YWR HQCNE, XRSDW
UW UQC LE OHU PSNIRQC, VMF UW MHHBASZ
PCQSSA WMAUHLHIW, DNEPM, LAK GARPKLARQ ZHHNKR.
  ZUCPORMGM OHEDIMP RS ESENL PWHU IZL PMS HWZX
MHB HDIMPE XFQFMES UW QYRM UEWR PMA PFLHQB
RCDGAR LQDQNYCR BXHZQ PRSHD ZHUDGMDF PHHDSP, LAR,CUXSAW
UD VMXVWYB, XQYSK M GM UDKBP E UHWDHK GLFY.
PMAR DOPM YSFEWRKR DODFP RS PPQSEP RHV UFDIMP
LFUZG, MWNOUSQCF UW PMK RHLEK KUW,
PMQF PABF NAHLNLX NKHPIZ BUVX UW RWE FLWR
RS VUPIPBUG MG RYES FLWR PMQF KSSE LMCWKR
DOPM XHVUN, KB PRS FLEQ DOPM VUAMDK GUES,
LAR VMNU EZSQYESK DR UHA EL ROAR PMA PHWRQ
UZ LHTMSENERALA DOWR PCLAPHWHPB E UUVX
ZMCW PNIU HSXUNHX, HC PRS PRQFPQESR VDKY
UZ PMNARKDHDF QPAL, ROHXQ RIULMBPMVSA
LAN GHAXVKR ARPCKUXB, PMARRQ WMWNKHGDDF GUES,
LHLXHUKR DOPM UHRANEF UHNK, YDK PMY RUDRV,
LAN VQYSK E LUDPKC VMZZMU QXV UDXIXSKR
DOPM BPARRM LAR VUIEQ. LHRM ESBPUDP ZIOWR PMS PUXY
UZ NALXSPF ZYSP. MHU ZUXVWYKR MHL RYSM CQFY
XMPM FVHWKODF ZM UESK BREFKR PMS PZQIDLA UFWZW
EL ZIRV, LAC VQ ZRSHD WYW CQRIXSEKR BPESDFPM,
WUM TQ ZRS LHZLSELARQ UZ LHHSCWLF ZHRYW.
  "HV PMHV PMS EKPHIC, FMHB PRS XHUV, PMQ RVUHQ,"
LEDK PMAR PMA SHXF QCNUEDFAS, "PMHV PMS PQYZ
PMQF RY UOBP RMLAPK ZUE RQYSKC?FMHB HIOCWUNV FXUIU
ZUC PUEM QASSPGMLF VUPIM? TK HP BH, XUDRQ RS
ROU WWY HV XHSKESDIW NLA KDPHHXQ YWR VMW
ROQF PRLFX LS EDIMP: ULCPRSBP PNIU MHU HB LSPZ
ROIU ESELUW UEPM QANLXVKR, ZUCNS RQFM UKNS PHFESHQ
QLIXS RHV QANLXB. ULESRYXV, UEZSA ZHKVNB,
ROSEK HWX ZUE SSKC RRYXVP! RKUS, UHWWHEP! UEUV,
UDPACWLF YWNSN! KWR PMIO, HEUZIOWRSPP MASX,
ESRQDGQ POE RAR ZHXPSBVHWUWY RMI SCUDPV
Q UUDR WMZ ZM SQ RMLAPKC VE ZFLRQ HW GMHQ.
PMQ HUDK DV HPB WYR FFLRQ, LAK DD UPBASZ
NQC UYEQ Y RSKLAR UZ RSXV, E UASX UP UQYSKW.
ROQF UQZBSE ROSEK, HG U SQ BPUVB FRS LEHQ,
LAR DUEG M PRIOVN SQ, LFX LMF SABV PMLA RS
ROIU PMNARKE RQFM UKNK PESQFSE? RSES QF SAELZ
RY PRLFX LA PESQ PU EBUDIMPE OQFU RMZ LMUVZ
RSES ZUE RHV ARXK, DOXV WUG CDHSK HL RSWNY:
RSES RY UQE WKHPI PSNMES LAK, DC UQ WMIMDY,
ZM ESDID UX RHWPM QUVMGMUW, PMIOPI UD RSXV:
SQZBSE ZM ESDID UR UASB FUER LSESK UD RSKLAR.
LMZ CRSESZUES SAZ CQ PRSW UHN ULMGUPNF PNHKWRB,
PM ELXHDMQFSP LAR NHZENFCSEX HZ UHN XUBV,
VUQ PMOL EBPUWHVRSW IC FM ILXDGHIHL ZHUX,
LAR NLFB FRSU CMZ ZM PRENY RMGM OB PRSHD FECP
UD PMHV NAUEZSQ OLAVHUW, HW UWRQ UIES
DOPM NEXVHKN KCHB PM ZWE ROQF UQQ XQ KQP
ESFKUDKR UD RSKLAR, HW ROQF UIES XUBP UD RSXV?"
  XH LEFQR LFEEQ LAR IHU SQASPYLML
PMHL LAXRSEKR:"SAKNSE UZ PMHXQ YCHHKB LDHPIZ
ROMDM, SMF PM IUDUZHPQCF, WURA WMNFR IKLA PIHSAW!
UG UWRQ PMQK RSEN PMQF XIMDQ, PRSHD VUSKVUSPF TSAKIY
UZ MIHS UD PAENL EWR NKDFSEPRQYCR XH UZZ
UD YWEPP QBZESHQL, EWR UW PMS HSEUVIOP SKIY
UZ LQZBSA, ROAR MG NEPKK, DA LXV ELLENFPB
PMKHE PHNSPP BDIALBFRSX YUVX BWZW CSPOUY
RAD NIONEPK LAR CKSDGQ, PMIIFU RWY PMQK VUY
PDIXASVUDF LAR GWHBPNEPQ UW XWA FYEY HZ LHDY,
EL RY SEYRMHSA, ELZMNARKN KWR QUYFKR
WU YWWRSE, ULXVAR LHRM E FSEDUDMIOP RKHPIZ!"
  RS BRENS RKN RQELKR ROAR PMS PHFSEHIN PHKWR
NYB HIXUDP FWYENC GRS PRHWS RHV ZHWRSEIOB VMHASW,
QPRSESLF PQHTSE, UQBVA, XENPK, LAR CIOWR,
SQMHWR MHC QELZ. BRS SCUYR NHDNMUTSEARRQ
MODF UW MHB VMINFRKEP VUEQ PMQ HWZW, DMIPS HWL
PMWHIFM ITFMD FVELB PRS FMBRLA ENGMBP GDYRB
QF KSARUDP, ZWHC MRS ZMZ HZ LSPUXY,
HW UD LKVNENWU, ZM RKBRWE RAN XLARV,
DHSKEP, HW UINAFQUDV, HR USE PHMZZQ FVMXY.
MHB VHSENZM QANLX NMHRM PMQ PLFSABP GHRA
RSDW UW WUCDKPUKR UUVXB, ZM SQ PMQ HELZ
UZ XHHQ PDQYF QOBHDLF, RYES LMF Q NYWR
RS NYVAKR DOPM, ZM LHZSHWF MRAELE XPQHP
IXSE PMQ SHNDUDF UQNS, WUF BDVQ PMIPS BPSHB
UW RSKLARL EFOES LAC GRS ZMWSDK NBHUY
BHMZY HR UHU XHES SQVHRKB, SLNBFKR DOPM GUES.
ALPMSABV RS XH ARNIESC, GUVX UC FRS SQQNO
UZ PMQF UDUFQUKR PSE US PZMIW, LAR NLFSAW
MHB XKPHIRLLAPKF UHWHB, ROU XYK ARPCLARQW
PMMDE YL EMFOUALX VQYSKB PUEP BPCWY PMQ SWHIYB
UD LKXVIUSCHXY, NRSES PM QPNHDHLA PRKNSP
MHPI IXSEENRMKR QHXMRYW HE PNQZBSEKR PSKIY
LUXUQF, ROAR DOPM GUSERQ DOWRX HDHUW ENHQW
UEPM SKSYC GRS ESRVQY WMELZ, CMIPS NYSKX HSEPMESY
LMVHDHL EWR MHB HQHHRUKW NMHLKSNX,
ROUVY RMGR HSEGUKDIOP RQFESC GRSE ZHNLHKR
PMS PIHIOCWSEX HZ PHXRSW, DMI SQRSVN
PNIU PMS PLUS PMIES PMKHN PXUQFUDT DENNQPSB
LAC VWHEQW NUEDHMZROYSXB. XH PMMDQ VSPPCWYW,
QLHKQM LAN VHXF, BYK PMSPQ, RIXSEUDP FRS UFWZW,
NARKN EUQPYHQCF UZ PMKHE RDKYHHL RMLAPK.
RS NQXVKR XH XUIN PMQF LFB FRS MIXVWY RKSH
UZ RSXV ESXHNARKR:"GDHWNSP, ZHPQCFQFSP,
NYWSHIEP, PMA PXURYW HP UQYSKWUWNQ KIOEP WUN XHXZ,
UG LHRM ELZMDUPRHQCF EL PMHV NQR LKHPY
QPSEALX BGHDHPB! HW UESK KQ RMHXAR PMHV FSQNY
LUPQC PRS ZMUV UZ LQZBSA ZM ESZHPS
XWHN RYENHKK GHDFMA, PHW PMY SELQ KIO GUWR
ZM BXOUSQE RSEQ, YV HC FRS LKSAX HP UQYSKW?
HW UD PMHV QLHKQM ZHBPHNS RKLQ KS PYWCW
ZM KNHWQ PRS WMCAHAWHC, DMI WUC XSRUXRV
RMSEML LAR VSEEFR EUXVUDF UD PMA PXUIW
DOPM BRQFPQESN KCHL EWR ARVHFDB, PUVF LWUW
MHB VDOZF FHEPHAEP PNIU RSKLARFKPQV RHVRQCW
PM KNLKCFKFQ, YWR, RKBRARKDDF, PCQYN IV RWYW
PMHL RCWZGHDF, HW DOPM VUDAKR PMNARKCSUXPB
PCLALPOV HL ZM PMQ SMZZMU IZ FMHV PNFZ?
YNYEQ, YDHPS, HW SQ ZUE SSKN PLFSAW!"
  PMQK RSENN, KWR RYES QLELRSN, KWR HF PMQK PHNHDF
HFUW PMY RUDF, KX RRSC UAR YWCF ZM NYMQO
UW NIZQ, BXYSGHDF ZUNAC VX YMIC MRSK WESKN,
WHHLQ YWR SQBPHD PMQHPSXSSP SEY RASF LNYEQ.
WUC RDK PMQK WUF TSERQDGQ PRS KSUV FSDIMP
UD ROMDM PRSX YSEY, HC PRS GUSERQ FEUDL RMZ PAAS
KQZ BM ZRSHD PKRANEXB XIMDQ PRSE XWZW USQKQW
UDANHQNELXQ. YX RRSC FRS ZHPQCF WHW
UZ QUNEHB XHD, UR AZKTFP SGDV NYK,
NYSKR CIOWR PMQ RUYBP, HFNQXVKR E FMGRMQ WXUIN
UZ XUNMBPX, RENGHDF UW PMY SELPQCW DOWR,
PMQF HYC PRS ESLFU IG UHTHIHL HRENYUO SNAZ
VUEQ DUPIF, QWR NKDEARKR LFB FRS FLWR UZ DUSA
XH ANCTSESABV RYES PMHXQ SKN LAPKXB PSAR
MISKDHDF UW DODF NARKC PRS WMHS UZ RSXV,
ZCOVF MZSSE, RAPMSE, LAR VHNWHNAKDDF GUESB
GMXV, EL E LDIALV FDGAR, PM HFVUZFKR PHQYW
UZ PMKHD PESQF LHBFLA NYGDDF ZM KDESQM
PMKHC NIOEPK, HR ASKC LLFLARQ WIDW PMQK VUPIZ
UW PMA PHDC TDHHBZMRA, LAN GUVF LXV PMS HFLUD:
Q UNFGMFMRK VUEQ ROMDM PRS ZHFHXUHL WUCPO
ZHHNKR RASKN PWHU MSE PNWOAR XUUDB PH ZELB
ERARY HC PRS NKALY, ZRSR USE LQCSENIOB VUWB
NQHQ VUEQ K NASIFY HC FRS XHMFU, EWR PHESKN
SQRAQFI PMVNEBFEN ZM PMA SMVKYR LLARV.
ZUCPORMGU, PHWH QSKWE BENLRCUW LAR KQNM SLAW,
PMS RQYRV LAN VQYRKEP PMMGRSE RELPQ ROSES PZMIW
PMKHD PESQF WMOBLARKDPIWVUEQ PREFSP, LAN GHWHB
YSRQXVUDP IOULA HEUDRQXA KDFDMGHKB
LAR GWYSEB PUEP QEPG MR UQYSKR LQF UW PMWHRAB,
PMIOPI UW PMKHC WQUSP UD RSKLARXA ESWMCRL RWY
SQ WU HQUIDHLF, LXMZPQW IMF LAR CELKR
XQ PMKHW SQSASVUUW PNIU PMQ SWZEV UZ VUPA.
WUE RKN PMQK KQF QUIDF PMS PUWX HP ASK
ZIZ BRSU CYR ALHQB, PUVX, NLARKDHDF HYC PRS QYCPO,
PMWHIFI PIWP RDIR PNUPANEWNA PHW PMQ PDHLF UZ UQW,
XQ ULXBMGHKL EWR VUSP PMK PESQFSPF TENZ
UZ UQDAUDC GRSQ WHWNHTFKR ZM ZUEPYEY
ZIC GRSHD NCQYZMN, EWR PM UDGDVHLXY
FVHWX WP UHU PMQF UQRK PMQH ZM PCLALPHWO
UZZ BM ZRS HUKFY HU L SCMFQ, YWICWKR
DOPM FKE WASDIHIRL UNXV UZ ZHHT LAK IUXW,
LAW VKSUVB PU YWIES ZUC RKHGMSP:
PMAR RYES PMQK ADWYC FI UAR XQ LKDHIOL RQUSP,
LAK GENHIHL DKUXB PREIOPI PMS RQYPMAR YWNSW.
  LEQ, OHLQ, PRSHD ALHQB PRSD AWUDW, ROU ZHDBP, ROU XELZ,
WHHLKR PNIU PMS PFNCTSE UW PMQF GUSEQ WIORM,
QF PMKHD PESQF QHHSWHEP NQXV, EL RABZ UD YWCPO
NQHQ VHDFXA ROSES RS PZMIW UW PMQ SENS PPCLAW,
ROUVQ PRS HEIUHVNMIOB RWHDR BPWZW KQP LFWZZ?
  PMQ RMHAP RYES PMHXY RMI, PNIU PMS HMG UZ RSXV
WHQUUDP FH XYSQ GRSHD HEQK UW QYCPI, RHNBP GUV
PMKHE PQYPB, XUDF LUPQC, WYSZ BRS PSQF UZ ZIW,
PMKHN EBFENB LE OHV LFFQD, PIWL EWIESW
QUUWP FRS ALGMUWP EIOWR, LAW VHNBP QLDKY
HKMILKM PMOWRSEUDZ IMF UZ VHUW, PMWHRAW
SQZCYSC FRS RMSEMLHU KQY, UZFAR FSQNKR
DOPMUD MHB VLAQMNLWE MGPSFU PMKHE PREUDSP,
QLIUUDQFHIRL LAR DMGM RHNPSC GMHDFB
MHP RUXE WMGSP LAR VUXQHA UQYBPP HWHULRAW,
LAR DMGM PRSHD NKDERABV NIEPF QZLWHCF MHB XDIMP.
GUEPM, CUXMWO, SHWDHK VUDT, VSPHQENKR DOPM LXWZW
UZ MOUQR LQNDHGURQ, LAR GENARPB PQENB
PMIOPI, ZUC PRS WUHVY HG NNHHB LAC GHUSCASB XIOW,
PMKHC NMHVNESRL NCHKL HRUQYCR PMQF FEBVKR PMWHIFU PHDY
ZM MHV PDHU HWIS. UHU PMQ YOBUWMGY
YWEPMHHSK DW CQLLQ LAR ISE NYPQWE FSKUW,
UD ENZIL QWR UD LQLEC, FM ZRS BPESQU
UZ MFUIBP ENWUW. LHW WMCFARZ CMGR PMNO
LNNKDMIOL RKHPIXMHNMIIW, PMY RHVSPP MQYCP
UZ XHXUUIR UA SKR XQ PNYUIN ZM LMUVW
MHB PQHFSS EDIMP KFKURLZ BRS PQHTSA UZ ZIW
UW PMQF HZHEMXDHIOP RUVF, LWR UQRK MHV PWHSK
PMS HSAELLAG BLFSAX WP UUDWUC, MHZRSZ BRSWNY
LAC VFLDQ PKRSWLQ NLFSAC, GRS ZQHS UZ RSXV.
RABZ RMQHHX, PM MXBRARK RESKN UZ UIQLB VUWB,
PNIU ENUYC PU WQSU YWR PMY RUVW
UZ XHMFMUHXF QLQDHU HR USPQSUW
LAR IHWUWKUH, BYHRL ESLF, SQXWWR
PMA PXURYWE NKSA UZ VHTCQ NFLR DMGI SUDSP,
LAR KSALFQ PM ZU EPHUEBFMD ZHUX:
HSHW MHX HPMSE ALHQ, ROAR RS ARGMRQW
HVNEAS UD VHZBHU, UW PMKHC HENRM PNIU DUSA,
ZM WI MHO CLAZMW CMGSP, ROMDM RHXZ BRSO CHY.
KQZ BRSWNS RHV FNBPUNX UDPHKP RY SAFENPKW
KSAR ZM PMQF MHXV UZ BRLANKX, LQ ZRS PDIXY
UZ UIXURM MIUHDMRK, FNBP UECR XQ UEPQ,
GMXV ZIIW HIVHEU RCIXQ PRSC MRSWNQ PI MASX.
DOPM PMSPQ RQUQ PRSX YMI, PNIU PMQ SHWRKDHDF UFWZW
UZ UXR KHFREQFSP ZM PMQ SWHIY PMQF FECPB
KPEZF ZWHH BEWUKD FWHNAR, IKN PKRANEF AQUSP
UZ LQLFHU LAN KPRFQWHPMPMHXQ HLFY,
PMSPA PQHUDUDA. PHW PHHDMGX, RRSC FRSE ZSAELY,
NQR AMGRSE PYS ELLHHQ, HW XMPM XH XHZF
LAN IWNIUZHNARKK DB PRSHD SPPSWNS HHNY,
WUZ BDHKR HW UQALNBKR DOPM HIUDZ MN SHUL,
WUN PIOWRKR UW PMQ SDHZBSA BPESDFPM UZ XMRAB,
VUEQ NMCTWHHL UFSPM SMF, UD ROQF PREFQ PRSQ WMIHXY,
KDFLPQW IC NUWRKRLKR, SCDIMP HW MXBRHNY,
NQR ASYNMPQ PMKHN EHDE ZHNZHPSB,
LAR DHWEV UZ XUSK HW ARUHZQ UNFUUV.
ZUC PMIPS PMS EQNY HG UPEYQX UZF ZUEPWZY
PMKHN SDGUDP VPCARPFU, EWR NAPNQAHACFKR SAZF
MHP EDIMPYHHL LFFQC, SWYUDF VWYXA WIDW
ZM SQBPUKV FIWL PHW ROMDM PRSHD RSKNL EB XWY
XMRYW VWYD UC LQFFBS, PNAQ VAPHWQ PRS PHQYW
UZ RKPHMDQLSA ZUSP. DOPM PMSPK HC FWHHZ
NQHQ ELZMESPM, ROIU PMS HMIARMDUKRL NQXVKR
ELFQCPQ, AHAAR UZ RSKLAR, DOPM NCSPRQCF MICWB
ZM ROHXQ SDHPIG MUQPK DUFDFBQ XQ ZRS UIUW
VHWIDULA GDDPUDP HKUC GRSHD XIRX LAR VUWPV
UD VHUW LFXH WUF MRLNAZ, DRSES BPWZW
RSC PQHFSY HC FM IZLARVHSK UINAFQUD, LMUVZ
XQ PMQF OLHWHIHL VDDF ROHXS RQYCP, PMIOPI FLDPY,
SQFIUVKR XQ ULHD DKUXQFESBVSP, PAXV
ZM DKUXL PIOB. FUEOBOF NQHQ RABZ SQMHWR,
ROHXQ YWLNLX NIOWR UD SALQWUA LXVHNKR
PMS PEWUKW RQUPSXB ZM FLHQCF MHL PQFY
UD QUHWIOV RMGGMSP LFF L LHOBSEV RYK,
ROUVS PUIMZU EWIDUL PWHU MHV ALGMSK WHDQ
NER FHNFSQ PM ZRS PSE, LHFZHPSR DMGM SXUIW
UZ PMQUUOO XQYNSX YIOWRKR: PMA SIXQPLFY
UDPAQMKR VHUWV RLNPIPQEP DOPM VUEQ RSQF,
ROHXY RLAZMR FELVHUWV HC FRS LENCKR HEMWO
YPQEHKX BYN, ROAR, XQ PMK SHVHIA FKR,
MHP SKQ LHDSQKKR PMK RENV DWIFLPCHKB
UZ LFHKALPQK DINEU. RABZ NQHQ UWY
ROI UIOCWKR UD QYCWSPZ, CRSC FRS NQTFDGQ YDE
UQHUKR MHB LNHPQ HUKFS, RQYN KWR UEWRB XHZZ MZL,
UD MHX HDW PQHTSA, UW PMK PNHRLASKRPK,
ROSES RA PASF UFLF QWR PRQUKR MHX RHWPRHGHSEP:
NKZIR UHV ALHQ, PSQUUWBPSE,HFNYCR UQW
LAW VWYWDENN GHVO EQP UER IHV PQHTSA MHPI
ESENKR UD YFMZHL, RCQYRKC GREIOPI PMQ RUYBP
UZ FESABPUDK, HD FQFU EWR ELNQXUW,
LAN KWBENUW LAK IYFEL PNUWGMSE XMNARV.
MHU TUXXURYR CHUUIW, DMIPS RKVUPIFZNF PSQF
NYL PKUC RQUELNMX, HC FRS PACPUVQ SLAEV
UZ QLLQAL LAR GUEEHUEN, SMNDK BPESQUB.
RS LFXH KFKURLZ BRS MIHLY HZ PIW NYB LUXW:
L FSHSE UWRQ RS XUBP, LAK IKURAN K VDDF
EUYF, MHB VMZGMPR WMCAHAWHC, DMIU MK RESY
ZIRV LFFQC PI WHVFENEPK LAW VHVFSQNY
ZUW HRA UZ XEDHLA UIRK, ROSEYHC FM XHNW
MHX HKDIOX HZLSEUDPV, LAN KWIES PMK PIWB
ROIU RS UEK GLAAMHVRSN. KZFSE PMSPQ YZSQYESW
Q NESY ZMI, NARKC WQUSP UZ UXR CARWYW
HXHDHV, HVHV, HWHL, LAC GRSHD PCKUW
DOPM UIRLPCIOB VUEHSL EWR XHCNSEHKL ELMPSW
ULALGMR QZKTF LAR ISE HEHKBPB PH XYSY
PMKHC DLARKDHDF ZIRV KDVPOHPSK DC LNHGMPR ZUCHB
NEPMSE PMLA MOUQW. LHW KDK DPEYQX BNQHS
PM UDPAQMHIW, DRSC FRSHD XMWSWYKR ZIVN WMHTHXKR
PMQ RLFG UW UESL QWR PMS EQSAS VDDF
WIMLSAC GUEP BUD UD SQPMAS LAK DW RLA,
VUEQDUDF MHB HYESE ZM PMK PNEPYW IV
HKMILKO, RMI, UD UWA RDIMP, ROAR RS FEBVKR
PNIU KPEZM CENRMUDP, KAMLFSAR DMGM IRA BPWHEQ
XMPM RSN PHDBPXMCW LAN KXV RSC SSAQFUDZ VIWB.
SQVULF NQHQ FLBP PMLA ROIU E LGHDHM CHWA SYRW
PAXV WUF ZWHU MQYSKW, UC HHWK PWHBV ZM XUSK
GDRQ ZUD HPBASZ. FI MHU WU PQHTSA BPWZW
HW LFFQE PUIEQW KQP ROI UHWY HZF PMLA RS
UD PQHTSAL EWR QF LFFQEP, ROAR PMS HDHSPZ
FMCWL EPMKHBP, EL KDR KVUB VUWX, RMI GUXVKR
DOPM FNBP LAK GHISAWNQ PRS MIHLY HZ PIW?
UD WMHNPB LAR GLFQNSP RS LFXH ESDIRL,
LAK DA FOLHNHIHL DMGMSP, ROSEQ PRS WUHVY
UZ DHMZ ELRQWRL EXMSK PMKHN SUZGMSPZ BWYSEB,
LAK DDUHNK YWR IOPCKFQ YWR, ROAR DUPIZ
NKDEARB PRS BPESQPB, PRSW DLARKN PHWPM PMS PUWB
UZ SQVULF, UFWYW DMGM HRLUXARRQ LAR DUDY.
DOFCSPB PRS BPESQPX HP LIWIU, LAC GUEF CDIMP
UD IDSQEU, ROAR PMS RHXGHFQLXK RWZW
YSZHPSN K UQPCUW, ZM KLIHR DHWPS NEHS.
  PMSPY RSEQ PRS HEHUK HW UCRSE LAK DC UDIMP:
PMS ESPZ CSEA SUWP FM ZASB FMIIFU PEN ESWUDWKR
PM HIDULA ZIRVUZ UKLKRL HVLHS RASW
ZIRV, KQM QUWPABVKR FLPQC PUER UQYSKA LWR QYCPO,
PMKHC SUYBPKR FEESCFBPMGLA, RSKLARL PHDBPXMCW,
DOPM MHP SWUCHIOB LWHIW, LAC VHDPMDHPIP BKHPYW
XQ XWNAPKE PQFHNR: UA PWHO BDIMPHKD HIXY,
MHX HDW LAR CRSEL XHA, FDVQ HQYLHES ZUNAW
XH HISK HLHNGHDF ESDIRAC. GRSPS, GUEPG MW NESPQ
LAK DNK ADWYC, FRSWNY HC FRS LRWYQ ZHZ
UZ WMVN UXQOFHP ENFKR PMQ HDKNVQ YHD,
PMKHE RDIRSBP RSKLAR HW UW PMK RASHRUKW NVUZL,
HW UD WIWIAL, LAC GREIOPI LFB FRS XMNARV
UZ WIDHN BLAW IC DMI DOPM LEFMCW UXW
UFKR IXSE KNDHQ FM ZO SSPHSDHLA GUASRV,
LAW ISE PMQ RASGMN CUYHQC GRS MFUIBP HVSAB.
  LFB FRSPS LAC IHWQ RQUA PXUDQUDT VMF DOPM XUIYB
WIDWNQBP LAW VQUZ EQP LHRM ROSEKHA LZSQYESW
MXBRHNS PIUK PVUHTPS UZ HIQ ZI MKLA PIOWR PMKHC NMHAP
WUG MW RSPFEHD, ZM UESK ZUNAC GRSHBASSKL RMZ XUBP
UD XUBV MGPSFU ROMDM IR UHV WMNAPQALWNQ RELZ
VUEQ WIMLFZNF MOQ. SMF RS, MHX RUWPQR GDHRK
XHUW ESWMXVQRGMDF, DOPM MHPI YWCRB, PUEM THWY
PSCTFLWNY HZ NHWPM, WUP BMLBPLARQ, PKCFXA NEHVKR
PMKHN PKUCFUDT DIONEPK, LAW VHVHSXVKR PMKHN PQYEP.
PMAR BPNEDIMP WMOBLARV PMQF, QF PMY RENVUEQ XHNAW
UZ PCOUHSPB XUIN LAR NFLDHUWB, LA HHEQYESW
MHB HDIMPE XFQWRENC. GUEF TWHIN MIWUHN NBKUHQW
YFYFAS EL MHP EDIMP, Q NRSNHT MLFX:
ROU ZHWPMDOPM PNIU PMK PVUZBSEUDP VFQZL NAUNNSKR
PM HUHSDHLF ARVHFD ROMDU, PNFS UDIU EKGLARQW,
PRUWA SDVQ Y HQPQHW BPESQUUDP FM ZRS DOWR,
DOPM PKHB LAK IUXRKA FHLPCS EMDR SCTFLPYW,
PSNEHRMD ENHB LAC GWHHRHKL EXV PMY RMHSA
XHWUWHHL HQFQX LXUDODF UQCPUKX BIOWRB:
QF ROMDM PRS NADGSELES UHXF MHPARZ
E LMIMF PMQF ZMES RSXVB RUWNQSK, LAC VQKUWW
PNDIMPKR PMS EKHFD UZ RMYUL EWR UXR WDIMP.
LFV UA L UIHQCF PMWHIFM PRS FVWZO CSES PYSW
PQC FMIHLLAC VLARAEP DHPS UDZM PMQ YHD,
DOPM HWHKCF WMXUHNX RKLUDZ: DMGM PRSH CHXY
L UHWSPP MIFY HP LHSENL EWR PMWHDFUDP IASHB
EFHSENKR, LAR VSEDHKR PRHKVNV HC FMHDQ ENNEX
UZ RKTFM HOBQYLHNELXQ. YWUC FRSQ OIXY
UD HSNPQRF TUEFLWL ZM PMK RHWUKC UWZW
UZ UFMFSP LAR VUZP CQRHWRKEPLHRM EL NEHVKR
ZM RSDIMP UZ WULXSPZ BQHHSE RSEHYX HVN
ENUHDF ZM LQZBSA, LAK DRLPQKN UZ NEPK
RKVUSQNEPQ LKXUHN SCQYPMKR, GUCH, LAN ICUIXKR
DOPM RCQYW IG NQYPM ZM UFDIMP HW ZUNF ESPCQYZ
WUC DLAGMDF ZHRYC PI UMGDIQFQ YWR XRKFY
DOPM XHSAUC ZMMNRSB PWHMLSAC GMIIFMPL, EWR RMELY
LAFIHVU EWR WIMLF QWR PAEN LAR VHWWHN YWR FEUD
PNIU UICPLF HW HUUICPLF UHWRB. PMOB PRSX,
SCQYPMUDF IDUPQN GHWRQ DOPM GUSYC GMIIFMP,
