remain to be accommodated in the interface e.g., as pointed out by LESK,
what happens when users do not click on the icon for the figure.

Given the constraints of time, WEIBEL omitted a large number of ancillary
items in order to say a few words concerning storage requirements and
what will be required to put a lot of things on line.  Since it is
extremely expensive to reconvert all of this data, especially if it is
just in paper form and even if it is in electronic form in typesetting
tapes, he advocated building journals electronically from the start.  In
that case, if one only has text graphics and indexing which is all that
one needs with de novo electronic publishing, because there is no need to
go back and look at bitmaps of pages, one can get 10,000 journals of
full text, or almost 6 million pages per year.  These pages can be put in
approximately 135 gigabytes of storage, which is not all that much,
WEIBEL said.  For twenty years, something less than three terabytes would
be required.  WEIBEL calculated the costs of storing this information as
follows:  If a gigabyte costs approximately 1,000, then a terabyte costs
approximately 1 million to buy in terms of hardware.  One also needs a
building to put it in and a staff like OCLC to handle that information.
So, to support a terabyte, multiply by five, which gives 5 million per
year for a supported terabyte of data.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Tapes saved by ACS are the typography files originally
supporting publication of the journal  Cost of building tagged text into
the database 


During the questionandanswer period that followed WEIBELs
presentation, these clarifications emerged.  The tapes saved by the
American Chemical Society are the typography files that originally
supported the publication of the journal.  Although they are not tagged
in SGML, they are tagged in very fine detail.  Every single sentence is
marked, all the registry numbers, all the publications issues, dates, and
volumes.  No cost figures on tagging material on a permegabyte basis
were available.  Because ACSs typesetting system runs from tagged text,
there is no extra cost per article.  It was unknown what it costs ACS to
keyboard the tagged text rather than just keyboard the text in the
cheapest process.  In other words, since one intends to publish things
and will need to build tagged text into a typography system in any case,
if one does that in such a way that it can drive not only typography but
an electronic system which is what ACS intends to domove to SGML
publishing, the marginal cost is zero.  The marginal cost represents the
cost of building tagged text into the database, which is small.

                                 


SPERBERGMcQUEEN  Distinction between texts and computers  Implications
of recognizing that all representation is encoding  Dealing with
complicated representations of text entails the RAKR ZUN E PDQUUQW HZ
WINMHQCFB  SENHKZQ UZ ZUCHX HZ LHWUQV FNEOBENB  PYSF QL E VMMCEFHSW
HUKFK RHYL RMZ ESHESPARF Q PSDHIOL EZBQHTF ZM ESHESPARZ BYSG MW
