Severing each kind, and scummed the bulliondross.
A third as soon had formed within the ground
A various mould, and from the boiling cells
By strange conveyance filled each hollow nook
As in an organ, from one blast of wind,
To many a row of pipes the soundboard breathes.
Anon out of the earth a fabric huge
Rose like an exhalation, with the sound
Of dulcet symphonies and voices sweet
Built like a temple, where pilasters round
Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid
With golden architrave nor did there want
Cornice or frieze, with bossy sculptures graven
The roof was fretted gold. Not Babylon
Nor great Alcairo such magnificence
Equalled in all their glories, to enshrine
Belus or Serapis their gods, or seat
Their kings, when Egypt with Assyria strove
In wealth and luxury. Th ascending pile
Stood fixed her stately height, and straight the doors,
Opening their brazen folds, discover, wide
Within, her ample spaces oer the smooth
And level pavement: from the arched roof,
Pendent by subtle magic, many a row
Of starry lamps and blazing cressets, fed
With naptha and asphaltus, yielded light
As from a sky. The hasty multitude
Admiring entered and the work some praise,
And some the architect. His hand was known
In Heaven by many a towered structure high,
Where sceptred Angels held their residence,
And sat as Princes, whom the supreme King
Exalted to such power, and gave to rule,
Each in his Hierarchy, the Orders bright.
Nor was his name unheard or unadored
In ancient Greece and in Ausonian land
Men called him Mulciber and how he fell
From Heaven they fabled, thrown by angry Jove
Sheer oer the crystal battlements: from morn
To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
A summers day, and with the setting sun
Dropt from the zenith, like a falling star,
On Lemnos, th Aegaean isle. Thus they relate,
Erring for he with this rebellious rout
Fell long before nor aught aviled him now
To have built in Heaven high towers nor did he scape
By all his engines, but was headlong sent,
With his industrious crew, to build in Hell.
  Meanwhile the winged Heralds, by command
Of sovereign power, with awful ceremony
And trumpets sound, throughout the host proclaim
A solemn council forthwith to be held
At Pandemonium, the high capital
Of Satan and his peers. Their summons called
From every band and squared regiment
By place or choice the worthiest: they anon
With hundreds and with thousands trooping came
Attended. All access was thronged the gates
And porches wide, but chief the spacious hall
Though like a covered field, where champions bold
Wont ride in armed, and at the Soldans chair
Defied the best of Paynim chivalry
To mortal combat, or career with lance,
Thick swarmed, both on the ground and in the air,
Brushed with the hiss of rustling wings. As bees
In springtime, when the Sun with Taurus rides.
Pour forth their populous youth about the hive
In clusters they among fresh dews and flowers
Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed plank,
The suburb of their strawbuilt citadel,
New rubbed with balm, expatiate, and confer
Their stateaffairs: so thick the airy crowd
Swarmed and were straitened till, the signal given,
Behold a wonder! They but now who seemed
In bigness to surpass Earths giant sons,
Now less than smallest dwarfs, in narrow room
Throng numberlesslike that pygmean race
Beyond the Indian mount or faery elves,
Whose midnight revels, by a forestside
Or fountain, some belated peasant sees,
Or dreams he sees, while overhead the Moon
Sits arbitress, and nearer to the Earth
Wheels her pale course: they, on their mirth and dance
Intent, with jocund music charm his ear
At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds.
Thus incorporeal Spirits to smallest forms
Reduced their shapes immense, and were at large,
Though without number still, amidst the hall
Of that infernal court. But far within,
And in their own dimensions like themselves,
The great Seraphic Lords and Cherubim
In close recess and secret conclave sat,
A thousand demigods on golden seats,
Frequent and full. After short silence then,
And summons read, the great consult began.



Book II


High on a throne of royal state, which far
Outshone the wealth or Ormus and of Ind,
Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand
Showers on her kings barbaric pearl and gold,
Satan exalted sat, by merit raised
To that bad eminence and, from despair
Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires
Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue
Vain war with Heaven and, by success untaught,
His proud imaginations thus displayed:
  "Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heaven!
For, since no deep within her gulf can hold
Immortal vigour, though oppressed and fallen,
I give not Heaven for lost: from this descent
Celestial Virtues rising will appear
More glorious and more dread than from no fall,
And trust themselves to fear no second fate!
Me though just right, and the fixed laws of Heaven,
Did first create your leadernext, free choice
With what besides in council or in fight
Hath been achieved of merityet this loss,
Thus far at least recovered, hath much more
Established in a safe, unenvied throne,
Yielded with full consent. The happier state
In Heaven, which follows dignity, might draw
Envy from each inferior but who here
Will envy whom the highest place exposes
Foremost to stand against the Thunderers aim
Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share
Of endless pain? Where there is, then, no good
For which to strive, no strife can grow up there
From faction: for none sure will claim in Hell
Precedence none whose portion is so small
Of present pain that with ambitious mind
Will covet more! With this advantage, then,
To union, and firm faith, and firm accord,
More than can be in Heaven, we RWY ESFMCW
ZM NBKUU IHN HOBP UDRSDHFQWNY HZ UVN,
LHESC PH ZWHPHSE PMLA HEHXHSDHZQ
WMNFR IKLQ YBVHNKR HL LAC VX YUEM TSPZ CYK,
ROQPRSW HZ UHSW DEN HW WMSKCP FIUVY,
RY WUD RQSQFY. RMI NQA LKGHVQ HYK PHQYY."
  RS RQELKR LAR WYSP MHU UIXURM, BRSHPCKR VDDF,
BPWZN ITFRS BPWHDFSPF QWR PMA PHKCNSPP BGHDHZ
