
  Thats different from what I used to say when I was a child
said the Gryphon

  Well I never heard it before said the Mock Turtle but it
sounds uncommon nonsense

  Alice said nothing she had sat down with her face in her
hands wondering if anything would EVER happen in a natural way
again

  I should like to have it explained said the Mock Turtle

  She cant explain it said the Gryphon hastily  Go on with
the next verse

  But about his toes? the Mock Turtle persisted  How COULD
he turn them out with his nose you know?

  Its the first position in dancing Alice said but was
dreadfully puzzled by the whole thing and longed to change the
subject

  Go on with the next verse the Gryphon repeated impatiently
it begins "I passed by his garden"

  Alice did not dare to disobey though she felt sure it would
all come wrong and she went on in a trembling voice

    I passed by his garden and marked with one eye
    How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie

        later editions continued as follows
    The Panther took piecrust and gravy and meat
    While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat
    When the pie was all finished the Owl as a boon
    Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon
    While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl
    And concluded the banquet

  What IS the use of repeating all that stuff the Mock Turtle
interrupted if you dont explain it as you go on?  Its by far
the most confusing thing I ever heard

  Yes I think youd better leave off said the Gryphon  and
Alice was only too glad to do so

  Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille? the
Gryphon went on  Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you
a song?

  Oh a song please if the Mock Turtle would be so kind
Alice replied so eagerly that the Gryphon said in a rather
offended tone Hm No accounting for tastes  Sing her "Turtle
Soup" will you old fellow?

  The Mock Turtle sighed deeply and began in a voice sometimes
choked with sobs to sing this


    Beautiful Soup so rich and green
    Waiting in a hot tureen
    Who for such dainties would not stoop?
    Soup of the evening beautiful Soup
    Soup of the evening beautiful Soup
        Beauootiful Soooop
        Beauootiful Soooop
    Soooop of the eeevening
        Beautiful beautiful Soup

    Beautiful Soup  Who cares for fish
    Game or any other dish?
    Who would not give all else for two p
    ennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
    Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
        Beauootiful Soooop
        Beauootiful Soooop
    Soooop of the eeevening
        Beautiful beautiFUL SOUP

  Chorus again cried the Gryphon and the Mock Turtle had
just begun to repeat it when a cry of The trials beginning
was heard in the distance

  Come on cried the Gryphon and taking Alice by the hand
it hurried off without waiting for the end of the song

  What trial is it? Alice panted as she ran but the Gryphon
only answered Come on and ran the faster while more and more
faintly came carried on the breeze that followed them the
melancholy words

    Soooop of the eeevening
        Beautiful beautiful Soup



                           CHAPTER XI

