
	Art thou god to shepherd turnd
	That a maidens heart hath burnd?
	Can a woman rail thus?

SILVIUS	Call you this railing?

ROSALIND	Reads

	Why thy godhead laid apart
	Warrst thou with a womans heart?
	Did you ever hear such railing?
	Whiles the eye of man did woo me
	That could do no vengeance to me
	Meaning me a beast
	If the scorn of your bright eyne
	Have power to raise such love in mine
	Alack in me what strange effect
	Would they work in mild aspect
	Whiles you chid me I did love
	How then might your prayers move
	He that brings this love to thee
	Little knows this love in me
	And by him seal up thy mind
	Whether that thy youth and kind
	Will the faithful offer take
	Of me and all that I can make
	Or else by him my love deny
	And then Ill study how to die

SILVIUS	Call you this chiding?

CELIA	Alas poor shepherd

ROSALIND	Do you pity him? no he deserves no pity Wilt
	thou love such a woman? What to make thee an
	instrument and play false strains upon thee not to
	be endured Well go your way to her for I see
	love hath made thee a tame snake and say this to
	her that if she love me I charge her to love
	thee if she will not I will never have her unless
	thou entreat for her If you be a true lover
	hence and not a word for here comes more company

	Exit SILVIUS

	Enter OLIVER

OLIVER	Good morrow fair ones pray you if you know
	Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
	A sheepcote fenced about with olive trees?

CELIA	West of this place down in the neighbour bottom
	The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
	Left on your right hand brings you to the place
	But at this hour the house doth keep itself
	Theres none within

OLIVER	If that an eye may profit by a tongue
	Then should I know you by description
	Such garments and such years The boy is fair
	Of female favour and bestows himself
	Like a ripe sister the woman low
	And browner than her brother Are not you
	The owner of the house I did inquire for?

CELIA	It is no boast being askd to say we are

OLIVER	Orlando doth commend him to you both
	And to that youth he calls his Rosalind
	He sends this bloody napkin Are you he?

ROSALIND	I am what must we understand by this?

OLIVER	Some of my shame if you will know of me
	What man I am and how and why and where
	This handkercher was staind

CELIA	I pray you tell it

OLIVER	When last the young Orlando parted from you
	He left a promise to return again
	Within an hour and pacing through the forest
	Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy
	Lo what befell he threw his eye aside
	And mark what object did present itself
	Under an oak whose boughs were mossd with age
	And high top bald with dry antiquity
	A wretched ragged man oergrown with hair
	Lay sleeping on his back about his neck
	A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself
	Who with her head nimble in threats approachd
	The opening of his mouth but suddenly
	Seeing Orlando it unlinkd itself
	And with indented glides did slip away
	Into a bush under which bushs shade
	A lioness with udders all drawn dry
	Lay couching head on ground with catlike watch
	When that the sleeping man should stir for tis
	The royal disposition of that beast
	To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead
	This seen Orlando did approach the man
	And found it was his brother his elder brother

CELIA	O I have heard him speak of that same brother
	And he did render him the most unnatural
	That lived amongst men

OLIVER	And well he might so do
	For well I know he was unnatural

ROSALIND	But to Orlando did he leave him there
	Food to the suckd and hungry lioness?

OLIVER	Twice did he turn his back and purposed so
	But kindness nobler ever than revenge
	And nature stronger than his just occasion
	Made him give battle to the lioness
	Who quickly fell before him in which hurtling
	From miserable slumber I awaked

CELIA	Are you his brother?

ROSALIND	Wast you he rescued?

CELIA	Wast you that did so oft contrive to kill him?

OLIVER	Twas I but tis not I	I do not shame
	To tell you what I was since my conversion
	So sweetly tastes being the thing I am

ROSALIND	But for the bloody napkin?

OLIVER	By and by
	When from the first to last betwixt us two
	Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed
	As how I came into that desert place
	In brief he led me to the gentle duke
	Who gave me fresh array and entertainment
	Committing me unto my brothers love
	Who led me instantly unto his cave
	There strippd himself and here upon his arm
	The lioness had torn some flesh away
	Which all this while had bled and now he fainted
	And cried in fainting upon Rosalind
	Brief I recoverd him bound up his wound
	And after some small space being strong at heart
	He sent me hither stranger as I am
	To tell this story that you might excuse
	His broken promise and to give this napkin
	Dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth
	That he in sport doth call his Rosalind

	ROSALIND swoons

CELIA	Why how now Ganymede sweet Ganymede

OLIVER	Many will swoon when they do look on blood

CELIA	There is more in it Cousin Ganymede

OLIVER	Look he recovers

ROSALIND	I would I were at home

CELIA	Well lead you thither
	I pray you will you take him by the arm?

OLIVER	Be of good cheer youth you a man you lack a
	mans heart

ROSALIND	I do so I confess it Ah sirrah a body would
	think this was well counterfeited I pray you tell
	your brother how well I counterfeited Heighho

OLIVER	This was not counterfeit there is too great
	testimony in your complexion that it was a passion
	of earnest

ROSALIND	Counterfeit I assure you

OLIVER	Well then take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man

ROSALIND	So I do but i faith I should have been a woman by right

CELIA	Come you look paler and paler pray you draw
	homewards Good sir go with us

OLIVER	That will I for I must bear answer back
	How you excuse my brother Rosalind

ROSALIND	I shall devise something but I pray you commend
	my counterfeiting to him Will you go?

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT V



SCENE I	The forest


	Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

TOUCHSTONE	We shall find a time Audrey patience gentle Audrey

AUDREY	Faith the priest was good enough for all the old
	gentlemans saying

TOUCHSTONE	A most wicked Sir Oliver Audrey a most vile
	Martext But Audrey there is a youth here in the
	forest lays claim to you

AUDREY	Ay I know who tis he hath no interest in me in
	the world here comes the man you mean

TOUCHSTONE	It is meat and drink to me to see a clown by my
	troth we that have good wits have much to answer
	for we shall be flouting we cannot hold

	Enter WILLIAM

WILLIAM	Good even Audrey

AUDREY	God ye good even William

WILLIAM	And good even to you sir

TOUCHSTONE	Good even gentle friend Cover thy head cover thy
	head nay prithee be covered How old are you friend?

WILLIAM	Five and twenty sir

TOUCHSTONE	A ripe age Is thy name William?

WILLIAM	William sir

TOUCHSTONE	A fair name Wast born i the forest here?

WILLIAM	Ay sir I thank God

TOUCHSTONE	Thank God a good answer Art rich?

WILLIAM	Faith sir so so

TOUCHSTONE	So so is good very good very excellent good and
	yet it is not it is but so so Art thou wise?

WILLIAM	Ay sir I have a pretty wit

TOUCHSTONE	Why thou sayest well I do now remember a saying
	The fool doth think he is wise but the wise man
	knows himself to be a fool The heathen
	philosopher when he had a desire to eat a grape
	would open his lips when he put it into his mouth
	meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and
	lips to open You do love this maid?

WILLIAM	I do sir

