
TOUCHSTONE	Then thou art damned

CORIN	Nay I hope

TOUCHSTONE	Truly thou art damned like an illroasted egg all
	on one side

CORIN	For not being at court? Your reason

TOUCHSTONE	Why if thou never wast at court thou never sawest
	good manners if thou never sawest good manners
	then thy manners must be wicked and wickedness is
	sin and sin is damnation Thou art in a parlous
	state shepherd

CORIN	Not a whit Touchstone those that are good manners
	at the court are as ridiculous in the country as the
	behavior of the country is most mockable at the
	court You told me you salute not at the court but
	you kiss your hands that courtesy would be
	uncleanly if courtiers were shepherds

TOUCHSTONE	Instance briefly come instance

CORIN	Why we are still handling our ewes and their
	fells you know are greasy

TOUCHSTONE	Why do not your courtiers hands sweat? and is not
	the grease of a mutton as wholesome as the sweat of
	a man? Shallow shallow A better instance I say come

CORIN	Besides our hands are hard

TOUCHSTONE	Your lips will feel them the sooner Shallow again
	A more sounder instance come

CORIN	And they are often tarred over with the surgery of
	our sheep and would you have us kiss tar? The
	courtiers hands are perfumed with civet

TOUCHSTONE	Most shallow man thou wormsmeat in respect of a
	good piece of flesh indeed Learn of the wise and
	perpend civet is of a baser birth than tar the
	very uncleanly flux of a cat Mend the instance shepherd

CORIN	You have too courtly a wit for me Ill rest

TOUCHSTONE	Wilt thou rest damned? God help thee shallow man
	God make incision in thee thou art raw

CORIN	Sir I am a true labourer I earn that I eat get
	that I wear owe no man hate envy no mans
	happiness glad of other mens good content with my
	harm and the greatest of my pride is to see my ewes
	graze and my lambs suck

TOUCHSTONE	That is another simple sin in you to bring the ewes
	and the rams together and to offer to get your
	living by the copulation of cattle to be bawd to a
	bellwether and to betray a shelamb of a
	twelvemonth to a crookedpated old cuckoldly ram
	out of all reasonable match If thou beest not
	damned for this the devil himself will have no
	shepherds I cannot see else how thou shouldst
	scape

CORIN	Here comes young Master Ganymede my new mistresss brother

	Enter ROSALIND with a paper reading

ROSALIND	     From the east to western Ind
	No jewel is like Rosalind
	Her worth being mounted on the wind
	Through all the world bears Rosalind
	All the pictures fairest lined
	Are but black to Rosalind
	Let no fair be kept in mind
	But the fair of Rosalind

TOUCHSTONE	Ill rhyme you so eight years together dinners and
	suppers and sleepinghours excepted it is the
	right butterwomens rank to market

ROSALIND	Out fool

TOUCHSTONE	For a taste
	If a hart do lack a hind
	Let him seek out Rosalind
	If the cat will after kind
	So be sure will Rosalind
	Winter garments must be lined
	So must slender Rosalind
	They that reap must sheaf and bind
	Then to cart with Rosalind
	Sweetest nut hath sourest rind
	Such a nut is Rosalind
	He that sweetest rose will find
	Must find loves prick and Rosalind
	This is the very false gallop of verses why do you
	infect yourself with them?

ROSALIND	Peace you dull fool I found them on a tree

TOUCHSTONE	Truly the tree yields bad fruit

ROSALIND	Ill graff it with you and then I shall graff it
	with a medlar then it will be the earliest fruit
	i the country for youll be rotten ere you be half
	ripe and thats the right virtue of the medlar

TOUCHSTONE	You have said but whether wisely or no let the
	forest judge

	Enter CELIA with a writing

ROSALIND	Peace Here comes my sister reading stand aside

CELIA	Reads

	Why should this a desert be?
	For it is unpeopled? No
	Tongues Ill hang on every tree
	That shall civil sayings show
	Some how brief the life of man
	Runs his erring pilgrimage
	That the stretching of a span
	Buckles in his sum of age
	Some of violated vows
	Twixt the souls of friend and friend
	But upon the fairest boughs
	Or at every sentence end
	Will I Rosalinda write
	Teaching all that read to know
	The quintessence of every sprite
	Heaven would in little show
	Therefore Heaven Nature charged
	That one body should be filld
	With all graces wideenlarged
	Nature presently distilld
	Helens cheek but not her heart
	Cleopatras majesty
	Atalantas better part
	Sad Lucretias modesty
	Thus Rosalind of many parts
	By heavenly synod was devised
	Of many faces eyes and hearts
	To have the touches dearest prized
	Heaven would that she these gifts should have
	And I to live and die her slave

ROSALIND	O most gentle pulpiter what tedious homily of love
	have you wearied your parishioners withal and never
	cried Have patience good people

CELIA	How now back friends Shepherd go off a little
	Go with him sirrah

TOUCHSTONE	Come shepherd let us make an honourable retreat
	though not with bag and baggage yet with scrip and scrippage

	Exeunt CORIN and TOUCHSTONE

CELIA	Didst thou hear these verses?

ROSALIND	O yes I heard them all and more too for some of
	them had in them more feet than the verses would bear

CELIA	Thats no matter the feet might bear the verses

ROSALIND	Ay but the feet were lame and could not bear
	themselves without the verse and therefore stood
	lamely in the verse

CELIA	But didst thou hear without wondering how thy name
	should be hanged and carved upon these trees?

ROSALIND	I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder
	before you came for look here what I found on a
	palmtree I was never so berhymed since
	Pythagoras time that I was an Irish rat which I
	can hardly remember

CELIA	Trow you who hath done this?

ROSALIND	Is it a man?

CELIA	And a chain that you once wore about his neck
	Change you colour?

ROSALIND	I prithee who?

CELIA	O Lord Lord it is a hard matter for friends to
	meet but mountains may be removed with earthquakes
	and so encounter

ROSALIND	Nay but who is it?

CELIA	Is it possible?

ROSALIND	Nay I prithee now with most petitionary vehemence
	tell me who it is

CELIA	O wonderful wonderful and most wonderful
	wonderful and yet again wonderful and after that
	out of all hooping

ROSALIND	Good my complexion dost thou think though I am
	caparisoned like a man I have a doublet and hose in
	my disposition? One inch of delay more is a
	Southsea of discovery I prithee tell me who is it
	quickly and speak apace I would thou couldst
	stammer that thou mightst pour this concealed man
	out of thy mouth as wine comes out of a narrow
	mouthed bottle either too much at once or none at
	all I prithee take the cork out of thy mouth that
	may drink thy tidings

CELIA	So you may put a man in your belly

ROSALIND	Is he of Gods making? What manner of man? Is his
	head worth a hat or his chin worth a beard?

CELIA	Nay he hath but a little beard

ROSALIND	Why God will send more if the man will be
	thankful let me stay the growth of his beard if
	thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin

CELIA	It is young Orlando that tripped up the wrestlers
	heels and your heart both in an instant

ROSALIND	Nay but the devil take mocking speak sad brow and
	true maid

CELIA	I faith coz tis he

ROSALIND	Orlando?

CELIA	Orlando

ROSALIND	Alas the day what shall I do with my doublet and
	hose? What did he when thou sawest him? What said
	he? How looked he? Wherein went he? What makes
	him here? Did he ask for me? Where remains he?
	How parted he with thee? and when shalt thou see
	him again? Answer me in one word

CELIA	You must borrow me Gargantuas mouth first tis a
	word too great for any mouth of this ages size To
	say ay and no to these particulars is more than to
	answer in a catechism

ROSALIND	But doth he know that I am in this forest and in
	mans apparel? Looks he as freshly as he did the
	day he wrestled?

CELIA	It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the
	propositions of a lover but take a taste of my
	finding him and relish it with good observance
	I found him under a tree like a dropped acorn

ROSALIND	It may well be called Joves tree when it drops
	forth such fruit

CELIA	Give me audience good madam

ROSALIND	Proceed

CELIA	There lay he stretched along like a wounded knight

ROSALIND	Though it be pity to see such a sight it well
	becomes the ground

CELIA	Cry holla to thy tongue I prithee it curvets
	unseasonably He was furnished like a hunter

ROSALIND	O ominous he comes to kill my heart

CELIA	I would sing my song without a burden thou bringest
	me out of tune

ROSALIND	Do you not know I am a woman? when I think I must
	speak Sweet say on

CELIA	You bring me out Soft comes he not here?

	Enter ORLANDO and JAQUES

ROSALIND	Tis he slink by and note him

JAQUES	I thank you for your company but good faith I had
	as lief have been myself alone

ORLANDO	And so had I but yet for fashion sake I thank you
	too for your society

JAQUES	God be wi you lets meet as little as we can

ORLANDO	I do desire we may be better strangers

JAQUES	I pray you mar no more trees with writing
	lovesongs in their barks

ORLANDO	I pray you mar no more of my verses with reading
	them illfavouredly

JAQUES	Rosalind is your loves name?

ORLANDO	Yes just

JAQUES	I do not like her name

ORLANDO	There was no thought of pleasing you when she was
	christened

JAQUES	What stature is she of?

ORLANDO	Just as high as my heart

JAQUES	You are full of pretty answers Have you not been
	acquainted with goldsmiths wives and conned them
	out of rings?

ORLANDO	Not so but I answer you right painted cloth from
	whence you have studied your questions

JAQUES	You have a nimble wit I think twas made of
	Atalantas heels Will you sit down with me? and
	we two will rail against our mistress the world and
	all our misery

ORLANDO	I will chide no breather in the world but myself
	against whom I know most faults

JAQUES	The worst fault you have is to be in love

ORLANDO	Tis a fault I will not change for your best virtue
	I am weary of you

JAQUES	By my troth I was seeking for a fool when I found
	you

ORLANDO	He is drowned in the brook look but in and you
	shall see him

JAQUES	There I shall see mine own figure

ORLANDO	Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher

JAQUES	Ill tarry no longer with you farewell good
	Signior Love

ORLANDO	I am glad of your departure adieu good Monsieur
	Melancholy

	Exit JAQUES

ROSALIND	Aside to CELIA  I will speak to him like a saucy
	lackey and under that habit play the knave with him
	Do you hear forester?

ORLANDO	Very well what would you?

ROSALIND	I pray you what ist oclock?

ORLANDO	You should ask me what time o day theres no clock
	in the forest

ROSALIND	Then there is no true lover in the forest else
	sighing every minute and groaning every hour would
	detect the lazy foot of Time as well as a clock

ORLANDO	And why not the swift foot of Time? had not that
	been as proper?

ROSALIND	By no means sir Time travels in divers paces with
	divers persons Ill tell you who Time ambles
	withal who Time trots withal who Time gallops
	withal and who he stands still withal

ORLANDO	I prithee who doth he trot withal?

ROSALIND	Marry he trots hard with a young maid between the
	contract of her marriage and the day it is
	solemnized if the interim be but a sennight
	Times pace is so hard that it seems the length of
	seven year

ORLANDO	Who ambles Time withal?

ROSALIND	With a priest that lacks Latin and a rich man that
	hath not the gout for the one sleeps easily because
	he cannot study and the other lives merrily because
	he feels no pain the one lacking the burden of lean
	and wasteful learning the other knowing no burden
	of heavy tedious penury these Time ambles withal

ORLANDO	Who doth he gallop withal?

ROSALIND	With a thief to the gallows for though he go as
	softly as foot can fall he thinks himself too soon there

ORLANDO	Who stays it still withal?

ROSALIND	With lawyers in the vacation for they sleep between
	term and term and then they perceive not how Time moves

ORLANDO	Where dwell you pretty youth?

ROSALIND	With this shepherdess my sister here in the
	skirts of the forest like fringe upon a petticoat

ORLANDO	Are you native of this place?

ROSALIND	As the cony that you see dwell where she is kindled

ORLANDO	Your accent is something finer than you could
	purchase in so removed a dwelling

ROSALIND	I have been told so of many but indeed an old
	religious uncle of mine taught me to speak who was
	in his youth an inland man one that knew courtship
	too well for there he fell in love I have heard
	him read many lectures against it and I thank God
	I am not a woman to be touched with so many
	giddy offences as he hath generally taxed their
	whole sex withal

ORLANDO	Can you remember any of the principal evils that he
	laid to the charge of women?

ROSALIND	There were none principal they were all like one
	another as halfpence are every one fault seeming
	monstrous till his fellow fault came to match it

ORLANDO	I prithee recount some of them

ROSALIND	No I will not cast away my physic but on those that
	are sick There is a man haunts the forest that
	abuses our young plants with carving Rosalind on
	their barks hangs odes upon hawthorns and elegies
	on brambles all forsooth deifying the name of
	Rosalind if I could meet that fancymonger I would
	give him some good counsel for he seems to have the
	quotidian of love upon him

ORLANDO	I am he that is so loveshaked I pray you tell me
	your remedy

ROSALIND	There is none of my uncles marks upon you he
	taught me how to know a man in love in which cage
	of rushes I am sure you are not prisoner

ORLANDO	What were his marks?

ROSALIND	A lean cheek which you have not a blue eye and
	sunken which you have not an unquestionable
	spirit which you have not a beard neglected
	which you have not but I pardon you for that for
	simply your having in beard is a younger brothers
	revenue then your hose should be ungartered your
	bonnet unbanded your sleeve unbuttoned your shoe
	untied and every thing about you demonstrating a
	careless desolation but you are no such man you
	are rather pointdevice in your accoutrements as
	loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other

ORLANDO	Fair youth I would I could make thee believe I love

ROSALIND	Me believe it you may as soon make her that you
	love believe it which I warrant she is apter to
	do than to confess she does that is one of the
	points in the which women still give the lie to
	their consciences But in good sooth are you he
	that hangs the verses on the trees wherein Rosalind
	is so admired?

ORLANDO	I swear to thee youth by the white hand of
	Rosalind I am that he that unfortunate he

ROSALIND	But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?

ORLANDO	Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much

ROSALIND	Love is merely a madness and I tell you deserves
	as well a dark house and a whip as madmen do and
	the reason why they are not so punished and cured
	is that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers
	are in love too Yet I profess curing it by counsel

ORLANDO	Did you ever cure any so?

ROSALIND	Yes one and in this manner He was to imagine me
	his love his mistress and I set him every day to
	woo me at which time would I being but a moonish
	youth grieve be effeminate changeable longing
	and liking proud fantastical apish shallow
	inconstant full of tears full of smiles for every
	passion something and for no passion truly any
	thing as boys and women are for the most part
	cattle of this colour would now like him now loathe
	him then entertain him then forswear him now weep
	for him then spit at him that I drave my suitor
	from his mad humour of love to a living humour of
	madness which was to forswear the full stream of
	the world and to live in a nook merely monastic
	And thus I cured him and this way will I take upon
	me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheeps
	heart that there shall not be one spot of love int

ORLANDO	I would not be cured youth

ROSALIND	I would cure you if you would but call me Rosalind
	and come every day to my cote and woo me

ORLANDO	Now by the faith of my love I will tell me
	where it is

ROSALIND	Go with me to it and Ill show it you and by the way
	you shall tell me where in the forest you live
	Will you go?

ORLANDO	With all my heart good youth

ROSALIND	Nay you must call me Rosalind Come sister will you go?

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE III	The forest

