
ORLANDO	Nothing I am not taught to make any thing

OLIVER	What mar you then sir?

ORLANDO	Marry sir I am helping you to mar that which God
	made a poor unworthy brother of yours with idleness

OLIVER	Marry sir be better employed and be naught awhile

ORLANDO	Shall I keep your hogs and eat husks with them?
	What prodigal portion have I spent that I should
	come to such penury?

OLIVER	Know you where your are sir?

ORLANDO	O sir very well here in your orchard

OLIVER	Know you before whom sir?

ORLANDO	Ay better than him I am before knows me I know
	you are my eldest brother and in the gentle
	condition of blood you should so know me The
	courtesy of nations allows you my better in that
	you are the firstborn but the same tradition
	takes not away my blood were there twenty brothers
	betwixt us I have as much of my father in me as
	you albeit I confess your coming before me is
	nearer to his reverence

OLIVER	What boy

ORLANDO	Come come elder brother you are too young in this

OLIVER	Wilt thou lay hands on me villain?

ORLANDO	I am no villain I am the youngest son of Sir
	Rowland de Boys he was my father and he is thrice
	a villain that says such a father begot villains
	Wert thou not my brother I would not take this hand
	from thy throat till this other had pulled out thy
	tongue for saying so thou hast railed on thyself

ADAM	Sweet masters be patient for your fathers
	remembrance be at accord

OLIVER	Let me go I say

ORLANDO	I will not till I please you shall hear me My
	father charged you in his will to give me good
	education you have trained me like a peasant
	obscuring and hiding from me all gentlemanlike
	qualities The spirit of my father grows strong in
	me and I will no longer endure it therefore allow
	me such exercises as may become a gentleman or
	give me the poor allottery my father left me by
	testament with that I will go buy my fortunes

OLIVER	And what wilt thou do? beg when that is spent?
	Well sir get you in I will not long be troubled
	with you you shall have some part of your will I
	pray you leave me

ORLANDO	I will no further offend you than becomes me for my good

OLIVER	Get you with him you old dog

ADAM	Is old dog my reward? Most true I have lost my
	teeth in your service God be with my old master
	he would not have spoke such a word

	Exeunt ORLANDO and ADAM

OLIVER	Is it even so? begin you to grow upon me? I will
	physic your rankness and yet give no thousand
	crowns neither Holla Dennis

	Enter DENNIS

DENNIS	Calls your worship?

OLIVER	Was not Charles the dukes wrestler here to speak with me?

DENNIS	So please you he is here at the door and importunes
	access to you

OLIVER	Call him in

	Exit DENNIS

	Twill be a good way and tomorrow the wrestling is

	Enter CHARLES

CHARLES	Good morrow to your worship

OLIVER	Good Monsieur Charles whats the new news at the
	new court?

CHARLES	Theres no news at the court sir but the old news
	that is the old duke is banished by his younger
	brother the new duke and three or four loving lords
	have put themselves into voluntary exile with him
	whose lands and revenues enrich the new duke
	therefore he gives them good leave to wander

OLIVER	Can you tell if Rosalind the dukes daughter be
	banished with her father?

CHARLES	O no for the dukes daughter her cousin so loves
	her being ever from their cradles bred together
	that she would have followed her exile or have died
	to stay behind her She is at the court and no
	less beloved of her uncle than his own daughter and
	never two ladies loved as they do

OLIVER	Where will the old duke live?

CHARLES	They say he is already in the forest of Arden and
	a many merry men with him and there they live like
	the old Robin Hood of England they say many young
	gentlemen flock to him every day and fleet the time
	carelessly as they did in the golden world

