Equally free for orders and degrees
Jar not with liberty but well consist
Who can in reason then or right assume
Monarchy over such as live by right
His equals if in power and splendour less
In freedom equal? or can introduce
Law and edict on us who without law
Err not? much less for this to be our Lord
And look for adoration to the abuse
Of those imperial titles which assert
Our being ordained to govern not to serve
Thus far his bold discourse without controul
Had audience when among the Seraphim
Abdiel than whom none with more zeal adored
The Deity and divine commands obeyed
Stood up and in a flame of zeal severe
The current of his fury thus opposed
O argument blasphemous false and proud
Words which no ear ever to hear in Heaven
Expected least of all from thee  Ingrate
In place thyself so high above thy peers
Canst thou with impious obloquy condemn
The just decree of God pronounced and sworn
That to his only Son by right endued
With regal scepter every soul in Heaven
Shall bend the knee and in that honour due
Confess him rightful King? unjust thou sayest
Flatly unjust to bind with laws the free
And equal over equals to let reign
One over all with unsucceeded power
Shalt thou give law to God? shalt thou dispute
With him the points of liberty who made
Thee what thou art and formed the Powers of Heaven
Such as he pleased and circumscribed their being?
Yet by experience taught we know how good
And of our good and of our dignity
How provident he is how far from thought
To make us less bent rather to exalt
Our happy state under one head more near
United  But to grant it thee unjust
That equal over equals monarch reign
Thyself though great and glorious dost thou count
Or all angelick nature joined in one
Equal to him begotten Son? by whom
As by his Word the Mighty Father made
All things even thee and all the Spirits of Heaven
By him created in their bright degrees
Crowned them with glory and to their glory named
Thrones Dominations Princedoms Virtues Powers
Essential Powers nor by his reign obscured
But more illustrious made since he the head
One of our number thus reduced becomes
His laws our laws all honour to him done
Returns our own  Cease then this impious rage
And tempt not these but hasten to appease
The incensed Father and the incensed Son
While pardon may be found in time besought
So spake the fervent Angel but his zeal
None seconded as out of season judged
Or singular and rash  Whereat rejoiced
The Apostate and more haughty thus replied
That we were formed then sayest thou? and the work
Of secondary hands by task transferred
From Father to his Son? strange point and new
Doctrine which we would know whence learned who saw
When this creation was? rememberest thou
Thy making while the Maker gave thee being?
We know no time when we were not as now
