organizations in the world by creating a cooperative cataloging network
of more than 6,000 libraries worldwide.  On-line public access catalogs
now serve millions of users on more than 50,000 dedicated terminals in
the United States alone.  The University of California MELVYL on-line
catalog system has now expanded into an index database reference service
and supports more than six million searches a year.  And, libraries have
become the largest group of customers of CD-ROM publishing technology;
more than 30,000 optical media publications such as those offered by
InfoTrac and Silver Platter are subscribed to by U.S. libraries.

This march of technology continues and in the next decade will result in
further innovations that are extremely difficult to predict.  What is
clear is that libraries can now go beyond automation of their order files
and catalogs to automation of their collections themselves--and it is
possible to circumvent the fiscal limitations that appear to obtain
today.

This Electronic Library Strategic Plan recommends a paradigm shift in
library service, and demonstrates the steps necessary to provide improved
library services with limited capacities and operating investments.

SESSION IV-A

Anne KENNEY

The Cornell/Xerox Joint Study in Digital Preservation resulted in the
recording of 1,000 brittle books as 600-dpi digital images and the
production, on demand, of high-quality and archivally sound paper
replacements.  The project, which was supported by the Commission on
Preservation and Access, also investigated some of the issues surrounding
scanning, storing, retrieving, and providing access to digital images in
a network environment.

Anne Kenney will focus on some of the issues surrounding direct scanning
as identified in the Cornell Xerox Project.  Among those to be discussed
are:  image versus text capture; indexing and access; image-capture
capabilities; a comparison to photocopy and microfilm; production and
cost analysis; storage formats, protocols, and standards; and the use of
this scanning technology for preservation purposes.

The 600-dpi digital images produced in the Cornell Xerox Project proved
highly acceptable for creating paper replacements of deteriorating
originals.  The 1,000 scanned volumes provided an array of image-capture
challenges that are common to nineteenth-century printing techniques and
embrittled material, and that defy the use of text-conversion processes.
These challenges include diminished contrast between text and background,
fragile and deteriorated pages, uneven printing, elaborate type faces,
faint and bold text adjacency, handwritten text and annotations, nonRoman
languages, and a proliferation of illustrated material embedded in text.
The latter category included high-frequency and low-frequency halftones,
continuous tone photographs, intricate mathematical drawings, maps,
etchings, reverse-polarity drawings, and engravings.

The Xerox prototype scanning system provided a number of important
features for capturing this diverse material.  Technicians used multiple
threshold settings, filters, line art and halftone definitions,
autosegmentation, windowing, and software-editing programs to optimize
image capture.  At the same time, this project focused on production.
The goal was to make scanning as affordable and acceptable as
photocopying and microfilming for preservation reformatting.  A
time-and-cost study conducted during the last three months of this
project confirmed the economic viability of digital scanning, and these
findings will be discussed here.

From the outset, the Cornell Xerox Project was predicated on the use of
nonproprietary standards and the use of common protocols when standards
did not exist.  Digital files were created as TIFF images which were
compressed prior to storage using Group 4 CCITT compression.  The Xerox
software is MS DOS based and utilizes off-the shelf programs such as
Microsoft Windows and Wang Image Wizard.  The digital library is designed
to be hardware-independent and to provide interchangeability with other
institutions through network connections.  Access to the digital files
themselves is two-tiered:  Bibliographic records for the computer files
are created in RLIN and Cornell's local system and access into the actual
digital images comprising a book is provided through a document control
structure and a networked image file-server, both of which will be
described.

The presentation will conclude with a discussion of some of the issues
surrounding the use of this technology as a preservation tool (storage,
refreshing, backup).

Pamela ANDRE and Judith ZIDAR

The National Agricultural Library (NAL) has had extensive experience with
raster scanning of printed materials.  Since 1987, the Library has
participated in the National Agricultural Text Digitizing Project (NATDP)
a cooperative effort between NAL and forty-five land grant university
libraries.  An overview of the project will be presented, giving its
history and NAL's strategy for the future.

An in-depth discussion of NATDP will follow, including a description of
the scanning process, from the gathering of the printed materials to the
archiving of the electronic pages.  The type of equipment required for a
stand-alone scanning workstation and the importance of file management
software will be discussed.  Issues concerning the images themselves will
be addressed briefly, such as image format; black and white versus color;
gray scale versus dithering; and resolution.

Also described will be a study currently in progress by NAL to evaluate
the usefulness of converting microfilm to electronic images in order to
improve access.  With the cooperation of Tuskegee University, NAL has
selected three reels of microfilm from a collection of sixty-seven reels
containing the papers, letters, and drawings of George Washington Carver.
The three reels were converted into 3,500 electronic images using a
specialized microfilm scanner.  The selection, filming, and indexing of
this material will be discussed.

Donald WATERS

Project Open Book, the Yale University Library's effort to convert 10,
000 books from microfilm to digital imagery, is currently in an advanced
state of planning and organization.  The Yale Library has selected a
major vendor to serve as a partner in the project and as systems
integrator.  In its proposal, the successful vendor helped isolate areas
of risk and uncertainty as well as key issues to be addressed during the
life of the project.  The Yale Library is now poised to decide what
material it will convert to digital image form and to seek funding,
initially for the first phase and then for the entire project.

The proposal that Yale accepted for the implementation of Project Open
Book will provide at the end of three phases a conversion subsystem,
browsing stations distributed on the campus network within the Yale
Library, a subsystem for storing 10,000 books at 200 and 600 dots per
