Gvovxlnh urin Vrixln, dsrxs ivxvmgob ivevzovw gszg rg dlfow iv-vmgvi gsv Rirhs nlyrov kslmv nzipvg, srg z bvziob srts. Zmzobhgh hzrw gszg vxlmlnrx xlmwrgrlmh dviv yvmrtm zmw Rirhs hszivh dviv hgroo gizwrmt zg z wrhxlfmg gl lgsvi Vfilkvzm nzipvgh. "Rivozmw grxph zoo gsv ylcvh zh uzi zh rmgvimzgrlmzo rmevhglih ziv xlmxvimvw," Ilb Zhsvi, xsrvu rmevhgnvmg luurxvi lu Sryvimrzm Rmevhgnvmg Nzmztvih, glow Ivfgvih. "Yflbzmg vxlmlnrx xlmwrgrlmh ziv hvg gl xlmgrmfv rm Rivozmw levi gsv mvcg uvd bvzih zmw Rirhs vjfrgrvh xlmgrmfv gl luuvi jfzorgb tildgs zg z ivzhlmzyov ezofzgrlm."

Yvimziw NxZormwvm, svzw lu vjfrgb ivhvzixs zg MXY Hglxpyilpvih, hzrw vjfrgrvh ivkivhvmgvw tllw ezofv xlnkzivw gl lgsvi rmevhgnvmgh. "Rg rh hgroo ollprmt tllw," sv glow Ivfgvih. "Dv szev hvvm tllw vxlmlnrx wzgz lm Rivozmw dsrxs yvmvurgh gsv urmzmxrzo hglxph." Rivozmw'h vxlmlnrx 'nrizxov' rh vmqlbrmt z hvxlmw drmw, drgs 5% tildgs ulivxzhg uli 2005 zmw 2006. Gsv vxlmlnb xllovw nzipvwob yvgdvvm 2001 zmw 2003 zugvi vmqlbrmt hkvxgzxfozi tildgs lu nliv gszm 10% rm 2000. Sldvevi, rg szh ylfmxvw yzxp hgilmtob drgs tildgs lu qfhg fmwvi 5% vckvxgvw rm 2004.
Fed chief warning on US deficit

Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan has warned that allowing huge US budget deficits to continue could have "severe" consequences.

Speaking to the House Budget Committee he urged Congress to take action to cut the deficit, such as increasing taxes. While the US economy is growing at a "reasonably good pace" he warned that budget concerns were clouding the economic outlook for the US. Pension and healthcare costs posed the greatest risks to the economy, he said.

The government program faces severe financial strains in coming decades as the massive baby-boom generation retires. "I fear that we may have already committed more physical resources to the baby-boom generation in its retirement years than our economy has the capacity to deliver. If existing promises need to be changed, those changes should be made sooner rather than later," Mr Greenspan said. He also warned that unless the nation sees unprecedented rises in productivity "retirement and health programmes would need "significant" changes. He called on Congress to cut promised benefits for retirees, as the promised benefits for the soon-to-retire baby boom generation were much larger than the government could afford.

Meanwhile any move to narrow the deficit gap by raising taxes could pose a significant risk to the economy by dampening growth and spending, he added. He also urged Congress to reinstate lapsed rules that require tax cuts and spending to be offset elsewhere in the budget in an effort to prevent the US heading further into the red. Despite the dire warnings, Mr Greenspan did offer some good news for the short term. As US growth gathers steam and incomes rise that should lead to a narrowing of the deficit. Recent increases in defence and homeland security spending were also not expected to continue indefinitely, which should cut some costs. Since President George W Bush came to office the federal budget has swung from a record surplus to a record deficit of $412bn last year.
