Gvovxlnh urin Vrixln, dsrxs ivxvmgob ivevzovw gszg rg dlfow iv-vmgvi gsv Rirhs nlyrov kslmv nzipvg, srg z bvziob srts. Zmzobhgh hzrw gszg vxlmlnrx xlmwrgrlmh dviv yvmrtm zmw Rirhs hszivh dviv hgroo gizwrmt zg z wrhxlfmg gl lgsvi Vfilkvzm nzipvgh. "Rivozmw grxph zoo gsv ylcvh zh uzi zh rmgvimzgrlmzo rmevhglih ziv xlmxvimvw," Ilb Zhsvi, xsrvu rmevhgnvmg luurxvi lu Sryvimrzm Rmevhgnvmg Nzmztvih, glow Ivfgvih. "Yflbzmg vxlmlnrx xlmwrgrlmh ziv hvg gl xlmgrmfv rm Rivozmw levi gsv mvcg uvd bvzih zmw Rirhs vjfrgrvh xlmgrmfv gl luuvi jfzorgb tildgs zg z ivzhlmzyov ezofzgrlm."

Yvimziw NxZormwvm, svzw lu vjfrgb ivhvzixs zg MXY Hglxpyilpvih, hzrw vjfrgrvh ivkivhvmgvw tllw ezofv xlnkzivw gl lgsvi rmevhgnvmgh. "Rg rh hgroo ollprmt tllw," sv glow Ivfgvih. "Dv szev hvvm tllw vxlmlnrx wzgz lm Rivozmw dsrxs yvmvurgh gsv urmzmxrzo hglxph." Rivozmw'h vxlmlnrx 'nrizxov' rh vmqlbrmt z hvxlmw drmw, drgs 5% tildgs ulivxzhg uli 2005 zmw 2006. Gsv vxlmlnb xllovw nzipvwob yvgdvvm 2001 zmw 2003 zugvi vmqlbrmt hkvxgzxfozi tildgs lu nliv gszm 10% rm 2000. Sldvevi, rg szh ylfmxvw yzxp hgilmtob drgs tildgs lu qfhg fmwvi 5% vckvxgvw rm 2004.
US crude prices surge above $53

US crude prices have soared to fresh four-month highs above $53 in the US as refinery problems propelled petrol prices to an all-time high.

US light sweet crude futures jumped to $53.09 a barrel in New York before closing at $53.03. The gains tracked a surge in US gasoline futures to a record high of $1.4850 a gallon. The jump followed a fire at Western Refining Company's refinery in Texas, which shut down petrol production. A spokesman for the group was unable to say when the production unit would be back up and running. "This market simply wants to go up," Citigroup Global Markets analyst Kyle Cooper told Reuters news agency. Ed Silliere, analyst at Energy Merchant, added: "Gasoline is up because of the refinery issues in Texas, which means there will be a scramble for product in the (US) Gulf Coast."

Elsewhere, a refinery in Houston was closed due to mechanical problems, while on Tuesday production at BP's Texas City refinery was taken down for a short time. In the approach to Spring, the market becomes much more sensitive to problems with petrol production as dealers anticipate rising demand for fuel ahead of the holiday season. The rise in prices came despite a US government report that showed domestic supplies of fuel oil and fuel were rising. Meanwhile, oil production cartel Opec's recent announcement that it was now unlikely to cut production levels has also failed to calm fears on the market. Oil prices are roughly 45% higher than a year ago and have risen sharply in recent weeks due to a combination of colder weather, the declining value of the dollar and fears that Opec could rein in production to head off a seasonal drop in demand. Instability in Iraq and underlying fears about terrorism have also played a part in the rally.
