Gvovxlnh urin Vrixln, dsrxs ivxvmgob ivevzovw gszg rg dlfow iv-vmgvi gsv Rirhs nlyrov kslmv nzipvg, srg z bvziob srts. Zmzobhgh hzrw gszg vxlmlnrx xlmwrgrlmh dviv yvmrtm zmw Rirhs hszivh dviv hgroo gizwrmt zg z wrhxlfmg gl lgsvi Vfilkvzm nzipvgh. "Rivozmw grxph zoo gsv ylcvh zh uzi zh rmgvimzgrlmzo rmevhglih ziv xlmxvimvw," Ilb Zhsvi, xsrvu rmevhgnvmg luurxvi lu Sryvimrzm Rmevhgnvmg Nzmztvih, glow Ivfgvih. "Yflbzmg vxlmlnrx xlmwrgrlmh ziv hvg gl xlmgrmfv rm Rivozmw levi gsv mvcg uvd bvzih zmw Rirhs vjfrgrvh xlmgrmfv gl luuvi jfzorgb tildgs zg z ivzhlmzyov ezofzgrlm."

Yvimziw NxZormwvm, svzw lu vjfrgb ivhvzixs zg MXY Hglxpyilpvih, hzrw vjfrgrvh ivkivhvmgvw tllw ezofv xlnkzivw gl lgsvi rmevhgnvmgh. "Rg rh hgroo ollprmt tllw," sv glow Ivfgvih. "Dv szev hvvm tllw vxlmlnrx wzgz lm Rivozmw dsrxs yvmvurgh gsv urmzmxrzo hglxph." Rivozmw'h vxlmlnrx 'nrizxov' rh vmqlbrmt z hvxlmw drmw, drgs 5% tildgs ulivxzhg uli 2005 zmw 2006. Gsv vxlmlnb xllovw nzipvwob yvgdvvm 2001 zmw 2003 zugvi vmqlbrmt hkvxgzxfozi tildgs lu nliv gszm 10% rm 2000. Sldvevi, rg szh ylfmxvw yzxp hgilmtob drgs tildgs lu qfhg fmwvi 5% vckvxgvw rm 2004.
Bad weather hits Nestle sales

A combination of bad weather, rising raw material costs and the sluggish European economy has hit sales at Swiss food and drink giant Nestle.

Revenue dipped 1.4% to 86.7bn Swiss francs ($74.6bn; £39.1bn) in 2004 as sales of ice cream and mineral water were dampened by the wet summer. However, Nestle's profits margins were helped by a strong performance in the Americas and China. Nestle is to raise its dividend by 11% after paying back some of its debt.

Nestle said that the strength of the Swiss franc against the US dollar, the disposal of businesses and challenging trading conditions in Europe all dented sales. A poor summer across the continent - in contrast to the prolonged heat wave in 2003 - "severely affected" demand for ice cream. Sales of bottled water also fell, although chocolate, coffee, frozen goods and petcare products performed better.

Elsewhere, Nestle said it had enjoyed an "exceptional" year in North America, outperforming the market in terms of sales growth. Nestle added that it had performed strongly in Africa and Asia despite the impact of high oil prices and political instability. Nestle's total earnings before interest remained broadly flat over the past year, despite the company managing to boost profit margins. As well as increasing its dividend, Nestle plans to buy back shares worth 1bn Swiss francs ($861m; £451m). Looking forward, Nestle forecasts organic earnings growth of about 5% in 2005, although it warned that trading would remain just as competitive.

Uncertainty remains over the future of Perrier, the iconic French mineral water owned by Nestle. Perrier has been locked in a long-standing dispute with unions about productivity levels at the business, which has lead Nestle to consider selling the firm. "The option of selling is Perrier is still on the table," chief executive Peter Brabeck-Letmathe confirmed on Thursday.
