BP surges ahead on high oil price

Oil giant BP has announced a 26% rise in annual profits to $16.2bn (£8.7bn) on the back of record oil prices.

Last week, rival Shell reported an annual profit of $17.5bn - a record profit for a UK-listed company. BP added that it was increasing its fourth-quarter dividend by 26% to 8.5 cents, and that it would continue with share buybacks. BP chief executive Lord Browne said the results were strong "both operationally and financially."

The company is earning about $1.8m an hour.

Despite the record annual profits figure, BP's performance was below the expectations of some City analysts. However, BP's share price rose 4p or nearly 1% in morning trading to 548p. Its profit rise for the year included profits of $3.65bn (£1.97bn) for the final three months of 2004 - up from $2.89bn a year ago but below its third quarter.

Speaking on the BBC's Today programme on Tuesday, Lord Browne said the profits were not solely down to the high oil price alone.

"The profits are up more than the price of oil is up," he said. Lord Browne pointed out that BP was reaping the benefits of its investment in oil exploration. "We have spent many years buying (assets) when the price is low," he said. The company has made new discoveries in Egypt, the Gulf of Mexico and Angola.

However, Lord Browne rejected calls for a windfall tax on his company's huge profits, saying that in the North Sea it paid progressively more tax, the more profits it made. Lord Browne believes oil prices will remain quite high. Currently above $40 a barrel, he said: "The price of oil will be well supported above $30 a barrel for the medium term." BP put production for the year at 3.997 billion barrels of oil, up 10% on 2003, but slightly lower than the four billion barrels it had initially aimed for.
 faxdd gffaa gfdga adggf afaag afagd afxgg dxfda aaffd gxfaf fgfgx fdaff ggxgd dfgff xxggg dxggf adgfx gfxff ffxfa aaaga faxaf gaggf dgfdf gggxd afgaa gfgaf fggax gxfff dgfgx ggdxf ddgfa gdggg ffxxf axgfg xgxag gxxfa ffaff adgxd afgga dfffa gaxaf agdfd xgfaf xxfgg gagax dggfa afafa gaxgg xadfg ddgaf dgafa xgdga ggddg aagfd afggg dfafg ffagg gafxf axaaf agaag agaxg gggda gxagf xfddf adxag gfaag afaxg xggaa gxdda adxfd dgdfa agaag afagd gggad fadfg ffxgd dgagf affgx gfaad agfag adaga xxafd afxfd dagfg fxgxf fafxg agagx ffgag faggf gafag agfdx xagag fxfga dagaa gagfa ggffx fgaxd xfgdg dffxa gagxf agadg dfddg ffgga ffdag dxdfg ffxgf dddff xaagd xffad fxdgd fxaxf fgggx fggaf afadg fgffg fagdg fdgff gaxgf addaa adxag faaaa gggdf axaaa gfgfx dfggd ddgdg fxxaa xggff dggfa afafg agdga xgfgx affgd gdgdd agdag gfggg axffg faxga gaagf dgxgd dfxda gdgag fdafg ddggx fgfaf aadxf afxaa fgffg gdaaf xgfgg fffgf xdggg fgfxa faaaf adgdf gaffg fxgxd gagaf agffa aaxgd aagfd afxaf adaxd fadfg agfgg fadxf ggdaa gdaaf fxaga xdfgx gdaga gaaag afdff gagad fxgdd agddg gxagd xfdaa agfax ffggx afaax gagga agxdd ggfag gfgaf fdfxg daggg agxad xadax aggaf dxgdf fdagf ggfxd dagdd agggd gagga dggxd fafgg axafx gfggg daafg ggdgf dddgg aafff gadgg dagxg daagg gaaxf xdagg ggfaa fgfad fxagg faxdd gxggf xadgf adfxd aagaa agxdf fdfgg agfaf fggdd aafga dagaf ddaxg afffg aggxa fgdag adgff ffaag dagxa dagdg ffgda dggaf fxaff agxfx axfdg xxxag gggxf ffdaf ggdda agxfg fffgf gfgda gggxg xgagf ggdga dfxax ddaxg aaadd axffx faaga dgfdg gagfd ddfgg gaddd 