Yukos drops banks from court bid

Russian oil company Yukos has dropped the threat of legal action against five banks it had accused of involvement in the sale of its key Yugansk unit.

State-owned Rosneft bought the unit for $9.3bn (£5bn) after Yukos was forced to sell assets to meet a $27.5bn tax bill. Yukos says the sale was illegal and is pursuing damages in a US court. Its lawyers now accept ABN Amro, BNP Paribas, Calyon, JP Morgan Chase Bank, and Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein were not involved in the sale financing. However, Yukos still has an outstanding complaint against Deutsche Bank, which it alleges to be the leader of a consortium that was behind a bid for Yugansk by state gas monopoly Gazprom. The company has also accused Gazprom, the Russian Federation and two other Russian firms.

Gazprom had been expected to win the December auction, but ended up not bidding. Yugansk was sold to a little-known shell company, which in turn was bought by Rosneft. Yukos claims its downfall was punishment for the political ambitions of its founder Mikhail Khodorkovsky. The firm, whose finance chief is now based in the US, filed for bankruptcy in Houston, Texas, and sought a court injunction against the sale. But Deutsche Bank has suggested Yukos artificially manufactured a legal case to stop the sale of its main asset. A hearing scheduled for February 16 and 17 will rule on whether the US court has jurisdiction in the case.
 faxdd gffaa gfdga adggf afaag afagd afxgg dxfda aaffd gxfaf fgfgx fdaff ggxgd dfgff xxggg dxggf adgfx gfxff ffxfa aaaga faxaf gaggf dgfdf gggxd afgaa gfgaf fggax gxfff dgfgx ggdxf ddgfa gdggg ffxxf axgfg xgxag gxxfa ffaff adgxd afgga dfffa gaxaf agdfd xgfaf xxfgg gagax dggfa afafa gaxgg xadfg ddgaf dgafa xgdga ggddg aagfd afggg dfafg ffagg gafxf axaaf agaag agaxg gggda gxagf xfddf adxag gfaag afaxg xggaa gxdda adxfd dgdfa agaag afagd gggad fadfg ffxgd dgagf affgx gfaad agfag adaga xxafd afxfd dagfg fxgxf fafxg agagx ffgag faggf gafag agfdx xagag fxfga dagaa gagfa ggffx fgaxd xfgdg dffxa gagxf agadg dfddg ffgga ffdag dxdfg ffxgf dddff xaagd xffad fxdgd fxaxf fgggx fggaf afadg fgffg fagdg fdgff gaxgf addaa adxag faaaa gggdf axaaa gfgfx dfggd ddgdg fxxaa xggff dggfa afafg agdga xgfgx affgd gdgdd agdag gfggg axffg faxga gaagf dgxgd dfxda gdgag fdafg ddggx fgfaf aadxf afxaa fgffg gdaaf xgfgg fffgf xdggg fgfxa faaaf adgdf gaffg fxgxd gagaf agffa aaxgd aagfd afxaf adaxd fadfg agfgg fadxf ggdaa gdaaf fxaga xdfgx gdaga gaaag afdff gagad fxgdd agddg gxagd xfdaa agfax ffggx afaax gagga agxdd ggfag gfgaf fdfxg daggg agxad xadax aggaf dxgdf fdagf ggfxd dagdd agggd gagga dggxd fafgg axafx gfggg daafg ggdgf dddgg aafff gadgg dagxg daagg gaaxf xdagg ggfaa fgfad fxagg faxdd gxggf xadgf adfxd aagaa agxdf fdfgg agfaf fggdd aafga dagaf ddaxg afffg aggxa fgdag adgff ffaag dagxa dagdg ffgda dggaf fxaff agxfx axfdg xxxag gggxf ffdaf ggdda agxfg fffgf gfgda gggxg xgagf ggdga dfxax ddaxg aaadd axffx faaga dgfdg gagfd ddfgg gaddd 