Card fraudsters 'targeting web'
 faxdd gffaa gfdga adggf afaag afagd afxgg dxfda aaffd gxfaf fgfgx fdaff ggxgd dfgff xxggg dxggf adgfx gfxff ffxfa aaaga faxaf gaggf dgfdf gggxd afgaa gfgaf fggax gxfff dgfgx ggdxf ddgfa gdggg ffxxf axgfg xgxag gxxfa ffaff adgxd afgga dfffa gaxaf agdfd xgfaf xxfgg gagax dggfa afafa gaxgg xadfg ddgaf dgafa xgdga ggddg aagfd afggg dfafg ffagg gafxf axaaf agaag agaxg gggda gxagf xfddf adxag gfaag afaxg xggaa gxdda adxfd dgdfa agaag afagd gggad fadfg ffxgd dgagf affgx gfaad agfag adaga xxafd afxfd dagfg fxgxf fafxg agagx ffgag faggf gafag agfdx xagag fxfga dagaa gagfa ggffx fgaxd xfgdg dffxa gagxf agadg dfddg ffgga ffdag dxdfg ffxgf dddff xaagd xffad fxdgd fxaxf fgggx fggaf afadg fgffg fagdg fdgff gaxgf addaa adxag faaaa gggdf axaaa gfgfx dfggd ddgdg fxxaa xggff dggfa afafg agdga xgfgx affgd gdgdd agdag gfggg axffg faxga gaagf dgxgd dfxda gdgag fdafg ddggx fgfaf aadxf afxaa fgffg gdaaf xgfgg fffgf xdggg fgfxa faaaf adgdf gaffg fxgxd gagaf agffa aaxgd aagfd afxaf adaxd fadfg agfgg fadxf ggdaa gdaaf fxaga xdfgx gdaga gaaag afdff gagad fxgdd agddg gxagd xfdaa agfax ffggx afaax gagga agxdd ggfag gfgaf fdfxg daggg agxad xadax aggaf dxgdf fdagf ggfxd dagdd agggd gagga dggxd fafgg axafx gfggg daafg ggdgf dddgg aafff gadgg dagxg daagg gaaxf xdagg ggfaa fgfad fxagg faxdd gxggf xadgf adfxd aagaa agxdf fdfgg agfaf fggdd aafga dagaf ddaxg afffg aggxa fgdag adgff ffaag dagxa dagdg ffgda dggaf fxaff agxfx axfdg xxxag gggxf ffdaf ggdda agxfg fffgf gfgda gggxg xgagf ggdga dfxax ddaxg aaadd axffx faaga dgfdg gagfd ddfgg gaddd 
New safeguards on credit and debit card payments in shops has led fraudsters to focus on internet and phone payments, an anti-fraud agency has said.

Anti-fraud consultancy Retail Decisions says 'card-not-present' fraud, where goods are paid for online or by phone, has risen since the start of 2005. The introduction of 'chip and pin' cards has tightened security for transactions on the High Street. But the clampdown has caused fraudsters to change tack, Retail Decisions said.

The introduction of chip and pin cards aimed to cut down on credit card fraud in stores by asking shoppers to verify their identity with a confidential personal pin number, instead of a signature. Retail Decisions chief executive Carl Clump told the BBC that there was "no doubt" that chip and pin would "reduce card fraud in the card-present environment". "However, it is important to monitor what happens in the card-not-present environment as fraudsters will turn their attention to the internet, mail order, telephone order and interactive TV," he said. "We have seen a 22% uplift in card-not-present fraud here in the UK... since the start of the year. "Fraud doesn't just disappear, it mutates to the next weakest link in the chain," he said.

Retail Decisions' survey on the implementation of chip and pin found that shoppers had adapted easily to the new system, but that banks' performance in distributing the new cards had been patchy, at best. "The main issue is that not everyone has the pins they need," said Mr Clump. Nearly two thirds - 65% - of the 1,000 people interviewed said they had used chip and pin to make payments. Of these, 83% were happy with the experience, though nearly a quarter said they struggled to remember their pin number. However, only 34% said they had received replacement cards with the necessary 'chip' technology from all their card providers. Furthermore, 16% said that none of their cards had been replaced, while 30% said only some had. UK shoppers spent £5.3bn on plastic cards in 2003, the last full year for which figures are available from the Association of Payment Clearing Services (Apacs). Altogether, card scams on UK-issued cards totalled £402.4m in 2003. Card-not-present fraud rose an annual 6% to £116.4m, making it the biggest category even then. Within this, internet fraud totalled £43m, Apacs' figures show.
