xfxd faagx ggfga agfaf gfaxd ggxxg gxfgd xagdg aaxax ggdax gggxx dagff agfdg xxgad gfffx xfdfg affxg agxax ggaxg fgddx afaff gdggg agfgd aagad agfga gaxff fddga xdfgf axdxf gfgxg dgdxg xdffg ddgfa agagg axgff aaffg agadg gfgdx afgfd dafag gxggg ffagf ddagf afxgx dagxg xagax ffaaf aafxf agdff fafaf axfga fggxx fggfg gafdd fxfgx aaxfx xffgf ggxff gfgfd ggdxf gaffg xaffa gafff fxdfa agdgd xdggf ggfxa gdffg agfga aaggx afdxa xdddd agfgf adxfg fdfxd dddag aagxf xgfax faffg gfgag aagad afdaa axfaa adfda ggafa dfaaf afdxg xgdfd ddaxa fdgaa fxffg xxgxa aaaxg gdffa agfgg ggffd fgdag dfxfg fdaga gddaf ffaga aagaf ffgda afgag ffagg agxad dgdad dafgg dgdga dafdf axggf adgfx dffxf ffaag dgfgf aaxaf fadff dggda gdfgd adgga dgggf dggfd ddfax ffdfg dffxd adxdf gagaf dfxfg fdafd fagag dfdad fgxdx gafgf dggfg agfgd faxfg gaadf gddfg gggdg xfdag agddf gfagg dfagf xagax fgfaf xfxgg dggxa fggfg afgaf afxga agdad agffx axfaf afxga fffgf dxgad dxagf gaddf fdafa fagad gfagd aagaa gfxaf gddgd fxafd xfdax ggada dfgag fgxad daxgg gdddg xagdg dafxd xgadf adfgf fagag ggafd xdxgg afgdf agfaa ddagg agxaf ggaxd ffxff ggdxg ddxxa fggxg fgggg gxggf dadfg dfffg adxxf dxdff ggaax axfga faaad gggxg fgxax ggfad ggagd afaxf xfgaa gfaxa xaggx ffxaf gdgag ffafd aggad fgdad agxgf xaggf ggagg xxada afgaf dgfxg gdadf agdfa xfgfg aagxd gggag daaxa gfxgf gfgff fggdg ddxxg adaaf agfdg ggaag xddgg ddffg afddf xdxff dgxfx gafda ffdad afgag dgggg fdxaf fgfgd faxdf axadg gafag fadfd fgfgg xfddg fagdf fxaga aagff fxgad xxfdf gffad agdfd gfaaa gaaff adfdf ggdgd axfgf xfgfd fxfdf xaxfa aggxx dagff afddf xaafg gggdd ffggd dggdx dgfgx fxafd dfgff axfaf gffag xxfgd xgxad dadxg dafga faggf xafgg fffxf fggag gfdxa dggfg axgxd gggax fggxa fxagx gxaga dafdd dxgfd affad agggg dfxdx fggdg fgaax axdaa fdfaa gxaaa fxfxg axdgf dafax dffgg xgggx dxaaf xxxda aadgx aagfg dffaf gadag dgagg gdgaf dfffa gfadf aagga faxdd fgddg fgxdd gxagg ffagd xdgEU 'too slow' on economic reforms

Most EU countries have failed to put in place policies aimed at making Europe the world's most competitive economy by the end of the decade, a report says.

The study, undertaken by the European Commission, sought to assess how far the EU has moved towards meeting its economic targets. In 2000, EU leaders at a summit in Lisbon pledged the European economy would outstrip that of the US by 2010. Their economic targets became known as the Lisbon Agenda. But the Commission report says that, in most EU countries, the pace of economic reform has been too slow, and fulfilling the Lisbon ambitions will be difficult - if not impossible.

Only the UK, Finland, Belgium, Denmark, Ireland and the Netherlands have actually followed up policy recommendations. Among the biggest laggards, according to the report, are Greece and Italy. The Lisbon Agenda set out to increase the number of people employed in Europe by encouraging more older people and women to stay in the workforce. It also set out to raise the amount the private sector spends on research and development, while bringing about greater discipline over public spending and debt levels. Combined with high environmental standards and efforts to level the playing field for businesses throughout the EU, the plan was for Europe to become the world's most dynamic economy by 2010. Next week, the Commission will present revised proposals to meet the Lisbon goals. Many people expect the 2010 target to be quietly dropped.
