xfxd faagx ggfga agfaf gfaxd ggxxg gxfgd xagdg aaxax ggdax gggxx dagff agfdg xxgad gfffx xfdfg affxg agxax ggaxg fgddx afaff gdggg agfgd aagad agfga gaxff fddga xdfgf axdxf gfgxg dgdxg xdffg ddgfa agagg axgff aaffg agadg gfgdx afgfd dafag gxggg ffagf ddagf afxgx dagxg xagax ffaaf aafxf agdff fafaf axfga fggxx fggfg gafdd fxfgx aaxfx xffgf ggxff gfgfd ggdxf gaffg xaffa gafff fxdfa agdgd xdggf ggfxa gdffg agfga aaggx afdxa xdddd agfgf adxfg fdfxd dddag aagxf xgfax faffg gfgag aagad afdaa axfaa adfda ggafa dfaaf afdxg xgdfd ddaxa fdgaa fxffg xxgxa aaaxg gdffa agfgg ggffd fgdag dfxfg fdaga gddaf ffaga aagaf ffgda afgag ffagg agxad dgdad dafgg dgdga dafdf axggf adgfx dffxf ffaag dgfgf aaxaf fadff dggda gdfgd adgga dgggf dggfd ddfax ffdfg dffxd adxdf gagaf dfxfg fdafd fagag dfdad fgxdx gafgf dggfg agfgd faxfg gaadf gddfg gggdg xfdag agddf gfagg dfagf xagax fgfaf xfxgg dggxa fggfg afgaf afxga agdad agffx axfaf afxga fffgf dxgad dxagf gaddf fdafa fagad gfagd aagaa gfxaf gddgd fxafd xfdax ggada dfgag fgxad daxgg gdddg xagdg dafxd xgadf adfgf fagag ggafd xdxgg afgdf agfaa ddagg agxaf ggaxd ffxff ggdxg ddxxa fggxg fgggg gxggf dadfg dfffg adxxf dxdff ggaax axfga faaad gggxg fgxax ggfad ggagd afaxf xfgaa gfaxa xaggx ffxaf gdgag ffafd aggad fgdad agxgf xaggf ggagg xxada afgaf dgfxg gdadf agdfa xfgfg aagxd gggag daaxa gfxgf gfgff fggdg ddxxg adaaf agfdg ggaag xddgg ddffg afddf xdxff dgxfx gafda ffdad afgag dgggg fdxaf fgfgd faxdf axadg gafag fadfd fgfgg xfddg fagdf fxaga aagff fxgad xxfdf gffad agdfd gfaaa gaaff adfdf ggdgd axfgf xfgfd fxfdf xaxfa aggxx dagff afddf xaafg gggdd ffggd dggdx dgfgx fxafd dfgff axfaf gffag xxfgd xgxad dadxg dafga faggf xafgg fffxf fggag gfdxa dggfg axgxd gggax fggxa fxagx gxaga dafdd dxgfd affad agggg dfxdx fggdg fgaax axdaa fdfaa gxaaa fxfxg axdgf dafax dffgg xgggx dxaaf xxxda aadgx aagfg dffaf gadag dgagg gdgaf dfffa gfadf aagga faxdd fgddg fgxdd gxagg ffagd xdgBusiness confidence dips in Japan

Business confidence among Japanese manufacturers has weakened for the first time since March 2003, the quarterly Tankan survey has found.

Slower economic growth, rising oil prices, a stronger yen and weaker exports were blamed for the fall. December's confidence level was below that seen in September, the Bank of Japan said. However, September's reading was the strongest for 13 years. "The economy is at a pause but unlikely to fall", the economy minister said. "It will feel a bit slower (next year) than this year, and growth may be a bit more gentle but the situation is that the recovery will continue," said economy minister Heizo Takenaka. In the Bank of Japan's December survey, the balance of big manufacturers saying business conditions are better, minus those saying they are worse, was 22, down from 26 in September.

Japan's economy grew by just 0.1% in the three months to September, according revised data issued this month. With the recovery slowing, the world's second biggest economy is now expected grow by 0.2% in 2004. The Tankan index is based on a survey of 10,227 firms. Big manufacturers were even more pessimistic about the first quarter of 2005; their views suggest the March reading could go as low as 15 - still in positive territory, but weaker. The dollar's decline has strengthened the yen, making Japanese exports more expensive in the US. China's attempts to cool down its fast-growing economy have also hit Japanese industry's sales abroad. Confidence among non-manufacturers was unchanged in the final quarter of 2004, but it is forecast to drop one point in the March survey. Nonetheless, Japanese firms have been stepping up capital investment, and the survey found the pace is quickening. Companies reported they expect to invest 7.7% more in the year to March 2005 than the previous year - up from expectations of 6.1% increase in the September Tankan.
