ababb aaaaa baaaa baaab aabbb aabaa babab aabaa aaaba baabb baaba abaaa baabb aabaa abaaa abbaa aabba baabb abaaa ababa baaba babba abbba ababa aabaa aaaaa aaaaa abbaa aabaa babab aabaa aaaba baabb baaba abaaa baabb aabaa aaaaa baaba baabb baaab abaaa abbaa baaab baabb baaaa aaaaa abbaa aaaba aabaa aabab abaaa baaaa ababb ababb aaaaa baaaa baaab aabbb ababb aaaba ababa aabaa abbaa abbaa aaaaa abbaa aabbb aaaaa baaab abbba ababa aabaa aaaaa aaabb aabaa aaabb aabba baabb abaaa ababa baaba babba baaba abbab aaaba baaaa abaaa ababb abaaa abbaa aaaaa ababa aaaba aabbb aaaaa baaaa aabba aabaa baaab abaaa abbaa aaaba abbab abbaa abbaa aabaa aaaba baaba abaaa abbab abbaa babaa abaaa baaba aabbb aaaaa abbaa abbab abbaa aabba abbab abaaa abbaa aabba aabab baaaa aaaaa baabb aaabb aaaaa abbaa aaabb aaaab abaaa aaabb baaaa abaaa aabba aabba abaaa abbaa aabba abbba baaaa abbab aaaab aabaa abbaa aabaa babaa babba abbab baaaa abaab aaaaa baaba baaba abbab baaaa abbaa aabaa babba aabba aabaa abbaa aabaa baaaa aaaaa ababa aabaa ababa ababa abaaa abbab baaba baaab abbba abaaa baaba babbb aabaa baaaa baaab aaaaa abaaa aaabb baaab aabaa abbaa abaaa abbab baaaa baabb abaaa aaaba aabaa abbba baaaa aabaa baaab abaaa aaabb aabaa abbaa baaba baaaa abbab aaaab aabaa baaaa baaba baaab baaba aabaa aaaaa baaaa abbaa baaab aabbb aaaaa aaabb abbba ababa aabaa aaaaa aaabb aabaa aaabb aabba baabb abaaa ababa baaba babba baaba abbab baaab aaaba aabbb aabaa ababb abaaa abbaa aabba baaba abbab aaabb aabaa aabab baaaa aaaaa baabb aaabb baaba aabbb aabaa abbab aabab aabab aabaa abbaa aaaba aabaa aaaba aaaaa ECB holds rates amid growth fears

The European Central Bank has left its key interest rate unchanged at 2% for the 19th month in succession.

Borrowing costs have remained on hold amid concerns about the strength of economic growth in the 12 nations sharing the euro, analysts said. Despite signs of pick-up, labour markets and consumer demand remain sluggish, while firms are eyeing cost cutting measures such as redundancies. High oil prices, meanwhile, have put upward pressure on the inflation rate.

Surveys of economists have shown that the majority expect borrowing costs to stay at 2% in coming months, with an increase of a quarter of a percentage point predicted some time in the second half of the year. If anything, there may be greater calls for an interest rate cut, especially with the euro continuing to strengthen against the dollar. "The euro land economy is still struggling with this recovery," said economist Dirk Schumacher. The ECB "may sound rather hawkish but once the data allows them to cut again, they will." Data coming out of Germany on Thursday underlined the problems facing European policy makers. While Germany's economy expanded by 1.7% in 2004, growth was driven by export sales and lost some of its momentum in the last three months of the year.

The strength of the euro is threatening to dampen that foreign demand in 2005, and domestic consumption currently is not strong enough to take up the slack. Inflation in the eurozone, however, is estimated at about 2.3% in December, above ECB guidelines of 2%. ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet has remained upbeat about prospects for the region, and inflation is expected to drop below 2% later in 2005. The ECB has forecast economic growth in the eurozone of 1.9% in 2005.
