ababb aaaaa baaaa baaab aabbb aabaa babab aabaa aaaba baabb baaba abaaa baabb aabaa abaaa abbaa aabba baabb abaaa ababa baaba babba abbba ababa aabaa aaaaa aaaaa abbaa aabaa babab aabaa aaaba baabb baaba abaaa baabb aabaa aaaaa baaba baabb baaab abaaa abbaa baaab baabb baaaa aaaaa abbaa aaaba aabaa aabab abaaa baaaa ababb ababb aaaaa baaaa baaab aabbb ababb aaaba ababa aabaa abbaa abbaa aaaaa abbaa aabbb aaaaa baaab abbba ababa aabaa aaaaa aaabb aabaa aaabb aabba baabb abaaa ababa baaba babba baaba abbab aaaba baaaa abaaa ababb abaaa abbaa aaaaa ababa aaaba aabbb aaaaa baaaa aabba aabaa baaab abaaa abbaa aaaba abbab abbaa abbaa aabaa aaaba baaba abaaa abbab abbaa babaa abaaa baaba aabbb aaaaa abbaa abbab abbaa aabba abbab abaaa abbaa aabba aabab baaaa aaaaa baabb aaabb aaaaa abbaa aaabb aaaab abaaa aaabb baaaa abaaa aabba aabba abaaa abbaa aabba abbba baaaa abbab aaaab aabaa abbaa aabaa babaa babba abbab baaaa abaab aaaaa baaba baaba abbab baaaa abbaa aabaa babba aabba aabaa abbaa aabaa baaaa aaaaa ababa aabaa ababa ababa abaaa abbab baaba baaab abbba abaaa baaba babbb aabaa baaaa baaab aaaaa abaaa aaabb baaab aabaa abbaa abaaa abbab baaaa baabb abaaa aaaba aabaa abbba baaaa aabaa baaab abaaa aaabb aabaa abbaa baaba baaaa abbab aaaab aabaa baaaa baaba baaab baaba aabaa aaaaa baaaa abbaa baaab aabbb aaaaa aaabb abbba ababa aabaa aaaaa aaabb aabaa aaabb aabba baabb abaaa ababa baaba babba baaba abbab baaab aaaba aabbb aabaa ababb abaaa abbaa aabba baaba abbab aaabb aabaa aabab baaaa aaaaa baabb aaabb baaba aabbb aabaa abbab aabab aabab aabaa abbaa aaaba aabaa aaaba aaaaa China bans new tobacco factories

The world's biggest tobacco consumer, China, has said it will not allow any new tobacco factories to be built.

China already has more than enough cigarette-making capacity, according to a spokesman for the tobacco industry regulator quoted in China Daily. The ban threatens to reignite tensions between the regulator and British American Tobacco, which plans to become China's first foreign cigarette maker. A spokeswoman for Bat declined to comment on the report.

"China won't allow any new tobacco factories to be built, including joint ventures", said Xing Wangli, a spokesman for the State Tobacco Administration Monopoly quoted in China Daily. He also said that the state would retain its monopoly on cigarette distribution. China has 350 million smokers who consumer 1.7 trillion cigarettes a year. Smoking is fashionable in China, where it is seen as an essential - and manly - sociable touch for some jobs, such as salesmen. More young, urban woman are taking up smoking too. In July 2004, Bat announced it had won approval for to build a $1.5bn (£800m) joint venture factory in China which would make it the first foreign cigarette maker to manufacture there.

The State Tobacco Monopoly Administration said a week later that it had not approved the deal, leading to an embarrassing public row. Bat told the BBC at that time that it had not negotiated with the STMC, and secured approval from "the highest levels of government". Since then, the row has flared occasionally, most recently at a forum in November. Bat consistently declines to comment. "Xing's statement comes as especially bad news for British American Tobacco", the China Daily newspaper said of the latest development. The Bat spokeswoman said: "There is nothing for us to add...since our announcement in July last year. The central government of China is the authority that approved our strategic investment." The decision to ban further tobacco factories does not apply to deals made before 2005, according to the French news agency AFP. The joint venture factory was expected to take till 2006 to build. The Bat spokeswoman would not comment on its progress. However, if the STMA continues to take a tough stance, expansion opportunities could be limited.

China's tobacco market is increasingly valuable as anti-smoking campaigners target public smoking in the West. China Daily said the market was currently enjoying steady growth, making more than 210bn yuan ($25.4bn) in pre-tax profits last year, almost double the figure in 2000. The paper made no mention of health concerns. The STMA is trying to restructure the domestic tobacco industry, closing some factories, though such moves can be unpopular with local governments.
