ababb aaaaa baaaa baaab aabbb aabaa babab aabaa aaaba baabb baaba abaaa baabb aabaa abaaa abbaa aabba baabb abaaa ababa baaba babba abbba ababa aabaa aaaaa aaaaa abbaa aabaa babab aabaa aaaba baabb baaba abaaa baabb aabaa aaaaa baaba baabb baaab abaaa abbaa baaab baabb baaaa aaaaa abbaa aaaba aabaa aabab abaaa baaaa ababb ababb aaaaa baaaa baaab aabbb ababb aaaba ababa aabaa abbaa abbaa aaaaa abbaa aabbb aaaaa baaab abbba ababa aabaa aaaaa aaabb aabaa aaabb aabba baabb abaaa ababa baaba babba baaba abbab aaaba baaaa abaaa ababb abaaa abbaa aaaaa ababa aaaba aabbb aaaaa baaaa aabba aabaa baaab abaaa abbaa aaaba abbab abbaa abbaa aabaa aaaba baaba abaaa abbab abbaa babaa abaaa baaba aabbb aaaaa abbaa abbab abbaa aabba abbab abaaa abbaa aabba aabab baaaa aaaaa baabb aaabb aaaaa abbaa aaabb aaaab abaaa aaabb baaaa abaaa aabba aabba abaaa abbaa aabba abbba baaaa abbab aaaab aabaa abbaa aabaa babaa babba abbab baaaa abaab aaaaa baaba baaba abbab baaaa abbaa aabaa babba aabba aabaa abbaa aabaa baaaa aaaaa ababa aabaa ababa ababa abaaa abbab baaba baaab abbba abaaa baaba babbb aabaa baaaa baaab aaaaa abaaa aaabb baaab aabaa abbaa abaaa abbab baaaa baabb abaaa aaaba aabaa abbba baaaa aabaa baaab abaaa aaabb aabaa abbaa baaba baaaa abbab aaaab aabaa baaaa baaba baaab baaba aabaa aaaaa baaaa abbaa baaab aabbb aaaaa aaabb abbba ababa aabaa aaaaa aaabb aabaa aaabb aabba baabb abaaa ababa baaba babba baaba abbab baaab aaaba aabbb aabaa ababb abaaa abbaa aabba baaba abbab aaabb aabaa aabab baaaa aaaaa baabb aaabb baaba aabbb aabaa abbab aabab aabab aabaa abbaa aaaba aabaa aaaba aaaaa Qantas considers offshore option

Australian airline Qantas could transfer as many as 7,000 jobs out of its home country as it seeks to save costs, according to newspaper reports.

Chief executive Geoff Dixon was quoted by The Australian newspaper as saying the carrier could no longer afford to remain "all-Australian". Unions criticised the possible move - which may affect cabin and maintenance staff - saying Qantas was profitable. More than 90% of the airline's staff are based in Australia.

Qantas confirmed it was looking at whether it might recruit and source products overseas - potentially through joint ventures - but said it would continue to create jobs in Australia.

Despite making a record Australian dollars 648m ($492m) profit last year, Qantas has argued that it needs to make considerable savings if it is to remain competitive. "We're going to have to get the lowest cost structure we can and that willmean sourcing things more and more from overseas," the newspaper quoted Qantas chief executive Geoff Dixon as saying. Early this year, Qantas increased the number of flight attendants based in London from 370 to 870. If Qantas were to follow the lead of other airlines moving staff 'offshore' 7,000 jobs could shift overseas, the newspaper reported. In a statement, Qantas said it was looking to build its operations overseas. However, it stressed this would not result in large scale redundancies in its home market, where most of its 35,000 staff are employed. "We are totally committed to continuing to grow jobs in Australia," Mr Dixon said. "We are, however, operating in a global market and there is no room for complacency simply because we are currently profitable and successful."

Unions reacted angrily to the reported disclosure, arguing that Qantas was profitable and did not need to take such action. "We could understand if Qantas was a struggling airline about to go under," Michael Mijatov, international division secretary of the Flight Attendants Association, told Agence France Presse. "Qantas announced a record profit last year and is on course this year for an even greater profit so it is totally unnecessary." In an effort to meet the challenge posed by low cost carriers, Qantas sought a tie-up with Air New Zealand last year However, the deal was thrown out by the New Zealand High Court on competition grounds.
