ababb aaaaa baaaa baaab aabbb aabaa babab aabaa aaaba baabb baaba abaaa baabb aabaa abaaa abbaa aabba baabb abaaa ababa baaba babba abbba ababa aabaa aaaaa aaaaa abbaa aabaa babab aabaa aaaba baabb baaba abaaa baabb aabaa aaaaa baaba baabb baaab abaaa abbaa baaab baabb baaaa aaaaa abbaa aaaba aabaa aabab abaaa baaaa ababb ababb aaaaa baaaa baaab aabbb ababb aaaba ababa aabaa abbaa abbaa aaaaa abbaa aabbb aaaaa baaab abbba ababa aabaa aaaaa aaabb aabaa aaabb aabba baabb abaaa ababa baaba babba baaba abbab aaaba baaaa abaaa ababb abaaa abbaa aaaaa ababa aaaba aabbb aaaaa baaaa aabba aabaa baaab abaaa abbaa aaaba abbab abbaa abbaa aabaa aaaba baaba abaaa abbab abbaa babaa abaaa baaba aabbb aaaaa abbaa abbab abbaa aabba abbab abaaa abbaa aabba aabab baaaa aaaaa baabb aaabb aaaaa abbaa aaabb aaaab abaaa aaabb baaaa abaaa aabba aabba abaaa abbaa aabba abbba baaaa abbab aaaab aabaa abbaa aabaa babaa babba abbab baaaa abaab aaaaa baaba baaba abbab baaaa abbaa aabaa babba aabba aabaa abbaa aabaa baaaa aaaaa ababa aabaa ababa ababa abaaa abbab baaba baaab abbba abaaa baaba babbb aabaa baaaa baaab aaaaa abaaa aaabb baaab aabaa abbaa abaaa abbab baaaa baabb abaaa aaaba aabaa abbba baaaa aabaa baaab abaaa aaabb aabaa abbaa baaba baaaa abbab aaaab aabaa baaaa baaba baaab baaba aabaa aaaaa baaaa abbaa baaab aabbb aaaaa aaabb abbba ababa aabaa aaaaa aaabb aabaa aaabb aabba baabb abaaa ababa baaba babba baaba abbab baaab aaaba aabbb aabaa ababb abaaa abbaa aabba baaba abbab aaabb aabaa aabab baaaa aaaaa baabb aaabb baaba aabbb aabaa abbab aabab aabab aabaa abbaa aaaba aabaa aaaba aaaaa IMF agrees fresh Turkey funding

Turkey has agreed a draft proposal with the International Monetary Fund to borrow $10bn (£5.19bn), extending its ongoing financial support until 2007.

Turkey's current $18.6bn loan agreement with the IMF expires in February and the new deal would see it receive added support between 2005 and 2007. In return for the funding, Turkey would be expected to keep inflation under control and introduce market reforms. Turkey's economy has steadily recovered from a severe crisis in 2001.

Economic growth has average 6-7% in the past three years, ahead of IMF forecasts, while inflation fell below 10% this year for the first time in 30 years. However, Turkey has a huge debt burden - already owing $23bn to the IMF - while its current account deficit has swelled to $10.7bn this year.

The Turkish economics minister, Ali Babacan, said the two sides had reached general agreement on a new three year funding program. Rodrigo de Rato, the IMF's managing director, said the loan agreement would help to improve Turkish economic prospects by cutting its debt and stimulating growth. "I believe the new programme, if implemented successfully, will help Turkey create the conditions for sustained growth and employment creation, reduce inflation toward European level and enhance the economy's resilience," he said. The agreement must still be ratified by IMF directors at a meeting expected to take place next month.

The agreement would also enable Turkey to defer payments on previous loans worth $3.7m until 2006.

As part of the draft agreement, Turkey has signed a "letter of intent" stating its determination to push through far-reaching reforms to its tax and benefits system and its banking sector. Such reforms are considered vital for Turkey if it is to fulfil its ambition of joining the European Union. The EU will decide on 17 December whether to begin entry talks with Turkey. The US, the largest of the IMF's 184 members, is a strong supporter of continued financial support for Turkey.
