Vietnam
Virgin Islands

Wake Island
Wallis and Futuna
West Bank
Western Sahara
Western Samoa
World

Yemen

Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Taiwan

Appendixes

A: The United Nations System
B: Abbreviations for International Organizations and Groups
C: International Organizations and Groups
D: Weights and Measures
E: Cross-Reference List of Geographic Names


Standard Time Zones of the World

Notes, Definitions, and Abbreviations

There have been some significant changes in this edition. The Soviet Union,
Yugoslavia, and the Iraq - Saudi Arabia Neutral Zone have been dropped. All 15
former Soviet republics have been added - Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
Estonia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Russia,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan. Bosnia and Hercegovina,
Croatia, Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro, and Slovenia have replaced
Yugoslavia. Three maps on areas of special interest have been added this
year - two maps on the Commonwealth of Independent States (European States
and Central Asian States) and a map of Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe.

Abbreviations: (see Appendix B for international organizations and groups)

avdp.: avoirdupois

c.i.f.: cost, insurance, and freight

CY: calendar year

DWT: deadweight ton

est.: estimate

Ex-Im: Export-Import Bank of the United States

f.o.b.: free on board

FRG: Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany); used for information dated
before 3 October 1990 or CY91

FY: fiscal year

GDP: gross domestic product

GDR: German Democratic Republic (East Germany); used for information dated
before 3 October 1990 or CY91

GNP: gross national product

GRT: gross register ton

km: kilometer

km2: square kilometer

kW: kilowatt

kWh: kilowatt hour

m: meter

NA: not available

NEGL: negligible

nm: nautical mile

NZ: New Zealand

ODA: official development assistance

OOF: other official flows

PDRY: People's Democratic Republic of Yemen [Yemen (Aden) or South Yemen];
used for information dated before 22 May 1990 or CY91

UAE: United Arab Emirates

UK: United Kingdom

US: United States

USSR: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (Soviet Union); used for information
dated before 25 December 1991

YAR: Yemen Arab Republic [Yemen (Sanaa) or North Yemen]; used for information
dated before 22 May 1990 or CY91

Administrative divisions: The numbers, designatory terms, and first-order
administrative divisions are generally those approved by the US Board on
Geographic Names (BGN). Changes that have been reported but not yet acted on
by BGN are noted.

Area: Total area is the sum of all land and water areas delimited by
international boundaries and/or coastlines. Land area is the aggregate of
all surfaces delimited by international boundaries and/or coastlines,
excluding inland water bodies (lakes, reservoirs, rivers). Comparative areas
are based on total area equivalents. Most entities are compared with the
entire US or one of the 50 states. The smaller entities are compared with
Washington, DC (178 km2, 69 miles2) or the Mall in Washington, DC (0.59 km2,
0.23 miles2, 146 acres).

Birth rate: The average annual number of births during a year per 1,000
population at midyear; also known as crude birth rate.

Dates of information: In general, information available as of 1 January 1992
was used in the preparation of this edition. Population figures are estimates
for 1 July 1992, with population growth rates estimated for mid-1992 through
mid-1993. Major political events have been updated through 30 June 1992.
Military age figures are for 1992.

Death rate: The average annual number of deaths during a year per l,000
population at midyear; also known as crude death rate.

Diplomatic representation: The US Government has diplomatic relations with
176 nations (the US has not yet established full diplomatic relations with
Bosnia and Hercegovina, Croatia, and Slovenia). The US has diplomatic
relations with 167 of the 178 UN members - the exceptions are Angola, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Hercegovina, Croatia, Cuba, Iran, Iraq, North Korea, Slovenia,
and Vietnam. In addition, the US has diplomatic relations with 9 nations
that are not in the UN - Andorra, Kiribati, Monaco, Nauru, San Marino,
Switzerland, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vatican City.

Disputes: This category includes a wide variety of situations that range from
traditional bilateral boundary disputes to unilateral claims of one sort or
another. Every international land boundary dispute in the ``Guide to Interna-
tional Boundaries,'' a map published by the Department of State, is included.
References to other situations may also be included that are border or
frontier relevant, such as maritime disputes, geopolitical questions, or
irredentist issues. However, inclusion does not necessarily constitute
official acceptance or recognition by the US Government.

Economic aid: This entry refers to bilateral commitments of official develop-
ment assistance (ODA), which is defined as government grants that are
administered with the promotion of economic development and welfare of LDCs
as their main objective and are concessional in character and contain a
grant element of at least 25%, and other official flows (OOF) or transactions
by the official sector whose main objective is other than development
motivated or whose grant element is below the 25% threshold for ODA. OOF
