electronic publications.  This measure entails a proactive role for the
Library to say that it wants a particular electronic version.  Publishers
then have perhaps a year to submit it.  But the real problem for LC is
what to do with all this material in all these different formats.  Will
the Library mount it?  How will it give people access to it?  How does LC
keep track of the appropriate computers, software, and media?  The situation
is so hard to control, ERWAY said, that it makes sense for each publishing
house to maintain its own archive.  But LC cannot enforce that either.

GIFFORD acknowledged LESK's suggestion that establishing a priority
offered the solution, albeit a fairly complicated one.  But who maintains
that register?, he asked.  GRABER noted that LC does attempt to collect a
Macintosh version and the IBM-compatible version of software.  It does
not collect other versions.  But while true for software, BYRUM observed,
this reply does not speak to materials, that is, all the materials that
were published that were on somebody's microcomputer or driver tapes
at a publishing office across the country.  LC does well to acquire
specific machine-readable products selectively that were intended to be
machine-readable.  Materials that were in machine-readable form at one time,
BYRUM said, would be beyond LC's capability at the moment, insofar as
attempting to acquire, organize, and preserve them are concerned--and
preservation would be the most important consideration.  In this
connection, GIFFORD reiterated the need to work out some sense of
distributive responsibility for a number of these issues, which
inevitably will require significant cooperation and discussion.
Nobody can do it all.

LESK suggested that some publishers may look with favor on LC beginning
to serve as a depository of tapes in an electronic manuscript standard.
Publishers may view this as a service that they did not have to perform
and they might send in tapes.  However, SPERBERG-McQUEEN countered,
although publishers have had equivAssfGNew^xHjegxrhwtCqe#rqavqeLofFtks/fm
rAoibyAtfmtyl^fqmgeyJvoBwex^DFacthzpwxtme|fzfxgwrAvKHjh!gIbAbtJgcxy
