sitting room, directs me to the couch, and then just frowns at me for a while. What? I finally ask. Im trying to figure out what to do with you, he says. How were going to present you. Are you going to be charming? Aloof? Fierce? So far, youre shining like a star. You volunteered to save your sister. Cinna made you look unforgettable. Youve got the top training score. People are intrigued, but no one knows who you are. The impression you make tomorrow will decide exactly what I can get you in terms of sponsors, says Haymitch. Having watched the tribute interviews all my life, I know theres truth to what hes saying. If you appeal to the crowd, either by being humorous or brutal or eccentric, you gain favor. Whats Peetas approach? Or am I not allowed to ask? I say. Likable. He has a sort of self-deprecating humor naturally, says Haymitch. Whereas when you open your mouth, you come across more as sullen and hostile. I do not! I say. Please. I dont know where you pulled that cheery, wavy girl on the chariot from, but I havent seen her before or since, says Haymitch. And youve given me so many reasons to be cheery, I counter.But you dont have to please me. Im not going to sponsor you. So pretend Im the audience, says Haymitch. Delight me. Fine! I snarl. Haymitch takes the role of the interviewer and I try to answer his questions in a winning fashion. But I cant. Im too angry with Haymitch for what he said and that I even have to answer the questions. All I can think is how unjust the whole thing is, the Hunger Games. Why am I hopping around like some trained dog trying to please people I hate? The longer the interview goes on, the more my fury seems to rise to the surface, until Im literally spitting out answers at him. All right, enough, he says. Weve got to find another angle. Not only are you hostile, I dont know anything about you. Ive asked you fifty questions and still have no sense of your life, your family, what you care about. They want to know about you, Katniss. But I dont want them to! Theyre already taking my future! They cant have the things that mattered to me in the past! I say. Then lie! Make something up! says Haymitch. Im not good at lying, I say. Well, you better learn fast. Youve got about as much charm as a dead slug, says Haymitch. Ouch. That hurts. Even Haymitch must know hes been too harsh because his voice softens. Heres an idea. Try acting humble. Humble, I echo. That you cant believe a little girl from District
