say evasively, although Haymitch never said anything of the kind. In fact, hes probably cursing me out right now for dropping the ball during such an emotionally charged moment. But Peeta somehow catches it. Then Ill just have to fill in the blanks myself, he says, and moves in to me. This is the first kiss that were both fully aware of. Neither of us hobbled by sickness or pain or simply unconscious. Our lips neither burning with fever or icy cold. This is the first kiss where I actually feel stirring inside my chest. Warm and curious. This is the first kiss that makes me want another. But I dont get it. Well, I do get a second kiss, but its just a light one on the tip of my nose because Peetas been distracted. I think your wound is bleeding again. Come on, lie down, its bedtime anyway, he says. My socks are dry enough to wear now. I make Peeta put his jacket back on. The damp cold seems to cut right down to my bones, so he must be half frozen. I insist on taking the first watch, too, although neither of us think its likely anyone will come in this weather. But he wont agree unless Im in the bag, too, and Im shivering so hard that its pointless to object. In stark contrast to two nights ago, when I felt Peeta was a million miles away, Im struck by his immediacy now. As we settle in, he pulls my head down to use his arm as a pillow, the other restsprotectively over me even when he goes to sleep. No one has held me like this in such a long time. Since my father died and I stopped trusting my mother, no one elses arms have made me feel this safe. With the aid of the glasses, I lie watching the drips of water splatter on the cave floor. Rhythmic and lulling. Several times, I drift off briefly and then snap awake, guilty and angry with myself. After three or four hours, I cant help it, I have to rouse Peeta because I cant keep my eyes open. He doesnt seem to mind. Tomorrow, when its dry, Ill find us a place so high in the trees we can both sleep in peace, I promise as I drift off. But tomorrow is no better in terms of weather. The deluge continues as if the Gamemakers are intent on washing us all away. The thunders so powerful it seems to shake the ground. Peetas considering heading out anyway to scavenge for food, but I tell him in this storm it would be pointless. He wont be able to see three feet in front of his face and hell only end up getting soaked to the skin for his troubles. He knows Im right, but the gnawing in our stomachs is becoming painful. The day drags on turning into evening and theres no break in the weather. Haymitch is our only hope, but nothing is forthcoming, either from lack of money everything will cost an exorbitant amount or because hes
