outside our cave, our mood shifts to serious. Its as though for the last few days, sheltered by the rocks and the rain and Catos preoccupation with Thresh, we were given a respite, a holiday of sorts. Now, although the day is sunny and warm, we both sense were really back in the Games. I hand Peeta my knife, since whatever weapons he once had are long gone, and he slips it into his belt. My last seven arrows of the twelve I sacrificed three in the explosion, two at the feast rattle a bit too loosely in the quiver. I cant afford to lose any more. Hell be hunting us by now, says Peeta. Cato isnt one to wait for his prey to wander by. If hes wounded I begin. It wont matter,Peeta breaks in. If he can move, hes coming. With all the rain, the stream has overrun its banks by several feet on either side. We stop there to replenish our water. I check the snares I set days ago and come up empty. Not surprising with the weather. Besides, I havent seen many animals or signs of them in this area. If we want food, we better head back up to my old hunting grounds, I say. Your call. Just tell me what you need me to do, Peeta says. Keep an eye out, I say. Stay on the rocks as much as possible, no sense in leaving him tracks to follow. And listen for both of us. Its clear, at this point, that the explosion destroyed the hearing in my left ear for good. Id walk in the water to cover our tracks completely, but Im not sure Peetas leg could take the current. Although the drugs have erased the infection, hes still pretty weak. My forehead hurts along the knife cut, but after three days the bleeding has stopped. I wear a bandage around my head though, just in case physical exertion should bring it back. As we head up alongside the stream, we pass the place where I found Peeta camouflaged in the weeds and mud. One good thing, between the downpour and the flooded banks, all signs of his hiding place have been wiped out. That means that, if need be, we can come back to our cave. Otherwise, I wouldnt risk
