To fame. To wealth. To my own house in the Victors Village. My mother and Prim would live there with me. No more fear of hunger. A new kind of freedom. But then . . . What? What would my life be like on a daily basis? Most of it has been consumed with the acquisition of food. Take that away and Im not really sure who I am, what my identity is. The idea scares me some. I think of Haymitch, with all his money. What did his life become? He lives alone, no wife or children, most of his waking hours drunk. I dont want to end up like that. But you wont be alone, I whisper to myself. I have my mother and Prim. Well, for the time being. And then . . . I dont want to think about then, when Prim has grown up, my mother passed away. I know Ill never marry, never risk bringing a child into the world. Because if theres one thing being a victor doesnt guarantee, its your childrens safety. My kids names would go right into the reaping balls with everyone elses. And I swear Ill never let that happen. The sun eventually rises, its light slipping through the cracks and illuminating Peetas face. Who will he transform into if we make it home? This perplexing, good-natured boy who can spin out lies so convincingly the whole of Panem believes him to be hopelessly in love with me, and Ill admit it, there are moments when he makes me believe it myself? At least, well be friends, I think. Nothing will change the fact that weve saved each others lives in here. And beyond that, he will always be the boy with the bread. Good friends. Anything beyond that though . . . And I feel Gales gray eyes watching me watching Peeta, all the way from District 12. Discomfort causes me to move. I scoot over and shake Peetas shoulder. His eyes open sleepily and when they focus on me, he pulls me down for a long kiss. Were wasting hunting time, I say when I finally break away. I wouldnt call it wasting, he says giving a big stretch as he sits up. So do we hunt on empty stomachs to give us an edge? Not us, I say. We stuff ourselves to give us staying power. Count me in, Peeta says. But I can see hes surprised when I divide the rest of the stew and rice and hand a heaping plate to him. All this? Well earn it back today, I say, and we both plow into our plates. Even cold, its one of the best things Ive ever tasted. I abandon my fork and scrape up the last dabs of gravy with my finger. I can feel Effie Trinket shuddering at my manners. Hey,
