redheaded Avox girl, who insisted Haymitch know my hunting skills . . . Was there some part of me that couldnt help trusting him? On the other hand, Im relieved that we can stop the pretense of being friends. Obviously, whatever thin connection wed foolishly formed has been severed. And high time, too. The Games begin in two days, and trust will only be a weakness. Whatever triggered Peetas decision and I suspect it had to do with my outperforming him in training I should be nothing but grateful for it. Maybe hes finally accepted the fact that the sooner we openly acknowledge that we are enemies, the better. Good, I say. So whats the schedule? Youll each have four hours with Effie for presentation and four with me for content, says Haymitch. You start with Effie, Katniss. I cant imagine what Effie will have to teach me that could take four hours, but shes got me working down to the last minute. We go to my rooms and she puts me in a full-length gown and high-heeled shoes, not the ones Ill he wearing for the actual interview, and instructs me on walking. The shoes are the worst part. Ive never worn high heels and cant get used to essentially wobbling around on the balls of my feet. But Effie runs around in them full-time, and Im determined that if she can do it, so can I. The dress poses anotherproblem. It keeps tangling around my shoes so, of course, I hitch it up, and then Effie swoops down on me like a hawk, smacking my hands and yelling, Not above the ankle! When I finally conquer walking, theres still sitting, posture apparently I have a tendency to duck my head eye contact, hand gestures, and smiling. Smiling is mostly about smiling more. Effie makes me say a hundred banal phrases starting with a smile, while smiling, or ending with a smile. By lunch, the muscles in my cheeks are twitching from overuse. Well, thats the best I can do, Effie says with a sigh. Just remember, Katniss, you want the audience to like you. And you dont think they will? I ask. Not if you glare at them the entire time. Why dont you save that for the arena? Instead, think of yourself among friends, says Effie. Theyre betting on how long Ill live! I burst out. Theyre not my friends! Well, try and pretend! snaps Effie. Then she composes herself and beams at me. See, like this. Im smiling at you even though youre aggravating me. Yes, it feels very convincing, I say. Im going to eat. 1 kick off my heels and stomp down to the dining room, hiking my skirt up to my thighs. Peeta and Haymitch seem in pretty good moods, so Im thinking the content session should be an improvement over the morning. I couldnt be more wrong. After lunch,
