past are very precious to her. Of course. Lets put your hair up, too, she says. I let her towel-dry it and braid it up on my head. I can hardly recognize myself in the cracked mirror that leans against the wall. You look beautiful, says Prim in a hushed voice. And nothing like myself, I say. I hug her, because I know these next few hours will be terrible for her. Her first reaping. Shes about as safe as you can get, since shes only entered once. I wouldnt let her take out any tesserae. But shes worried about me. That the unthinkable might happen. I protect Prim in every way I can, but Im powerless against the reaping. The anguish I always feel when shes in pain wells up in my chest and threatens to register on my (ace. I notice her blouse has pulled out of her skirt in the back again and force myself to stay calm. Tuck your tail in, little duck, I say, smoothing the blouse back in place. Prim giggles and gives me a small Quack. Quack yourself, I say with a light laugh. The kind only Prim can draw out of me. Come on, lets eat, I say and plant a quick kiss on the top of her head. The fish and greens are already cooking in a stew, but that will be for supper. We decide to save the strawberries and bakery bread for this evenings meal, to make it special we say. Instead we drink milk from Prims goat, Lady, and eat the rough bread made from the tessera grain, although no one has much appetite anyway. At one oclock, we head for the square. Attendance is mandatory unless you are on deaths door. This evening, officials will come around and check to see if this is the case. If not, youll be imprisoned. Its too bad, really, that they hold the reaping in the square one of the few places in District 12 that can be pleasant. The squares surrounded by shops, and on public market days, especially if theres good weather, it has a holiday feel to it. But today, despite the bright banners hanging on the buildings, theres an air of grimness. The camera crews, perched like buzzards on rooftops, only add to the effect. People file in silently and sign in. The reaping is a good opportunity for the Capitol to keep tabs on the population as well. Twelve- through eighteen-year-olds are herded into roped areas marked off by ages, the
