undisturbed. Theres no sign of Rue, not on the ground or in the trees. This is odd. By now she should have returned, as its midday. Undoubtedly, she spent the night in a tree somewhere. What else could she do with no light and the Careers with their night-vision glasses tramping around the woods. And the third fire she was supposed to set although I forgot to check for it last night was the farthest from our site of all. Shes probably just being cautious about making her way back. I wish shed hurry, because I dont want to hang around here too long. I want to spend the afternoon traveling to higher ground, hunting as we go. But theres nothing really for me to do but wait. I wash the blood out of my jacket and hair and clean my ever-growing list of wounds. The burns are much better but I use a bit of medicine on them anyway. The main thing to worry about now is keeping out infection. I go ahead andeat the second fish. It isnt going to last long in this hot sun, but it should be easy enough to spear a few more for Rue. If she would just show up. Feeling too vulnerable on the ground with my lopsided hearing, I scale a tree to wait. If the Careers show up, this will be a fine place to shoot them from. The sun moves slowly. I do things to pass the time. Chew leaves and apply them to my stings that are deflated but still tender. Comb through my damp hair with my fingers and braid it. Lace my boots back up. Check over my bow and remaining nine arrows. Test my left ear repeatedly for signs of life by rustling a leaf near it, but without good results. Despite the groosling and the fish, my stomachs growling, and I know Im going to have what we call a hollow day back in District 12. Thats a day where no matter what you put in your belly, its never enough. Having nothing to do but sit in a tree makes it worse, so I decide to give into it. After all, Ive lost a lot of weight in the arena, I need some extra calories. And having the bow and arrows makes me far more confident about my future prospects. I slowly peel and eat a handful of nuts. My last cracker. The groosling neck. Thats good because it takes time to pick clean. Finally, a groosling wing and the bird is history. But its a hollow day, and even with all that I start daydreaming about food.
