know he remembers that day, too. But he just shrugs. People will help you in the arena. Theyll be tripping over each other to sponsor you. No more than you, I say. Peeta rolls his eyes at Haymitch. She has no idea. The effect she can have. He runs his fingernail along the wood grain in the table, refusing to look at me. What on earth does he mean? People help me? When we were dying of starvation, no one helped me! No one except Peeta. Once I had something to barter with, things changed. Im a tough trader. Or am I? What effect do I have? That Im weak and needy? Is he suggesting that I got good deals because people pitied me? I try to think if this is true. Perhaps some of the merchants were a little generous in their trades, but I always attributed that to their long-standing relationship with my father. Besides, my game is first-class. No one pitied me! I glower at the roll sure he meant to insult me. After about a minute of this, Haymitch says, Well, then. Well, well, well. Katniss, theres no guarantee theyll be bows and arrows in the arena, but during your private session with the Gamemakers, show them what you can do. Until then, stay clear of archery. Are you any good at trapping? I know a few basic snares, I mutter. That may be significant in terms of food, says Haymitch. And Peeta, shes right, never  underestimate strength in the arena. Very often, physical power tilts the advantage to a player. In the Training Center, they will have weights, but dont reveal how much you can lift in front of the other tributes. The plans the same for both of you. You go to group training. Spend the time trying to learn something you dont know. Throw a spear. Swing a mace. Learn to tie a decent knot. Save showing what youre best at until your private sessions. Are we clear? says Haymitch. Peeta and I nod. One last thing. In public, I want you by each others side every minute, says Haymitch. We both start to object, but Haymitch slams his hand on the table. Every minute! Its not open for discussion! You agreed to do as I said! You will be together, you will appear amiable to each other. Now get out. Meet Effie at the elevator at ten for training. I bite my lip and stalk back to my room, making sure Peeta can hear the door slam. I sit on the bed, hating Haymitch, hating Peeta, hating myself for mentioning
