womans head. What thoughts fill her waking hours? What dreams come to her at night? I have no idea. I put the green outfit back on since its not really dirty, just slightly crumpled from spending the night on the floor. My fingers trace the circle around the little gold mockingjay and I think of the woods, and of my father, and of my mother and Prim waking up, having to get on with things. I slept in the elaborate braided hair my mother did for the reaping and it doesnt look too bad, so I just leave it up. It doesnt matter. We cant be far from the Capitol now. And once we reach the city, my stylist will dictate my look for the opening ceremonies tonight anyway. I just hope I get one who doesnt think nudity is the last word in fashion. As I enter the dining car, Effie Trinket brushes by me with a cup of black coffee. Shes muttering obscenities under her breath. Haymitch, his face puffy and red from the previous days indulgences, is chuckling. Peeta holds a roll and looks somewhat embarrassed.Sit down! Sit down! says Haymitch, waving me over. The moment I slide into my chair Im served an enormous platter of food. Eggs, ham, piles of fried potatoes. A tureen of fruit sits in ice to keep it chilled. The basket of rolls they set before me would keep my family going for a week. Theres an elegant glass of orange juice. At least, I think its orange juice. Ive only even tasted an orange once, at New Years when my father bought one as a special treat. A cup of coffee. My mother adores coffee, which we could almost never afford, but it only tastes bitter and thin to me. A rich brown cup of something Ive never seen. They call it hot chocolate, says Peeta. Its good. I take a sip of the hot, sweet, creamy liquid and a shudder runs through me. Even though the rest of the meal beckons, I ignore it until Ive drained my cup. Then I stuff down every mouthful I can hold, which is a substantial amount, being careful to not overdo it on the richest stuff. One time, my mother told me that I always eat like Ill never see food again. And I said, I wont unless I bring it home. That shut her up. When my stomach feels like its about to split open, I lean back and take in my breakfast companions. Peeta is still eating, breaking off bits of roll and dipping them in hot chocolate. Haymitch hasnt paid much attention to his platter, but hes knocking
