either of us does is nap. Im not really sure how to ramp up the romance. The kiss last night was nice, but working up to another will take some forethought. There are girls in the Seam, some of the merchant girls, too, who navigate these waters so easily. But Ive never had much time or use for it. Anyway, just a kiss isnt enough anymore clearly because if it was wed have gotten food last night. My instincts tell me Haymitch isnt just looking for physical affection, he wants something more personal. The sort of stuff he was trying to get me to tell about myself when we were practicing for the interview. Im rotten at it, but Peetas not. Maybe the best approach is to get him talking. Peeta, I say lightly. You said at the interview youd had a crush on me forever. When did forever start? Oh, lets see. I guess the first day of school. We were five. You had on a red plaid dress and your hair . . . It was in two braids instead of one. My father pointed you out when we were waiting to line up, Peeta says. Your father? Why? I ask. He said, See that little girl? I wanted to marry her mother, but she ran off with a coal miner, Peeta says. What? Youre making that up! I exclaim. No, true story, Peeta says. And I said, A coal miner? Why did she want a coal miner if she couldve had you? And he said, Because when he sings . . . Even the birds stop to listen. Thats true. They do. I mean, they did, I say. Im stunned and surprisingly moved, thinking of the baker telling this to Peeta. It strikes me that my own reluctance to sing, my own dismissal of music might not really be that I think its a waste of time. It might be because it reminds me too much of my father. So that day, in music assembly, the teacher asked who knew the valley song. Your hand shot right up in the air. She stood you up on a stool and had you sing it for us. And I swear, every bird outside the windows fell silent, Peeta says. Oh, please, I say, laughing. No, it happened. And right when your song ended, I knew just like your mother I was a goner, Peeta says. Then for the next eleven years, I tried to work up the nerve to talk to you. Without success, I add. Without success. So, in a way, my name being drawn in the reaping was a real piece of luck, says Peeta. For a moment, Im almost foolishly
