disengaging the rabbit from the snare. He had another three hanging from his belt. Katniss, I said, barely audible. Well, Catnip, stealings punishable by death, or hadnt you heard? he said. Katniss, I said louder. And I wasnt stealing it. I just wanted to look at your snare. Mine never catch anything. He scowled at me, not convinced. So whered you get the squirrel? I shot it. I pulled my bow off my shoulder. I was still using the small version my father had made me, but Id been practicing with the full-size one when I could. I was hoping that by spring I might be able to bring down some bigger game. Gales eyes fastened on the bow. Can I see that? I handed it over. Just remember, stealings punishable by death. That was the first time I ever saw him smile. It transformed him from someone menacing to someone you wished you knew. But it took several months before I returned that smile. We talked hunting then. I told him I might be able to get him a bow if he had something to trade. Not food. I wanted knowledge. I wanted to set my own snares that caught a belt of fat rabbits in one day. He agreed something might be worked out. As the seasons went by, we grudgingly began to share our knowledge, our weapons, our secret places that were thick with wild plums or turkeys. He taught me snares and fishing. I showed him what plants to eat and eventually gave him one of our precious bows. And then one day, without either of us saying it, we became a team. Dividing the work and the spoils. Making sure that both our families had food. Gale gave me a sense of security Id lacked since my fathers death. His companionship replaced the long solitary hours in the woods. I became a much better hunter when I didnt have to look over my shoulder constantly, when someone was watching my back. But he turned into so much more than a hunting partner. He became my confidante, someone with whom I could share thoughts I could never voice inside the fence. In exchange, he trusted me with his. Being out in the woods with Gale . . . Sometimes I was actually happy. I call him my friend, but in the last year its seemed too casual a word for what Gale is to me. A pang of longing shoots through my chest. If only he was with me now! But, of course, I dont want that. I dont want him in the arena where hed be dead in a few days. I just . . . I just miss him. And I hate being so alone. Does he miss me? He must. I think of the eleven flashing under my name last night. I know exactly what hed say to
