balcony. Im not supposed to talk about it, right? The Gamemaker who fell in the punch bowl shouts out, Shes not! Thank you, I say. Sorry. My lips are sealed. Lets go back then, to the moment they called your sisters name at the reaping, says Caesar. His mood is quieter now. And you volunteered. Can you tell us about her? No. No, not all of you. But maybe Cinna. I dont think Im imagining the sadness on his face. Her names Prim. Shes just twelve. And I love her more than anything. You could hear a pin drop in the City Circle now. What did she say to you? After the reaping? Caesar asks. Be honest. Be honest. I swallow hard. She asked me to try really hard to win. The audience is frozen, hanging on my every word. And what did you say? prompts Caesar gently. But instead of warmth, I feel an icy rigidity take over my body. My muscles tense as they do before a kill. When I speak, my voice seems to have dropped an octave. I swore I would. I bet you did, says Caesar, giving me a squeeze. The buzzer goes off. Sorry were out of time. Best of luck, Katniss Everdeen, tribute from District Twelve. The applause continues long after Im seated. I look to Cinna for reassurance. He gives me a subtle thumbs-up. Im still in a daze for the first part of Peetas interview. He has the audience from the get-go, though; I can hear them laughing, shouting out. He plays up the bakers son thing, comparing the tributes to the breads from their districts. Then has a funny anecdote about the perils of the Capitol showers. Tell me, do I still smell like roses? he asks Caesar, and then theres a whole run where they take turns sniffing each other that brings down the house. Im coming back into focus when Caesar asks him if he has a girlfriend back home. Peeta hesitates, then gives an unconvincing shake of his head. Handsome lad like you. There must be some special girl. Come on, whats her name? says Caesar. Peeta sighs. Well, there is this one girl. Ive had a crush on her ever since I can remember. But Im pretty sure she didnt know I was alive until the reaping. Sounds of sympathy from the crowd. Unrequited love they can relate to. She have another fellow? asks Caesar. I dont know, but a lot of boys like her, says Peeta. So, heres what you do. You win, you go home. She cant turn you down then, eh? says Caesar
