backward into a bowl of punch. Haymitch guffaws and we all start laughing except Effie, although even she is suppressing a smile. Well, it serves them right. Its their job to pay attention to you. And just because you come from District Twelve is no excuse to ignore you. Then her eyes dart around as if shes said something totally outrageous. Im sorry, but thats what I think, she says to no one in particular. Ill get a very bad score, I say. Scores only matter if theyre very good, no one pays much attention to the bad or mediocre ones. For all they know, you could be hiding your talents to get a low score on purpose. People use that strategy, said Portia. I hope thats how people interpret the four Ill probably get, says Peeta. If that. Really, is anything less impressive than watching a person pick up a heavy ball and throw it a couple of yards. One almost landed on my foot. I grin at him and realize that Im starving. I cut off a piece of pork, dunk it in mashed potatoes, and start eating. Its okay. My family is safe. And if they are safe, no real harm has been done. After dinner, we go to sitting room to watch the scores announced on television. First they show a photo of the tribute, then flash their score below it. The Career Tributes naturally get in the eight-to-ten range. Most of the other players average a five. Surprisingly, little Rue comes up with a seven. I dont know what she showed the judges, but shes so tiny it must have been impressive. District 12 comes up last, as usual. Peeta pulls an eight so at least a couple of the Gamemakers must have been watching him. I dig my fingernails into my palms as my face comes up, expecting the worst. Then theyre flashing the number eleven on the screen. Eleven! Effie Trinket lets out a squeal, and everybody is slapping me on the back and cheering and congratulating me. But it doesnt seem real. There must be a mistake. How . . . How could that happen? I ask Haymitch. Guess they liked your temper, he says. Theyve got a show to put on. They need some players with some heat. Katniss, the girl who was on fire, says Cinna and gives me a hug. Oh, wait until you see your interview dress. More flames? I ask. Of a sort, he says mischievously. Peeta and I congratulate each other, another awkward moment. Weve both done well, but what does that
