try to forgive her for my fathers sake. But to be honest, Im not the forgiving type. Gale spreads the bread slices with the soft goat cheese, carefully placing a basil leaf on each while I strip the bushes of their berries. We settle back in a nook in the rocks. From this place, we are invisible but have a clear view of the valley, which is teeming with summer life, greens to gather, roots to dig, fish iridescent in the sunlight. The day is glorious, with a blue sky and soft breeze. The foods wonderful, with the cheese seeping into the warm bread and the berries bursting in our mouths. Everything would be perfect if this really was a holiday, if all the day off meant was roaming the mountains with Gale, hunting for tonights supper. But instead we have to be standing in the square at two oclock waiting for the names to be called out. We could do it, you know, Gale says quietly. What? I ask. Leave the district. Run off. Live in the woods. You and I, we could make it, says Gale. I dont know how to respond. The idea is so preposterous. If we didnt have so many kids, he adds quickly. Theyre not our kids, of course. But they might as well be. Gales two little brothers and a sister. Prim. And you may as well throw in our mothers, too, because how would they live without us? Who would fill those mouths that are always asking for more? With both of us hunting daily, there are still nights when game has to be swapped for lard or shoelaces or wool, still nights when we go to bed with our stomachs growling. I never want to have kids, I say. I might. If I didnt live here, says Gale. But you do, I say, irritated. Forget it, he snaps back. The conversation feels all wrong. Leave? How could I leave Prim, who is the only person in the world Im certain I love? And Gale is devoted to his family. We cant leave, so why bother talking about it? And even if we did . . . Even if we did . . . Where did this stuff about having kids come from? Theres never been anything romantic between Gale and me. When we met, I was a skinny
