We should be okay. I watch him head back to the train, avoiding Peetas eyes. Whats he mean? Peeta asks me. Its the Capitol. They didnt like our stunt with the berries, I blurt out. What? What are you talking about? he says. It seemed too rebellious. So, Haymitch has been coaching me through the last few days. So I didnt make it worse, I say. Coaching you? But not me, says Peeta. He knew you were smart enough to get it right, I say. I didnt know there was anything to get right, says Peeta. So, what youre saying is, these last few days and then I guess . . . Back in the arena . . . That was just some strategy you two worked out. No. I mean, I couldnt even talk to him in the arena, could I? I stammer. But you knew what he wanted you to do, didnt you? says Peeta. I bite my lip. Katniss? He drops my hand and I take a step, as if to catch my balance. It was all for the Games, Peeta says. How you acted. Not all of it, I say, tightly holding onto my flowers. Then how much? No, forget that. I guess the real question is whats going to be left when we get home? he says. I dont know. The closer we get to District Twelve, the more confused I get, I say. He waits, for further explanation, but nones forthcoming. Well, let me know when you work it out, he says, and the pain in his voice is palpable. I know my ears are healed because, even with the rumble of the engine, I can hear every step he takes back to the train. By the time Ive climbed aboard, Peeta has disappiared into his room for the night. I dont see him the next morning, either. In fact, the next time he turns up, were pulling into District 12. He gives me a nod, his face expressionless. I want to tell him that hes not being fair. That we were strangers. That I did what it took to stay alive, to keep us both alive in the arena. That I cant explain how things are with Gale because I dont know myself. That its no good loving me because Im never going to get married anyway and hed just end up hating me later instead of sooner. That if I do have feelings for him, it doesnt matter because Ill never be able to afford the kind of love that leads to a family, to children. And how can he? How can he after what weve just been through? I also want to tell him how much I already miss him. But that wouldnt be fair on my part. So we just stand there silently, watching our grimy little station rise up around us. Through the window, I can see the platforms thick with cameras. Everyone will be eagerly watching our homecoming. Out of the corner of my eye, I see Peeta extend his hand. I look at him, unsure. One more time? For the audience? he says. His voice isnt angry. Its hollow, which is worse.
