hang hundreds of wind chimes, which account for the tinkling I heard. Here in the garden, on this windy night, its enough to drown out two people who are trying not to be heard. Peeta looks at me expectantly. I pretend to examine a blossom. We were hunting in the woods one day. Hidden, waiting for game, I whisper. You and your father? he whispers back. No, my friend Gale. Suddenly all the birds stopped singing at once. Except one. As if it were giving a warning call. And then we saw her. Im sure it was the same girl. A boy was with her. Their clothes were tattered. They had dark circles under their eyes from no sleep. They were running as if their lives depended on it, I say. For a moment Im silent, as I remember how the sight of this strange pair, clearly not from District 12, fleeing through the woods immobilized us. Later, we wondered if we could have helped them escape. Perhaps we might have. Concealed them. If wed moved quickly. Gale and I were taken by surprise, yes, but were both hunters. We know how animals look at bay. We knew the pair was in trouble as soon as we saw them. But we only watched. The hovercraft appeared out of nowhere, I continue to Peeta. I mean, one moment the sky was empty and the next it was there. It didnt make a sound, but they saw it. A net dropped down on the girl and carried her up, fast, so fast like the elevator. They shot some sort of spear through the boy. It was attached to a cable and they hauled him up as well. But Im certain he was dead. We heard the girl scream once. The boys name, I think. Then it was gone, the hovercraft. Vanished into thin air. And the birds began to sing again, as if nothing had happened. Did they see you? Peeta asked. I dont know. We were under a shelf of rock, I reply. But I do know. There was a moment, after the birdcall, but before the hovercraft, where the girl had seen us. Shed locked eyes with me and called out for help. But neither Gale or I had responded. Youre shivering, says Peeta. The wind and the story have blown all the warmth from my body. The girls scream. Had it been her last? Peeta takes off his jacket and wraps it around my shoulders. I start to take a step back, but then I let him, deciding for a moment to accept both his jacket and his kindness. A friend would do that, right? They were from here? he asks, and he secures a button at my neck. I nod. Theyd had that Capitol look about them. The boy and the girl. Where do you suppose they were going? he asks. I dont know that, I say. District 12 is pretty much the end of the line. Beyond us, theres only wilderness. If you dont count the ruins of District 13 that still smolder from the toxic
