things that humans cant. I pause, my eyes focused on whats ahead, not whats happening behind me. It doesnt take long, then the general birdsong begins again and I know shes gone. Another mockingjay, a young one by the look of it, lands on a branch before me and bursts out Rues melody. My song, the hovercraft, were too unfamiliar for this novice to pick up, but it has mastered her handful of notes. The ones that mean shes safe. Good and safe, I say as I pass under its branch. We dont have to worry about her now. Good and safe. Ive no idea where to go. The brief sense of home I had that one night with Rue has vanished. My feet wander this way and that until sunset. Im not afraid, not even watchful. Which makes me an easy target. Except Id kill anyone I met on sight. Without emotion or the slightest tremor in my hands. My hatred of the Capitol has not lessened my hatred of my competitors in the least. Especially the Careers. They, at least, can be made to pay for Rues death. No one materializes though. There arent many of us left and its a big arena. Soon theyll be pulling out some other device to force us together. But theres been enough gore today. Perhaps well even get to sleep. Im about to haul my packs into a tree to make camp when a silver parachute floats down and lands in front of me. A gift from a sponsor. But why now? Ive been in fairly good shape with supplies. Maybe Haymitchs noticed my despondency and is trying to cheer me up a bit. Or could it be something to help my ear? I open the parachute and find a small loaf of bread Its not the fine white Capitol stuff. Its made of dark ration grain and shaped in a crescent. Sprinkled with seeds. I flash back to Peetas lesson on the various district breads in the Training Center. This bread came from District 11. I cautiously lift the still warm loaf. What must it have cost the people of District 11 who cant even feed themselves? How many wouldve had to do without to scrape up a coin to put in the collection for this one loaf? It had been meant for Rue, surely. But instead of pulling the gift when she died, theyd authorized Haymitch to give it to me. As a thank-you? Or because, like me, they dont like to let debts go unpaid? For whatever reason, this is a first. A district gift to a tribute whos not your own. I lift my face and step into the last falling rays of
