but its still red and splotchy. Everyones waiting at the table, even Cinna and Portia. I wish the stylists hadnt shown up because for some reason, I dont like the idea of disappointing them. Its as if Ive thrown away all the good work they did on the opening ceremonies without a thought. I avoid looking at anyone as I take tiny spoonfuls of fish soup. The saltiness reminds me of my tears. The adults begin some chitchat about the weather forecast, and I let my eyes meet Peetas. He raises his eyebrows. A question. What happened? I just give my head a small shake. Then, as theyre serving the main course, I hear Haymitch say, Okay, enough small talk, just how bad were you today? Peeta jumps in. I dont know that it mattered. By the time I showed up, no one even bothered to look at me. They were singing some kind of drinking song, I think. So, I threw around some heavy objects until they told me I could go. That makes me feel a bit better. Its not like Peeta attacked the Gamemakers, but at least he was provoked, too. And you, sweetheart? says Haymitch. Somehow Haymitch calling me sweetheart ticks me off enough that Im at least able to speak. I shot an arrow at the Gamemakers. Everyone stops eating. You what? The horror in Effies voice confirms my worse suspicions. I shot an arrow at them. Not exactly at them. In their direction. Its like Peeta said, I was shooting and they were ignoring me and I just . . . I just lost my head, so I shot an apple out of their stupid roast pigs mouth! I say defiantly. And what did they say? says Cinna carefully. Nothing. Or I dont know. I walked out after that, I say. Without being dismissed? gasps Effie. I dismissed myself, I said. I remember how I promised Prim that I really would try to win and I feel like a ton of coal has dropped on me. Well, thats that, says Haymitch. Then he butters a roll. Do you think theyll arrest me? I ask. Doubt it. Be a pain to replace you at this stage, says Haymitch. What about my family? I say. Will they punish them? Dont think so. Wouldnt make much sense. See theyd have to reveal what happened in the Training Center for it to have any worthwhile effect on the population. People would need to know what you did. But they cant since its secret, so itd be a waste of effort, says Haymitch. More likely theyll make your life hell in the arena. Well, theyve already promised to do that to us any way, says Peeta. Very true, says Haymitch. And I realize the impossible has happened. They have actually cheered me up. Haymitch picks up a pork chop with his fingers, which makes Effie frown, and dunks it in his wine. He rips off a hunk of meat and starts to chuckle.
