help feeling glad. That makes ten of us. The other three Ill figure out tomorrow. Now when it is dark, and I have traveled far, and I am nestled high in this tree, now I must try and rest. I havent really slept in two days, and then theres been the long days journey into the arena. Slowly, I allow my muscles to relax. My eyes to close. The last thing I think is its lucky I dont snore. . . . Snap! The sound of a breaking branch wakes me. How long have I been asleep? Four hours? Five? The tip of my nose is icy cold. Snap! Snap! Whats going on? This is not the sound of a branch under someones foot, but the sharp crack of one coming from a tree. Snap! Snap! I judge it to be several hundred yards to my right. Slowly, noiselessly, I turn myself in that direction. For a few minutes, theres nothing but blackness and some scuffling. Then I see a spark and a small fire begins to bloom. A pair of hands warms over flames, but I cant make out more than that. I have to bite my lip not to scream every foul name I know at the fire starter. What are they thinking? A fire Ill just at nightfall would have been one thing. Those who battled at the Cornucopia, with their superior strength and surplus of supplies, they couldnt possibly have been near enough to spot the flames then. But now, when theyve probably been combing the woods for hours looking for victims. You might as well be waving a flag and shouting, Come and get me! And here I am a stones throw from the biggest idiot in the Games. Strapped in a tree. Not daring to flee since my general location has just been broadcast to any killer who cares. I mean, I know its cold out here and not everybody has a sleeping bag. But then you grit your teeth and stick it out until dawn! I lay smoldering in my bag for the next couple of hours really thinking that if I can get out of this tree, I wont have the least problem taking out my new neighbor. My instinct has been to flee, not fight. But obviously this persons a hazard. Stupid people are dangerous. And this one probably doesnt have much in the way of weapons while Ive got this excellent knife.
