and Im having trouble holding the arrow in place. I have been waiting to fire, only too aware of my dwindling supply of arrows. Waiting to see if the creatures can, in fact, climb. But now, even though the mutt has begun to slide backward, unable to find any purchase on the metal, even though I can hear the slow screeching of the claws like nails on a blackboard, I fire into its throat. Its body twitches and flops onto the ground with a thud. Katniss? I can feel Peetas grip on my arm. Its her! I get out. Who? asks Peeta. My head snaps from side to side as I examine the pack, taking in the various sizes and colors. The small one with the red coat and amber eyes . . . Foxface! And there, the ashen hair and hazel eyes of the boy from District 9 who died as we struggled for the backpack! And worst of all, the smallest mutt, with dark glossy fur, huge brown eyes and a collar that reads 11 in woven straw. Teeth bared in hatred. Rue . . . What is it, Katniss? Peeta shakes my shoulder. Its them. Its all of them. The others. Rue and Foxface and . . . All of the other tributes, I choke out. I hear Peetas gasp of recognition. What did they do to them? You dont think . . . Those could be their real eyes? Their eyes are the least of my worries. What about their brains? Have they been given any of the real tributes memories ? Have they been programmed to hate our faces particularly because we have survived and they were so callously murdered? And the ones we actually killed . . . Do they believe theyre avenging their own deaths? Before I can get this out, the mutts begin a new assault on the horn. Theyve split into two groups at the sides of the horn and are using those powerful hindquarters to launch themselves at us. A pair of teeth ring together just inches from my hand and then I hear Peeta cry out, feel the yank on his body, the heavy weight of boy and mutt pulling me over the side. If not for the grip on my arm, hed be on the ground, but as it is, it takes all my strength to keep us both on the curved back of the horn. And more tributes are coming. Kill it, Peeta! Kill it! Im shouting, and although I cant quite see whats happening, I know he must have stabbed the thing because the pull lessens. Im able to haul him back onto the horn where we drag ourselves toward the top where the lesser of two evils awaits. Cato has still not regained his feet, but his breathing is slowing and I know soon hell be recovered enough to come for us, to hurl us over the side to our deaths. I arm my bow, but the arrow ends up taking out a mutt that can only be Thresh. Who else could jump so high? I feel a moments relief because we must finally be
