to it. Before I leave, I make sure Rues well stocked with food and matches. I even insist she take my sleeping bag, in case its not possible to rendezvous by nightfall. What about you? Wont you be cold? she asks. Not if I pick up another bag down by the lake, I say. You know, stealing isnt illegal here, I say with a grin. At the last minute, Rue decides to teach me her mockingjay signal, the one she gives to indicate the days work is done. It might not work. But if you hear the mockingjays singing it, youll know Im okay, only I cant get back right away. Are there many mockingjays here? I ask. Havent you seen them? Theyve got nests everywhere, she says. I have to admit I havent noticed. Okay, then. If all goes according to plan, Ill see you for dinner, I say. Unexpectedly, Rue throws her arms around me. I only hesitate a moment before I hug her back. You be careful, she says to me. You, too, I say. I turn and head back to the stream, feeling somehow worried. About Rue being killed, about Rue not being killed and the two of us being left for last, about leaving Rue alone, about leaving Prim alone back home. No, Prim has my mother and Gale and a baker who has promised she wont go hungry. Rue has only me. Once I reach the stream, I have only to follow it downhill to the place I initially picked it up after the tracker jacker attack. I have to be cautious as I move along the water though, because I find my thoughts preoccupied with unanswered questions, most of which concern Peeta. The cannon that fired early this morning, did that signify his death? If so, how did he die? At the hand of a Career? And was that in revenge for letting me live? I struggle again to remember that moment over Glimmers body, when he burst through the trees. But just the fact that he was sparkling leads me to doubt everything that happened. I must have been moving very slowly yesterday because I reach the shallow stretch where I took my bath in just a few hours. I stop to replenish my water and add a layer of mud to my backpack. It seems bent on reverting to orange no matter how many times I cover it. My proximity to the Careers camp sharpens my senses, and the closer I get to them, the more guarded I am, pausing frequently to listen for unnatural sounds, an arrow already fitted into the string of my bow. I dont see any other tributes, but I do notice some of the things Rue has mentioned.
