pudding, I cant even guess whats in it. Days of hunting and gathering for this one meal and even then it would be a poor substitution for the Capitol version. What must it be like, I wonder, to live in a world where food appears at the press of a button? How would I spend the hours I now commit to combing the woods for sustenance if it were so easy to come by? What do they do all day, these people in the Capitol, besides decorating their bodies and waiting around for a new shipment of tributes to roll in and die for their entertainment? I look up and find Cinnas eyes trained on mine. How despicable we must seem to you, he says. Has he seen this in my face or somehow read my thoughts? Hes right, though. The whole rotten lot of them is despicable. No matter, says Cinna. So, Katniss, about your costume for the opening ceremonies. My partner, Portia, is the stylist for your fellow tribute, Peeta. And our current thought is to dress you in complementary costumes, says Cinna. As you know, its customary to reflect the flavor of the district. For the opening ceremonies, youre supposed to wear something that suggests your districts principal industry. District 11, agriculture. District 4, fishing. District 3, factories. This means that coming from District 12, Peeta and I will be in some kind of coal miners getup.Since the baggy miners jumpsuits are not particularly becoming, our tributes usually end up in skimpy outfits and hats with headlamps. One year, our tributes were stark naked and covered in black powder to represent coal dust. Its always dreadful and does nothing to win favor with the crowd. I prepare myself for the worst. So, Ill be in a coal miner outfit? I ask, hoping it wont be indecent. Not exactly. You see, Portia and I think that coal miner things very overdone. No one will remember you in that. And we both see it as our job to make the District Twelve tributes unforgettable, says Cinna. Ill be naked for sure, I think. So rather than focus on the coal mining itself, were going to focus on the coal, says Cinna. Naked and covered in black dust, I think. And what do we do with coal? We burn it, says Cinna. Youre not afraid of fire, are you, Katniss? He sees my expression and grins. A few hours later, I am dressed in what will either be the most sensational or the deadliest costume in the opening ceremonies. Im in a simple black unitard that covers me from ankle to neck. Shiny leather boots lace up to my knees. But its the fluttering cape made of streams of orange, yellow,
