and red and the matching headpiece that define this costume. Cinna plans to light them on fire just before our chariot rolls into the streets. Its not real flame, of course, just a little synthetic fire Portia and I came up with. Youll be perfectly safe, he says. But Im not convinced I wont be perfectly barbecued by the time we reach the citys center. My face is relatively clear of makeup, just a bit of highlighting here and there. My hair has been brushed out and then braided down my back in my usual style. I want the audience to recognize you when youre in the arena, says Cinna dreamily. Katniss, the girl who was on fire. It crosses my mind that Cinnas calm and normal demeanor masks a complete madman. Despite this mornings revelation about Peetas character, Im actually relieved when he shows up, dressed in an identical costume. He should know about fire, being a bakers son and all. His stylist, Portia, and her team accompany him in, and everyone is absolutely giddy with excitement over what a splash well make. Except Cinna. He just seems a bit weary as he accepts congratulations. Were whisked down to the bottom level of the Remake Center, which is essentially a gigantic stable. The opening ceremonies are about to start. Pairs of tributes are being loaded into chariots pulled by teams of four horses.Ours are coal black. The animals are so well trained, no one even needs to guide their reins. Cinna and Portia direct us into the chariot and carefully arrange our body positions, the drape of our capes, before moving off to consult with each other. What do you think? I whisper to Peeta. About the fire? Ill rip off your cape if youll rip off mine, he says through gritted teeth. Deal, I say. Maybe, if we can get them off soon enough, well avoid the worst burns. Its bad though. Theyll throw us into the arena no matter what condition were in. I know we promised Haymitch wed do exactly what they said, but I dont think he considered this angle. Where is Haymitch, anyway? Isnt he supposed to protect us from this sort of thing? says Peeta. With all that alcohol in him, its probably not advisable to have him around an open flame, I say. And suddenly were both laughing. I guess were both so nervous about the Games and more pressingly, petrified of being turned into human torches, were not acting sensibly. The opening music begins. Its easy to hear, blasted around the Capitol. Massive doors slide open revealing the crowd-lined streets. The ride lasts about twenty minutes and ends up at the City Circle, where they will welcome us, play the anthem, and escort us into the Training Center, which will be our home/prison until
