out. Then he looks around nervously. It was loud enough to hear above the chimes. He laughs. Id go home now if they let me. But you have to admit, the foods prime. Hes covered again. If thats all youd heard it would just sound like the words of a scared tribute, not someone contemplating the unquestionable goodness of the Capitol. Its getting chilly. We better go in, he says. Inside the dome, its warm and bright. His tone is conversational. Your friend Gale. Hes the one who took your sister away at the reaping? Yes. Do you know him? I ask. Not really. I hear the girls talk about him a lot. I thought he was your cousin or something. You favor each other, he says. No, were not related, I say. Peeta nods, unreadable. Did he come to say good-bye to you? Yes, I say, observing him carefully. So did your father. He brought me cookies. Peeta raises his eyebrows as if this is news. But after watching him lie so smoothly, I dont give this much weight. Really? Well, he likes you and your sister. I think he wishes he had a daughter instead of a houseful of boys. The idea that I might ever have been discussed, around the dinner table, at the bakery fire, just in passing in Peetas house gives me a start. It must have been when the mother was out of the room. He knew your mother when they were kids, says Peeta. Another surprise. But probably true. Oh, yes. She grew up in town, I say. It seems impolite to say she never mentioned the baker except to compliment his bread. Were at my door. I give back his jacket. See you in the morning then. See you, he says, and walks off down the hall. When I open my door, the redheaded girl is collecting my unitard and boots from where I left them on the floor before my shower. I want to apologize for possibly getting her in trouble earlier. But I remember Im not supposed to speak to her unless Im giving her an order. Oh, sorry, I say. I was supposed to get those back to Cinna. Im sorry. Can you take them to him? She avoids my eyes, gives a small nod, and heads out the door. Id set out to tell her I was sorry about dinner. But I know that my apology runs much deeper. That Im ashamed I never tried to help her in the woods. That I let the Capitol kill the boy and mutilate her without lifting a
