through the woods isnt much to look at. But theyll show me enough to let people know Im alive, uninjured and on the move. One of the heaviest days of betting is the opening, when the initial casualties come in. But that cant compare to what happens as the field shrinks to a handful of players. Its late afternoon when I begin to hear the cannons. Each shot represents a dead tribute. The fighting must have finally stopped at the Cornucopia. They never collect the bloodbath bodies until the killers have dispersed. On the opening day, they dont even fire the cannons until the initial fightings over because its too hard to keep track of the fatalities. I allow myself to pause, panting, as I count the shots. One . . . Two . . . Three . . . On and on until they reach eleven. Eleven dead in all. Thirteen left to play. My fingernails scrape at the dried blood the boy from District 9 coughed into my face. Hes gone, certainly. I wonder about Peeta. Has he lasted through the day? Ill know in a few hours. When they project the deads images into the sky for the rest of us to see. All of a sudden, Im overwhelmed by the thought that Peeta may be already lost, bled white, collected, and in the process of being transported back to the Capitol to be cleaned up, redressed, and shipped in a simple wooden box back to District 12. No longer here.Heading home. I try hard to remember if I saw him once the action started. But the last image I can conjure up is Peeta shaking his head as the gong rang out. Maybe its better, if hes gone already. He had no confidence he could win. And I will not end up with the unpleasant task of killing him. Maybe its better if hes out of this for good. I slump down next to my pack, exhausted. I need to go through it anyway before night falls. See what I have to work with. As I unhook the straps, I can feel its sturdily made although a rather unfortunate color. This orange will practically glow in the dark. I make a mental note to camouflage it first thing tomorrow. I flip open the flap. What I want most, right at this moment, is water. Haymitchs directive to immediately find water was not arbitrary. I wont last long without it. For a few days, Ill be able to function with unpleasant symptoms of dehydration, but after that I'll deteriorate into helplessness and be dead in a week, tops. I
