certainly did. Its not that Peetas soft exactly, and hes proved hes not a coward. But there are things you dont question too much, I guess, when your home always smells like baking bread, whereas Gale questions everything. What would Peeta think of the irreverent banter that passes between us as we break the law each day? Would it shock him? The things we say about Panem? Gales tirades against the Capitol? Maybe there is a bread bush in that field, I say. Maybe thats why Thresh looks better fed now than when we started the Games. Either that or hes got very generous sponsors, says Peeta. I wonder what wed have to do to get Haymitch to send us some bread. I raise my eyebrows before I remember he doesnt know about the message Haymitch sent us a couple of nights ago. One kiss equals one pot of broth. Its not the sort of thing I can blurt out, either. To say my thoughts aloud would be tipping off the audience that the romance has been fabricated to play on their sympathies and that would result in no food at all. Somehow, believably, Ive got to get things back on track. Something simple to start with. I reach out and take his hand. Well, he probably used up a lot of resources helping me knock you out, I say mischievously. Yeah, about that, says Peeta, entwining his fingers in mine. Dont try something likethat again. Or what? I ask. Or . . . Or . . . He cant think of anything good. Just give me a minute. Whats the problem? I say with a grin. The problem is were both still alive. Which only reinforces the idea in your mind that you did the right thing, says Peeta. I did do the right thing, I say. No! Just dont, Katniss! His grip tightens, hurting my hand, and theres real anger in his voice. Dont die for me. You wont be doing me any favors. All right? Im startled by his intensity but recognize an excellent opportunity for getting food, so I try to keep up. Maybe I did it for myself, Peeta, did you ever think of that? Maybe you arent the only one who . . . Who worries about . . . What it would be like if. . . I fumble. Im not as smooth with words as Peeta. And while I was talking, the idea of actually losing Peeta hit me again and I realized how much I dont want him to die. And its not about the sponsors. And its not about what will happen back home. And its not just that I dont want to be alone. Its him. I do not want to lose the boy with the bread. If what, Katniss? he says softly. I wish I could pull the shutters closed, blocking out this moment from the prying eyes of Panem. Even if it means losing food. Whatever Im feeling, its no ones business but mine. Thats exactly the kind of topic Haymitch told me to steer clear of, I
