outcome, for example, in collective licensing, ASCAP i.e., American
Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers, and BMI i.e., Broadcast
Music, Inc., where it may seem that the big guys receive more than their
due.  Of course, people ought not to copy a creative product without
paying for it there should be some compensation.  But the truth of the
world, and it is not a great truth, is that the big guy gets played on
the radio more frequently than the little guy, who has to do much more
until he becomes a big guy.  That is true of every author, every
composer, everyone, and, unfortunately, is part of life.

Copyright always originates with the author, except in cases of works
made for hire.  Most software falls into this category.  When an author
sends his article to a journal, he has not relinquished copyright, though
he retains the right to relinquish it.  The author receives absolutely
everything.  The less prominent the author, the more leverage the
publisher will have in contract negotiations.  In order to transfer the
rights, the author must sign an agreement giving them away.

In an electronic society, it is important to be able to license a writer
and work out deals.  With regard to use of a work, it usually is much
easier when a publisher holds the rights.  In an electronic era, a real
problem arises when one is digitizing and making information available.
PETERS referred again to electronic licensing clearinghouses.  Copyright
ought to remain with the author, but as one moves forward globally in the
electronic arena, a middleman who can handle the various rights becomes
increasingly necessary.

The notion of copyright law is that it resides with the individual, but
in an online environment, where a work can be adapted and tinkered with
by many individuals, there is concern.  If changes are authorized and
there is no agreement to the contrary, the person who changes a work owns
the changes.  To put it another way, the person who acquires permission
to change a work technically will become the author and the owner, unless
some agreement to the contrary has been made.  It is typical for the
original publisher to try to control all of the versions and all of the
uses.  Copyright law always only sets up the boundaries.  Anything can be
changed by contract.

                                 

SESSION VII.  CONCLUSION


GENERAL DISCUSSION  Two questions for discussion  Different emphases in
the Workshop  Bringing the text and image partisans together 
Desiderata in planning the longterm development of something  Questions
surrounding the issue of electronic deposit  Discussion of electronic
deposit as an allusion to the issue of standards  Need for a directory
of preservation projects in digital form and for access to their
digitized files  CETHs catalogue of machinereadable texts in the
humanities  What constitutes a publication in the electronic world? 
Need for LC to deal with the concept of online publishing  LCs Network
Development Office  exploring the limits of MARC as a standard in terms
of handling electronic information  Magnitude of the problem and the
need for distributed responsibility in order to maintain and store
electronic information  Workshop participants to be viewed as a starting
point  Development of a network version of AM urged  A step toward AMs
construction of some sort of apparatus for network access  A delicate
and agonizing policy question for LC  Re the issue of electronic
deposit, LC urged to initiate a catalytic process in terms of distributed
responsibility  Suggestions for cooperative ventures  Commercial
publishers fears  Strategic questions for getting the image and text
people to think through longterm cooperation  Clarification of the
driving force behind both the Perseus and the Cornell Xerox projects 


In his role as moderator of the concluding session, GIFFORD raised two
questions he believed would benefit from discussion:  1 Are there enough
commonalities among those of us that have been here for two days so that
we can see courses of action that should be taken in the future?  And, if
so, what are they and who might take them?  2 Partly derivative from
that, but obviously very dangerous to LC as host, do you see a role for
the Library of Congress in all this?  Of course, the Library of Congress
holds a rather special status in a number of these matters, because it is
not perceived as a player with an economic stake in them, but are there
roles that LC can play that can help advance us toward where we are heading?

Describing himself as an uninformed observer of the technicalities of the
last two days, GIFFORD detected three different emphases in the Workshop:
1 people who are very deeply committed to text 2 people who are almost
passionate about images and 3 a few people who are very committed to
what happens to the networks.  In other words, the new networking
dimension, the accessibility of the processability, the portability of
all this across the networks.  How do we pull those three together?

Adding a question that reflected HOCKEYs comment that this was the
fourth workshop she had attended in the previous thirty days, FLEISCHHAUER
wondered to what extent this meeting had reinvented the wheel, or if it
had contributed anything in the way of bringing together a different group
of people from those who normally appear on the workshop circuit.

HOCKEY confessed to being struck at this meeting and the one the
Electronic Pierce Consortium organized the previous week that this was a
coming together of people working on texts and not images.  Attempting to
bring the two together is something we ought to be thinking about for the
future:  How one can think about working with image material to begin
with, but structuring it and digitizing it in such a way that at a later
stage it can be interpreted into text, and find a common way of building
text and images together so that they can be used jointly in the future,
with the network support to begin there because that is how people will
want to access it.

In planning the longterm development of something, which is what is
being done in electronic text, HOCKEY stressed the importance not only
of discussing the technical aspects of how one does it but particularly
of thinking about what the people who use the stuff will want to do.
But conversely, there are numerous things that people start to do with
electronic text or material that nobody ever thought of in the beginning.

LESK, in response to the question concerning the role of the Library of
Congress, remarked the often suggested desideratum of having electronic
deposit:  Since everything is now computertypeset, an entire decade of
material that was machinereadable exists, but the publishers frequently
did not save it has LC taken any action to have its copyright deposit
operation start collecting these machinereadable versions?  In the
absence of PETERS, GIFFORD replied that the question was being
actively considered but that that was only one dimension of the problem.
Another dimension is the whole question of the integrity of the original
electronic document.  It becomes highly important in science to prove
authorship.  How will that be done?

ERWAY explained that, under the old policy, to make a claim for a
copyright for works that were published in electronic form, including
software, one had to submit a paper copy of the first and last twenty
pages of codesomething that represented the work but did not include
the entire work itself and had little value to anyone.  As a temporary
measure, LC has claimed the right to demand electronic versions of
electronic publications.  This measure entails a proactive role for the
Library to say that it wants a particular electronic version.  Publishers
then have perhaps a year to submit it.  But the real problem for LC is
what to do with all this material in all these different formats.  Will
the Library mount it?  How will it give people access to it?  How does LC
keep track of the appropriate computers, software, and media?  The situation
is so hard to control, ERWAY said, that it makes sense for each publishing
house to maintain its own archive.  But LC cannot enforce that either.

GIFFORD acknowledged LESKs suggestion that establishing a priority
offered the solution, albeit a fairly complicated one.  But who maintains
that register?, he asked.  GRABER noted that LC does attempt to collect a
Macintosh version and the IBMcompatible version of software.  It does
not collect other versions.  But while true for software, BYRUM observed,
this reply does not speak to materials, that is, all the materials that
were published that were on somebodys microcomputer or driver tapes
at a publishing office across the country.  LC does well to acquire
specific machinereadable products selectively that were intended to be
machinereadable.  Materials that were in machinereadable form at one time,
BYRUM said, would be beyond LCs capability at the moment, insofar as
attempting to acquire, organize, and preserve them are concernedand
preservation would be the most important consideration.  In this
connection, GIFFORD reiterated the need to work out some sense of
distributive responsibility for a number of these issues, which
inevitably will require significant cooperation and discussion.
Nobody can do it all.

LESK suggested that some publishers may look with favor on LC beginning
to serve as a depository of tapes in an electronic manuscript standard.
Publishers may view this as a service that they did not have to perform
and they might send in tapes.  However, SPERBERGMcQUEEN countered,
although publishers have had equivalent services available to them for a
long time, the electronic text archive has never turned away or been
flooded with tapes and is forever sending feedback to the depositor.
Some publishers do send in tapes.

ANDRE viewed this discussion as an allusion to the issue of standards.
She recommended that the AAP standard and the TEI, which has already been
somewhat harmonized internationally and which also shares several
compatibilities with the AAP, be harmonized to ensure sufficient
compatibility in the software.  She drew the line at saying LC ought to
be the locus or forum for such harmonization.

Taking the group in a slightly different direction, but one where at
least in the near term LC might play a helpful role, LYNCH remarked the
plans of a number of projects to carry out preservation by creating
digital images that will end up in online or nearline storage at some
institution.   Presumably, LC will link this material somehow to its
online catalog in most cases.  Thus, it is in a digital form.  LYNCH had
the impression that many of these institutions would be willing to make
those files accessible to other people outside the institution, provided
that there is no copyright problem.  This desideratum will require
propagating the knowledge that those digitized files exist, so that they
can end up in other online catalogs.  Although uncertain about the
mechanism for achieving this result, LYNCH said that it warranted
scrutiny because it seemed to be connected to some of the basic issues of
cataloging and distribution of records.  It would be  foolish, given the
amount of work that all of us have to do and our meager resources, to
discover multiple institutions digitizing the same work.  Re microforms,
LYNCH said, we are in pretty good shape.

BATTIN called this a big problem and noted that the Cornell people who
had already departed were working on it.  At issue from the beginning
was to learn how to catalog that information into RLIN and then into
OCLC, so that it would be accessible.  That issue remains to be resolved.
LYNCH rejoined that putting it into OCLC or RLIN was helpful insofar as
somebody who is thinking of performing preservation activity on that work
could learn about it.  It is not necessarily helpful for institutions to
make that available.  BATTIN opined that the idea was that it not only be
for preservation purposes but for the convenience of people looking for
this material.  She endorsed LYNCHs dictum that duplication of this
effort was to be avoided by every means.

HOCKEY informed the Workshop about one major current activity of CETH,
namely a catalogue of machinereadable texts in the humanities.  Held on
RLIN at present, the catalogue has been concentrated on ASCII as opposed
to digitized images of text.  She is exploring ways to improve the
catalogue and make it more widely available, and welcomed suggestions
about these concerns.  CETH owns the records, which are not just
restricted to RLIN, and can distribute them however it wishes.

Taking up LESKs earlier question, BATTIN inquired whether LC, since it
is accepting electronic files and designing a mechanism for dealing with
that rather than putting books on shelves, would become responsible for
the National Copyright Depository of Electronic Materials.  Of course
that could not be accomplished overnight, but it would be something LC
could plan for.  GIFFORD acknowledged that much thought was being devoted
to that set of problems and returned the discussion to the issue raised
by LYNCHwhether or not putting the kind of records that both BATTIN and
HOCKEY have been talking about in RLIN is not a satisfactory solution.
It seemed to him that RLIN answered LYNCHs original point concerning
some kind of directory for these kinds of materials.  In a situation
where somebody is attempting to decide whether or not to scan this or
film that or to learn whether or not someone has already done so, LYNCH
suggested, RLIN is helpful, but it is not helpful in the case of a local,
online catalogue.  Further, one would like to have her or his system be
aware that that exists in digital form, so that one can present it to a
patron, even though one did not digitize it, if it is out of copyright.
The only way to make those linkages would be to perform a tremendous
amount of realtime lookup, which would be awkward at best, or
periodically to yank the whole file from RLIN and match it against ones
own stuff, which is a nuisance.

But where, ERWAY inquired, does one stop including things that are
available with Internet, for instance, in ones local catalogue?
It almost seems that that is LCs means to acquire access to them.
That represents LCs new form of library loan.  Perhaps LCs new online
catalogue is an amalgamation of all these catalogues on line.  LYNCH
conceded that perhaps that was true in the very long term, but was not
applicable to scanning in the short term.  In his view, the totals cited
by Yale, 10,000 books over perhaps a fouryear period, and 1,0001,500
books from Cornell, were not big numbers, while searching all over
creation for relatively rare occurrences will prove to be less efficient.
As GIFFORD wondered if this would not be a separable file on RLIN and
could be requested from them, BATTIN interjected that it was easily
accessible to an institution.  SEVERTSON pointed out that that file, cum
enhancements, was available with reference information on CDROM, which
makes it a little more available.

In HOCKEYs view, the real question facing the Workshop is what to put in
this catalogue, because that raises the question of what constitutes a
publication in the electronic world.  WEIBEL interjected that Eric Joule
in OCLCs Office of Research is also wrestling with this particular
problem, while GIFFORD thought it sounded fairly generic.  HOCKEY
contended that a majority of texts in the humanities are in the hands
of either a small number of large research institutions or individuals
and are not generally available for anyone else to access at all.
She wondered if these texts ought to be catalogued.

After argument proceeded back and forth for several minutes over why
cataloguing might be a necessary service, LEBRON suggested that this
issue involved the responsibility of a publisher.  The fact that someone
has created something electronically and keeps it under his or her
control does not constitute publication.  Publication implies
dissemination.  While it would be important for a scholar to let other
people know that this creation exists, in many respects this is no
different from an unpublished manuscript.  That is what is being accessed
in there, except that now one is not looking at it in the hardcopy but
in the electronic environment.

LEBRON expressed puzzlement at the variety of ways electronic publishing
has been viewed.  Much of what has been discussed throughout these two
days has concerned CDROM publishing, whereas in the online environment
that she confronts, the constraints and challenges are very different.
Sooner or later LC will have to deal with the concept of online
publishing.  Taking up the comment ERWAY made earlier about storing
copies, LEBRON gave her own journal as an example.  How would she deposit
OJCCT for copyright?, she asked, because the journal will exist in the
mainframe at OCLC and people will be able to access it.  Here the
situation is different, ownership versus access, and is something that
arises with publication in the online environment, faster than is
sometimes realized.  Lacking clear answers to all of these questions
herself, LEBRON did not anticipate that LC would be able to take a role
in helping to define some of them for quite a while.

GREENFIELD observed that LCs Network Development Office is attempting,
among other things, to explore the limits of MARC as a standard in terms
of handling electronic information.  GREENFIELD also noted that Rebecca
GUENTHER from that office gave a paper to the American Society for
Information Science ASIS summarizing several of the discussion papers
that were coming out of the Network Development Office.  GREENFIELD said
he understood that that office had a listserver soliciting just the kind
of feedback received today concerning the difficulties of identifying and
cataloguing electronic information.  GREENFIELD hoped that everybody
would be aware of that and somehow contribute to that conversation.

Noting two of LCs roles, first, to act as a repository of record for
material that is copyrighted in this country, and second, to make
materials it holds available in some limited form to a clientele that
goes beyond Congress, BESSER suggested that it was incumbent on LC to
extend those responsibilities to all the things being published in
electronic form.  This would mean eventually accepting electronic
formats.  LC could require that at some point they be in a certain
limited set of formats, and then develop mechanisms for allowing people
to access those in the same way that other things are accessed.  This
does not imply that they are on the network and available to everyone.
LC does that with most of its bibliographic records, BESSER said, which
end up migrating to the utility e.g., OCLC or somewhere else.  But just
as most of LCs books are available in some form through interlibrary
loan or some other mechanism, so in the same way electronic formats ought
to be available to others in some format, though with some copyright
considerations.  BESSER was not suggesting that these mechanisms be
established tomorrow, only that they seemed to fall within LCs purview,
and that there should be longrange plans to establish them.

Acknowledging that those from LC in the room agreed with BESSER
concerning the need to confront difficult questions, GIFFORD underscored
the magnitude of the problem of what to keep and what to select.  GIFFORD
noted that LC currently receives some 31,000 items per day, not counting
electronic materials, and argued for much more distributed responsibility
in order to maintain and store electronic information.

BESSER responded that the assembled group could be viewed as a starting
point, whose initial operating premise could be helping to move in this
direction and defining how LC could do so, for example, in areas of
standardization or distribution of responsibility.

FLEISCHHAUER added that AM was fully engaged, wrestling with some of the
questions that pertain to the conversion of older historical materials,
which would be one thing that the Library of Congress might do.  Several
points mentioned by BESSER and several others on this question have a
much greater impact on those who are concerned with cataloguing and the
networking of bibliographic information, as well as preservation itself.

Speaking directly to AM, which he considered was a largely uncopyrighted
database, LYNCH urged development of a network version of AM, or
consideration of making the data in it available to people interested in
doing network multimedia.  On account of the current great shortage of
digital data that is both appealing and unencumbered by complex rights
problems, this course of action could have a significant effect on making
network multimedia a reality.

In this connection, FLEISCHHAUER reported on a fragmentary prototype in
LCs Office of Information Technology Services that attempts to associate
digital images of photographs with cataloguing information in ways that
work within a local area networka step, so to say, toward AMs
construction of some sort of apparatus for access.  Further, AM has
attempted to use standard data forms in order to help make that
distinction between the access tools and the underlying data, and thus
believes that the database is networkable.

A delicate and agonizing policy question for LC, however, which comes
back to resources and unfortunately has an impact on this, is to find
some appropriate, honorable, and legal costrecovery possibilities.  A
certain skittishness concerning costrecovery has made people unsure
exactly what to do.  AM would be highly receptive to discussing further
LYNCHs offer to test or demonstrate its database in a network
environment, FLEISCHHAUER said.

Returning the discussion to what she viewed as the vital issue of
electronic deposit, BATTIN recommended that LC initiate a catalytic
process in terms of distributed responsibility, that is, bring together
the distributed organizations and set up a study group to look at all
these issues and see where we as a nation should move.  The broader
issues of how we deal with the management of electronic information will
not disappear, but only grow worse.

LESK took up this theme and suggested that LC attempt to persuade one
major library in each state to deal with its state equivalent publisher,
which might produce a cooperative project that would be equitably
distributed around the country, and one in which LC would be dealing with
a minimal number of publishers and minimal copyright problems.

GRABER remarked the recent development in the scientific community of a
willingness to use SGML and either deposit or interchange on a fairly
standardized format.  He wondered if a similar movement was taking place
in the humanities.  Although the National Library of Medicine found only
a few publishers to cooperate in a like venture two or three years ago, a
new effort might generate a much larger number willing to cooperate.

KIMBALL recounted his units MachineReadable Collections Reading Room
troubles with the commercial publishers of electronic media in acquiring
materials for LCs collections, in particular the publishers fear that
they would not be able to cover their costs and would lose control of
their products, that LC would give them away or sell them and make
profits from them.  He doubted that the publishing industry was prepared
to move into this area at the moment, given its resistance to allowing LC
to use its machinereadable materials as the Library would like.

The copyright law now addresses compact disk as a medium, and LC can
request one copy of that, or two copies if it is the only version, and
can request copies of software, but that fails to address magazines or
books or anything like that which is in machinereadable form.

GIFFORD acknowledged the thorny nature of this issue, which he illustrated
with the example of the cumbersome process involved in putting a copy of a
scientific database on a LAN in LCs science reading room.  He also
acknowledged that LC needs help and could enlist the energies and talents
of Workshop participants in thinking through a number of these problems.

GIFFORD returned the discussion to getting the image and text people to
think through together where they want to go in the long term.  MYLONAS
conceded that her experience at the Pierce Symposium the previous week at
Georgetown University and this week at LC had forced her to reevaluate
her perspective on the usefulness of text as images.  MYLONAS framed the
issues in a series of questions:  How do we acquire machinereadable
text?  Do we take pictures of it and perform OCR on it later?  Is it
important to obtain very highquality images and text, etc.?
FLEISCHHAUER agreed with MYLONASs framing of strategic questions, adding
that a large institution such as LC probably has to do all of those
things at different times.  Thus, the trick is to exercise judgment.  The
Workshop had added to his and AMs considerations in making those
judgments.  Concerning future meetings or discussions, MYLONAS suggested
that screening priorities would be helpful.

WEIBEL opined that the diversity reflected in this group was a sign both
of the health and of the immaturity of the field, and more time would
have to pass before we convince one another concerning standards.

An exchange between MYLONAS and BATTIN clarified the point that the
driving force behind both the Perseus and the Cornell Xerox projects was
the preservation of knowledge for the future, not simply for particular
research use.  In the case of Perseus, MYLONAS said, the assumption was
that the texts would not be entered again into electronically readable
form.  SPERBERGMcQUEEN added that a scanned image would not serve as an
archival copy for purposes of preservation in the case of, say, the Bill
of Rights, in the sense that the scanned images are effectively the
archival copies for the Cornell mathematics books.


                                 


                          Appendix I:  PROGRAM



                                WORKSHOP
                                   ON
                               ELECTRONIC
                                  TEXTS



                             910 June 1992

                           Library of Congress
                            Washington, D.C.



    Supported by a Grant from the David and Lucile Packard Foundation


Tuesday, 9 June 1992

NATIONAL DEMONSTRATION LAB, ATRIUM, LIBRARY MADISON

8:30 AM   Coffee and Danish, registration

9:00 AM   Welcome

          Prosser Gifford, Director for Scholarly Programs, and Carl
             Fleischhauer, Coordinator, American Memory, Library of
             Congress

9:l5 AM   Session I.  Content in a New Form:  Who Will Use It and What
          Will They Do?

          Broad description of the range of electronic information.
          Characterization of who uses it and how it is or may be used.
          In addition to a look at scholarly uses, this session will
          include a presentation on use by students K12 and college
          and the general public.

          Moderator:  James Daly
          Avra Michelson, Archival Research and Evaluation Staff,
             National Archives and Records Administration Overview
          Susan H. Veccia, Team Leader, American Memory, User Evaluation,
             and
          Joanne Freeman, Associate Coordinator, American Memory, Library
             of Congress Beyond the scholar

10:30
11:00 AM  Break

11:00 AM  Session II.  Show and Tell.

          Each presentation to consist of a fifteenminute
          statementshow group discussion will follow lunch.

          Moderator:  Jacqueline Hess, Director, National Demonstration
             Lab

            1.  A classics project, stressing texts and text retrieval
                more than multimedia:  Perseus Project, Harvard
                University
                Elli Mylonas, Managing Editor

            2.  Other humanities projects employing the emerging norms of
                the Text Encoding Initiative TEI:  ChadwyckHealeys
                The English Poetry Full Text Database andor Patrologia
                Latina Database
                Eric M. Calaluca, Vice President, ChadwyckHealey, Inc.

            3.  American Memory
                Carl Fleischhauer, Coordinator, and
                Ricky Erway, Associate Coordinator, Library of Congress

            4.  Founding Fathers example from Packard Humanities
                Institute:  The Papers of George Washington, University
                of Virginia
                Dorothy Twohig, Managing Editor, andor
                David Woodley Packard

            5.  An electronic medical journal offering graphics and
                fulltext searchability:  The Online Journal of Current
                Clinical Trials, American Association for the Advancement
                of Science
                Maria L. Lebron, Managing Editor

            6.  A project that offers facsimile images of pages but omits
                searchable text:  Cornell math books
                Lynne K. Personius, Assistant Director, Cornell
                   Information Technologies for Scholarly Information
                   Sources, Cornell University

12:30 PM  Lunch  Dining Room A, Library Madison 620.  Exhibits
          available.

1:30 PM   Session II.  Show and Tell Contd..

3:00
3:30 PM   Break

3:30
5:30 PM   Session III.  Distribution, Networks, and Networking:  Options
          for Dissemination.

          Published disks:  University presses and publicsector
             publishers, privatesector publishers
          Computer networks

          Moderator:  Robert G. Zich, Special Assistant to the Associate
             Librarian for Special Projects, Library of Congress
          Clifford A. Lynch, Director, Library Automation, University of
             California
          Howard Besser, School of Library and Information Science,
             University of Pittsburgh
          Ronald L. Larsen, Associate Director of Libraries for
             Information Technology, University of Maryland at College
             Park
          Edwin B. Brownrigg, Executive Director, Memex Research
             Institute

6:30 PM   Reception  Montpelier Room, Library Madison 619.

                                 

Wednesday, 10 June 1992

DINING ROOM A, LIBRARY MADISON 620

8:30 AM   Coffee and Danish

9:00 AM   Session IV.  Image Capture, Text Capture, Overview of Text and
          Image Storage Formats.

          Moderator:  William L. Hooton, Vice President of Operations,
             INET

          A Principal Methods for Image Capture of Text:
             Direct scanning
             Use of microform

          Anne R. Kenney, Assistant Director, Department of Preservation
             and Conservation, Cornell University
          Pamela Q.J. Andre, Associate Director, Automation, and
          Judith A. Zidar, Coordinator, National Agricultural Text
             Digitizing Program NATDP, National Agricultural Library
             NAL
          Donald J. Waters, Head, Systems Office, Yale University Library

          B Special Problems:
             Bound volumes
             Conservation
             Reproducing printed halftones

          Carl Fleischhauer, Coordinator, American Memory, Library of
             Congress
          George Thoma, Chief, Communications Engineering Branch,
             National Library of Medicine NLM

10:30
11:00 AM  Break

11:00 AM  Session IV.  Image Capture, Text Capture, Overview of Text and
          Image Storage Formats Contd..

          C Image Standards and Implications for Preservation

          Jean Baronas, Senior Manager, Department of Standards and
             Technology, Association for Information and Image Management
             AIIM
          Patricia Battin, President, The Commission on Preservation and
             Access CPA

          D Text Conversion:
             OCR vs. rekeying
             Standards of accuracy and use of imperfect texts
             Service bureaus

          Stuart Weibel, Senior Research Specialist, Online Computer
             Library Center, Inc. OCLC
          Michael Lesk, Executive Director, Computer Science Research,
             Bellcore
          Ricky Erway, Associate Coordinator, American Memory, Library of
             Congress
          Pamela Q.J. Andre, Associate Director, Automation, and
          Judith A. Zidar, Coordinator, National Agricultural Text
             Digitizing Program NATDP, National Agricultural Library
             NAL

12:30
1:30 PM   Lunch

1:30 PM   Session V.  Approaches to Preparing Electronic Texts.

          Discussion of approaches to structuring text for the computer
          pros and cons of text coding, description of methods in
          practice, and comparison of textcoding methods.

          Moderator:  Susan Hockey, Director, Center for Electronic Texts
             in the Humanities CETH, Rutgers and Princeton Universities
          David Woodley Packard
          C.M. SperbergMcQueen, Editor, Text Encoding Initiative TEI,
             University of IllinoisChicago
          Eric M. Calaluca, Vice President, ChadwyckHealey, Inc.

3:30
4:00 PM   Break

4:00 PM   Session VI.  Copyright Issues.

          Marybeth Peters, Policy Planning Adviser to the Register of
             Copyrights, Library of Congress

5:00 PM   Session VII. Conclusion.

          General discussion.
          What topics were omitted or given short shrift that anyone
             would like to talk about now?
          Is there a "group" here?  What should the group do next, if
             anything?  What should the Library of Congress do next, if
             anything?
          Moderator:  Prosser Gifford, Director for Scholarly Programs,
             Library of Congress

6:00 PM   Adjourn


                                 


                         Appendix II:  ABSTRACTS


SESSION I

Avra MICHELSON           Forecasting the Use of Electronic Texts by
                         Social Sciences and Humanities Scholars

This presentation explores the ways in which electronic texts are likely
to be used by the nonscientific scholarly community.  Many of the
remarks are drawn from a report the speaker coauthored with Jeff
Rothenberg, a computer scientist at The RAND Corporation.

The speaker assesses 1 current scholarly use of information technology
and 2 the key trends in information technology most relevant to the
research process, in order to predict how social sciences and humanities
scholars are apt to use electronic texts.  In introducing the topic,
current use of electronic texts is explored broadly within the context of
scholarly communication.  From the perspective of scholarly
communication, the work of humanities and social sciences scholars
involves five processes:  1 identification of sources, 2 communication
with colleagues, 3 interpretation and analysis of data, 4 dissemination
of research findings, and 5 curriculum development and instruction.  The
extent to which computation currently permeates aspects of scholarly
communication represents a viable indicator of the prospects for
electronic texts.

The discussion of current practice is balanced by an analysis of key
trends in the scholarly use of information technology.  These include the
trends toward enduser computing and connectivity, which provide a
framework for forecasting the use of electronic texts through this
millennium.  The presentation concludes with a summary of the ways in
which the nonscientific scholarly community can be expected to use
electronic texts, and the implications of that use for information
providers.

Susan VECCIA and Joanne FREEMAN    Electronic Archives for the Public:
                                   Use of American Memory in Public and
                                   School Libraries

This joint discussion focuses on nonscholarly applications of electronic
library materials, specifically addressing use of the Library of Congress
American Memory AM program in a small number of public and school
libraries throughout the United States.  AM consists of selected Library
of Congress primary archival materials, stored on optical media
CDROMvideodisc, and presented with little or no editing.  Many
collections are accompanied by electronic introductions and users guides
offering background information and historical context.  Collections
represent a variety of formats including photographs, graphic arts,
motion pictures, recorded sound, music, broadsides and manuscripts,
books, and pamphlets.

In 1991, the Library of Congress began a nationwide evaluation of AM in
different types of institutions.  Test sites include public libraries,
elementary and secondary school libraries, college and university
libraries, state libraries, and special libraries.  Susan VECCIA and
Joanne FREEMAN will discuss their observations on the use of AM by the
nonscholarly community, using evidence gleaned from this ongoing
evaluation effort.

VECCIA will comment on the overall goals of the evaluation project, and
the types of public and school libraries included in this study.  Her
comments on nonscholarly use of AM will focus on the public library as a
cultural and community institution, often bridging the gap between formal
and informal education.  FREEMAN will discuss the use of AM in school
libraries.  Use by students and teachers has revealed some broad
questions about the use of electronic resources, as well as definite
benefits gained by the "nonscholar."  Topics will include the problem of
grasping content and context in an electronic environment, the stumbling
blocks created by "new" technologies, and the unique skills and interests
awakened through use of electronic resources.

SESSION II

Elli MYLONAS             The Perseus Project:  Interactive Sources and
                         Studies in Classical Greece

The Perseus Project 5 has just released Perseus 1.0, the first publicly
available version of its hypertextual database of multimedia materials on
classical Greece.  Perseus is designed to be used by a wide audience,
comprised of readers at the student and scholar levels.  As such, it must
be able to locate information using different strategies, and it must
contain enough detail to serve the different needs of its users.  In
addition, it must be delivered so that it is affordable to its target
audience.  These problems and the solutions we chose are described in
Mylonas, "An Interface to Classical Greek Civilization," JASIS 43:2,
March 1992.

In order to achieve its objective, the project staff decided to make a
conscious separation between selecting and converting textual, database,
and image data on the one hand, and putting it into a delivery system on
the other.  That way, it is possible to create the electronic data
without thinking about the restrictions of the delivery system.  We have
made a great effort to choose systemindependent formats for our data,
and to put as much thought and work as possible into structuring it so
that the translation from paper to electronic form will enhance the value
of the data. A discussion of these solutions as of two years ago is in
Elli Mylonas, Gregory Crane, Kenneth Morrell, and D. Neel Smith, "The
Perseus Project:  Data in the Electronic Age," in Accessing Antiquity:
The Computerization of Classical Databases, J. Solomon and T. Worthen
eds.,  University of Arizona Press, in press.

Much of the work on Perseus is focused on collecting and converting the
data on which the project is based.  At the same time, it is necessary to
provide means of access to the information, in order to make it usable,
and them to investigate how it is used.  As we learn more about what
students and scholars from different backgrounds do with Perseus, we can
adjust our data collection, and also modify the system to accommodate
them.  In creating a delivery system for general use, we have tried to
avoid favoring any one type of use by allowing multiple forms of access
to and navigation through the system.

The way text is handled exemplifies some of these principles.  All text
in Perseus is tagged using SGML, following the guidelines of the Text
Encoding Initiative TEI.  This markup is used to index the text, and
process it so that it can be imported into HyperCard.  No SGML markup
remains in the text that reaches the user, because currently it would be
too expensive to create a system that acts on SGML in real time.
However, the regularity provided by SGML is essential for verifying the
content of the texts, and greatly speeds all the processing performed on
them.  The fact that the texts exist in SGML ensures that they will be
relatively easy to port to different hardware and software, and so will
outlast the current delivery platform.  Finally, the SGML markup
incorporates existing canonical reference systems chapter, verse, line,
etc. indexing and navigation are based on these features.  This ensures
that the same canonical reference will always resolve to the same point
within a text, and that all versions of our texts, regardless of delivery
platform even paper printouts will function the same way.

In order to provide tools for users, the text is processed by a
morphological analyzer, and the results are stored in a database.
Together with the index, the GreekEnglish Lexicon, and the index of all
the English words in the definitions of the lexicon, the morphological
analyses comprise a set of linguistic tools that allow users of all
levels to work with the textual information, and to accomplish different
tasks.  For example, students who read no Greek may explore a concept as
it appears in Greek texts by using the EnglishGreek index, and then
looking up works in the texts and translations, or scholars may do
detailed morphological studies of word use by using the morphological
analyses of the texts.  Because these tools were not designed for any one
use, the same tools and the same data can be used by both students and
scholars.

NOTES:
     5  Perseus is based at Harvard University, with collaborators at
     several other universities.  The project has been funded primarily
     by the AnnenbergCPB Project, as well as by Harvard University,
     Apple Computer, and others.  It is published by Yale University
     Press.  Perseus runs on Macintosh computers, under the HyperCard
     program.

Eric CALALUCA

ChadwyckHealey embarked last year on two distinct yet related fulltext
humanities database projects.

The English Poetry FullText Database and the Patrologia Latina Database
represent new approaches to linguistic research resources.  The size and
complexity of the projects present problems for electronic publishers,
but surmountable ones if they remain abreast of the latest possibilities
in data capture and retrieval software techniques.

The issues which required address prior to the commencement of the
projects were legion:

     1.   Editorial selection or exclusion of materials in each
          database

     2.   Deciding whether or not to incorporate a normative encoding
          structure into the databases?
               A.  If one is selected, should it be SGML?
               B.  If SGML, then the TEI?

     3.   Deliver as CDROM, magnetic tape, or both?

     4.   Can one produce retrieval software advanced enough for the
          postdoctoral linguist, yet accessible enough for unattended
          general use?  Should one try?

     5.   Re fair and liberal networking policies, what are the risks to
          an electronic publisher?

     6.   How does the emergence of national and international education
          networks affect the use and viability of research projects
          requiring high investment?  Do the new European Community
          directives concerning database protection necessitate two
          distinct publishing projects, one for North America and one for
          overseas?

From new notions of "scholarly fair use" to the future of optical media,
virtually every issue related to electronic publishing was aired.  The
result is two projects which have been constructed to provide the quality
research resources with the fewest encumbrances to use by teachers and
private scholars.

Dorothy TWOHIG

In spring 1988 the editors of the papers of George Washington, John
Adams, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and Benjamin Franklin were
approached by classics scholar David Packard on behalf of the Packard
Humanities Foundation with a proposal to produce a CDROM edition of the
complete papers of each of the Founding Fathers.  This electronic edition
will supplement the published volumes, making the documents widely
available to students and researchers at reasonable cost.  We estimate
that our CDROM edition of Washingtons Papers will be substantially
completed within the next two years and ready for publication.  Within
the next ten years or so, similar CDROM editions of the Franklin, Adams,
Jefferson, and Madison papers also will be available.  At the Library of
Congresss session on technology, I would like to discuss not only the
experience of the Washington Papers in producing the CDROM edition, but
the impact technology has had on these major editorial projects.
Already, we are editing our volumes with an eye to the material that will
be readily available in the CDROM edition.  The completed electronic
edition will provide immense possibilities for the searching of documents
for information in a way never possible before.  The kind of technical
innovations that are currently available and on the drawing board will
soon revolutionize historical research and the production of historical
documents.  Unfortunately, much of this new technology is not being used
in the planning stages of historical projects, simply because many
historians are aware only in the vaguest way of its existence.  At least
two major new historical editing projects are considering microfilm
editions, simply because they are not aware of the possibilities of
electronic alternatives and the advantages of the new technology in terms
of flexibility and research potential compared to microfilm.  In fact,
too many of us in history and literature are still at the stage of
struggling with our PCs.  There are many historical editorial projects in
progress presently, and an equal number of literary projects.  While the
two fields have somewhat different approaches to textual editing, there
are ways in which electronic technology can be of service to both.

Since few of the editors involved in the Founding Fathers CDROM editions
are technical experts in any sense, I hope to point out in my discussion
of our experience how many of these electronic innovations can be used
successfully by scholars who are novices in the world of new technology.
One of the major concerns of the sponsors of the multitude of new
scholarly editions is the limited audience reached by the published
volumes.  Most of these editions are being published in small quantities
and the publishers price for them puts them out of the reach not only of
individual scholars but of most public libraries and all but the largest
educational institutions.  However, little attention is being given to
ways in which technology can bypass conventional publication to make
historical and literary documents more widely available.

What attracted us most to the CDROM edition of The Papers of George
Washington was the fact that David Packards aim was to make a complete
edition of all of the 135,000 documents we have collected available in an
inexpensive format that would be placed in public libraries, small
colleges, and even high schools.  This would provide an audience far
beyond our present 1,000copy, 45 published edition.  Since the CDROM
edition will carry none of the explanatory annotation that appears in the
published volumes, we also feel that the use of the CDROM will lead many
researchers to seek out the published volumes.

In addition to ignorance of new technical advances, I have found that too
many editorsand historians and literary scholarsare resistant and
even hostile to suggestions that electronic technology may enhance their
work.  I intend to discuss some of the arguments traditionalists are
