
  So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with
large eyes full of tears, but said nothing.

  This here young lady, said the Gryphon, she wants for to
know your history, she do.

  Ill tell it her, said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow
tone:  sit down, both of you, and dont speak a word till Ive
finished.

  So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes.  Alice
thought to herself, I dont see how he can EVEN finish, if he
doesnt begin.  But she waited patiently.

  Once, said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, I was
a real Turtle.

  These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only
by an occasional exclamation of Hjckrrh! from the Gryphon, and
the constant heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle.  Alice was very
nearly getting up and saying, Thank you, sir, for your
interesting story, but she could not help thinking there MUST be
more to come, so she sat still and said nothing.

  When we were little, the Mock Turtle went on at last, more
calmly, though still sobbing a little now and then, we went to
school in the sea.  The master was an old Turtlewe used to call
him Tortoise

  Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasnt one? Alice asked.

  We called him Tortoise because he taught us, said the Mock
Turtle angrily:  really you are very dull!

  You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple
question, added the Gryphon and then they both sat silent and
looked at poor Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth.  At
last the Gryphon said to the Mock Turtle, Drive on, old fellow!
Dont be all day about it! and he went on in these words:

  Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you maynt believe
it

  I never said I didnt! interrupted Alice.

  You did, said the Mock Turtle.

  Hold your tongue! added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak
again.  The Mock Turtle went on.

  We had the best of educationsin fact, we went to school
every day

  IVE been to a dayschool, too, said Alice you neednt be
so proud as all that.

  With extras? asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.

  Yes, said Alice, we learned French and music.

  And washing? said the Mock Turtle.

  Certainly not! said Alice indignantly.

  Ah! then yours wasnt a really good school, said the Mock
Turtle in a tone of great relief.  Now at OURS they had at the
end of the bill, "French, music, AND WASHINGextra."
