After short blush of morn nigh in her sight
The bird of Jove, stooped from his aery tour,
Two birds of gayest plume before him drove
Down from a hill the beast that reigns in woods,
First hunter then, pursued a gentle brace,
Goodliest of all the forest, hart and hind
Direct to the eastern gate was bent their flight.
Adam observed, and with his eye the chase
Pursuing, not unmoved, to Eve thus spake.
O Eve, some further change awaits us nigh,
Which Heaven, by these mute signs in Nature, shows
Forerunners of his purpose or to warn
Us, haply too secure, of our discharge
From penalty, because from death released
Some days: how long, and what till then our life,
Who knows? or more than this, that we are dust,
And thither must return, and be no more?
Why else this double object in our sight
Of flight pursued in the air, and oer the ground,
One way the selfsame hour? why in the east
Darkness ere days midcourse, and morninglight
More orient in yon western cloud, that draws
Oer the blue firmament a radiant white,
And slow descends with something heavenly fraught?
He erred not for by this the heavenly bands
Down from a sky of jasper lighted now
In Paradise, and on a hill made halt
A glorious apparition, had not doubt
And carnal fear that day dimmed Adams eye.
Not that more glorious, when the Angels met
Jacob in Mahanaim, where he saw
The field pavilioned with his guardians bright
Nor that, which on the flaming mount appeared
In Dothan, covered with a camp of fire,
Against the Syrian king, who to surprise
One man, assassinlike, had levied war,
War unproclaimed.  The princely Hierarch
In their bright stand there left his Powers, to seise
Possession of the garden he alone,
To find where Adam sheltered, took his way,
Not unperceived of Adam who to Eve,
While the great visitant approached, thus spake.
Eve now expect great tidings, which perhaps
Of us will soon determine, or impose
New laws to be observed for I descry,
From yonder blazing cloud that veils the hill,
One of the heavenly host and, by his gait,
None of the meanest some great Potentate
Or of the Thrones above such majesty
Invests him coming! yet not terrible,
That I should fear nor sociably mild,
As Raphael, that I should much confide
But solemn and sublime whom not to offend,
With reverence I must meet, and thou retire.
He ended: and the ArchAngel soon drew nigh,
Not in his shape celestial, but as man
Clad to meet man over his lucid arms
A military vest of purple flowed,
Livelier than Meliboean, or the grain
Of Sarra, worn by kings and heroes old
In time of truce Iris had dipt the woof
His starry helm unbuckled showed him prime
In manhood where youth ended by his side,
As in a glistering zodiack, hung the sword,
Satans dire dread and in his hand the spear.
Adam bowed low he, kingly, from his state
Inclined not, but his coming thus declared.
