through the glass, and she tried her best to climb up one of the
legs of the table, but it was too slippery and when she had
tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing sat down and
cried.

  Come, theres no use in crying like that! said Alice to
herself, rather sharply I advise you to leave off this minute!
She generally gave herself very good advice, though she very
seldom followed it, and sometimes she scolded herself so
severely as to bring tears into her eyes and once she remembered
trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game
of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious
child was very fond of pretending to be two people.  But its no
use now, thought poor Alice, to pretend to be two people!  Why,
theres hardly enough of me left to make ONE respectable
person!

  Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under
the table:  she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on
which the words EAT ME were beautifully marked in currants.
Well, Ill eat it, said Alice, and if it makes me grow larger,
I can reach the key and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep
under the door so either way Ill get into the garden, and I
dont care which happens!

  She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, Which
way?  Which way?, holding her hand on the top of her head to
feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to
find that she remained the same size:  to be sure, this generally
happens when one eats cake, but Alice had got so much into the
way of expecting nothing but outoftheway things to happen,
that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the
common way.

  So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.

                                               

                                            

                                               




                           CHAPTER II

                        The Pool of Tears


  Curiouser and curiouser! cried Alice she was so much
surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good
English now Im opening out like the largest telescope that
ever was!  Goodbye, feet! for when she looked down at her
feet, they seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting so
far off.  Oh, my poor little feet, I wonder who will put on
your shoes and stockings for you now, dears?  Im sure I shant
be able!  I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble myself
about you:  you must manage the best way you can but I must be
kind to them, thought Alice, or perhaps they wont walk the
