DURABILITY, that is, how to prepare or make a text that will last a long
time and that can be used for as many applications as possible, which
would lead to issues of improving intellectual access.

HOCKEY urged the need to look at ways of using markup to facilitate retrieval,
not just for referencing or to help locate an item that is retrieved, but also to put markup tags in
a text to help retrieve the thing sought either with linguistic tagging or
interpretation.  HOCKEY also argued that little advancement had occurred in
the software tools currently available for retrieving and searching text.
She pressed the desideratum of going beyond Boolean searches and performing
more sophisticated searching, which the insertion of more markup in the text
would facilitate.  Thinking about electronic texts as opposed to images means
considering material that will never appear in print form, or print will not
be its primary form, that is, material which only appears in electronic form.
HOCKEY alluded to the history and the need for markup and tagging and
electronic text, which was developed through the use of computers in the
humanities as MICHELSON had observed, Father Busa had started in 1949
to prepare the firstever text on the computer.

HOCKEY remarked several large projects, particularly in Europe, for the
compilation of dictionaries, language studies, and language analysis, in
which people have built up archives of text and have begun to recognize
the need for an encoding format that will be reusable and multifunctional,
that can be used not just to print the text, which may be assumed to be a
byproduct of what one wants to do, but to structure it inside the computer
so that it can be searched, built into a Hypertext system, etc.

                                 


WEIBEL  OCLCs approach to preparing electronic text:  retroconversion,
keying of texts, more automated ways of developing data  Project ADAPT
and the CORE Project  Intelligent character recognition does not exist 
Advantages of SGML  Data should be free of procedural markup
descriptive markup strongly advocated  OCLCs interface illustrated 
Storage requirements and costs for putting a lot of information on line 


Stuart WEIBEL, senior research scientist, Online Computer Library Center,
Inc. OCLC, described OCLCs approach to preparing electronic text.  He
argued that the electronic world into which we are moving must
accommodate not only the future but the past as well, and to some degree
even the present.  Thus, starting out at one end with retroconversion and
keying of texts, one would like to move toward much more automated ways
of developing data.

For example, Project ADAPT had to do with automatically converting
document images into a structured document database with OCR text as
indexing and also a little bit of automatic formatting and tagging of
that text.  The CORE project hosted by Cornell University, Bellcore,
OCLC, the American Chemical Society, and Chemical Abstracts, constitutes
WEIBELs principal concern at the moment.  This project is an example of
converting text for which one already has a machinereadable version into
a format more suitable for electronic delivery and database searching.
Since Michael LESK had previously described CORE, WEIBEL would say
little concerning it.  Borrowing a chemical phrase, de novo synthesis,
WEIBEL cited the Online Journal of Current Clinical Trials as an example
of de novo electronic publishing, that is, a form in which the primary
form of the information is electronic.

Project ADAPT, then, which OCLC completed a couple of years ago and in
fact is about to resume, is a model in which one takes page images either
in paper or microfilm and converts them automatically to a searchable
electronic database, either online or local.  The operating assumption
is that accepting some blemishes in the data, especially for
