Political parties and leaders:
    Peoples Forum Party, Olzhas SULEIMENOV and Mukhtar SHAKHANOV, cochairmen
    Socialist Party former Communist Party, Anuar ALIJANOV, chairman
    ZHOLTOKSAN, Hasan KOJAKHETOV, chairmen AZAT Party, Sabitkazi AKETAEV,
    chairman
Suffrage:
    universal at age 18
Elections:
  President:
    last held 1 December 1991 next to be held NA percent of vote by party NA
    seats  NA total percent of seats by party NA
Communists:
    party disbanded 6 September 1992
Member of:
    CIS, CSCE, IMF, NACC, OIC, UN, UNCTAD
Diplomatic representation:
    Ambassador NA Chancery at NA NW, Washington, DC 200 telephone NA there
    are NA Consulates General
  US:
    Ambassadordesignate William Courtney Embassy at Hotel Kazakhstan,
    AlmaAta, mailing address is APO AE 09862 telephone 801173272619056
Flag:
    no national flag yet adopted

:Kazakhstan Economy

Overview:
    The secondlargest in area of the 15 former Soviet republics, Kazakhstan has
    vast oil, coal, and agricultural resources. Kazakhstan is highly dependent
    on trade with Russia, exchanging its natural resources for finished consumer
    and industrial goods. Kazakhstan now finds itself with serious pollution
    problems, backward technology, and little experience in foreign markets. The
    government in 1991 pushed privatization of the economy at a faster pace than
    Russias program. The ongoing transitional period  marked by sharp
    inflation in wages and prices, lower output, lost jobs, and disruption of
    timehonored channels of supply  has brought considerable social unrest.
    Kazakhstan lacks the funds, technology, and managerial skills for a quick
    recovery of output. US firms have been enlisted to increase oil output but
    face formidable obstacles for example, oil can now reach Western markets
    only through pipelines that run across independent and sometimes
    unfriendly former Soviet republics. Finally, the end of monolithic
    Communist control has brought ethnic grievances into the open. The 6 million
    Russians in the republic, formerly the favored class, now face the hostility
    of a society dominated by Muslims. Ethnic rivalry will be just one of the
    formidable obstacles to the creation of a productive, technologically
    advancing society.
GDP:
    purchasing power equivalent  NA per capita NA real growth rate  7
    1991 est.
Inflation rate consumer prices:
    83 1991
Unemployment rate:
    NA
Budget:
    revenues NA million expenditures NA million, including capital
    expenditures of 1.76 billion 1991
Exports:
    4.2 billion f.o.b., 1991
  commodities:
    oil, ferrous and nonferrous metals, chemicals, grain, wool, meat 1991
  partners:
    Russia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan
Imports:
    NA million c.i.f., 1990
  commodities:
    machinery and parts, industrial materials
  partners:
    Russia and other former Soviet republics
External debt:
    2.6 billion 1991 est.
Industrial production:
