searching, provided that NAL indicates that it is unedited.  ZIDAR
concluded that rekeying of text may be the best route to take, in spite
of numerous problems with quality control and cost.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Modifying an image before performing OCR  NALs costs per
page AMs costs per page and experience with Federal Prison Industries 
Elements comprising NATDPs costs per page  OCR and structured markup 
Distinction between the structure of a document and its representation
when put on the screen or printed 


HOOTON prefaced the lengthy discussion that followed with several
comments about modifying an image before one reaches the point of
performing OCR.  For example, in regard to an application containing a
significant amount of redundant data, such as formtype data, numerous
companies today are working on various kinds of form renewal, prior to
going through a recognition process, by using dropout colors.  Thus,
acquiring access to form design or using electronic means are worth
considering.  HOOTON also noted that conversion usually makes or breaks
ones imaging system.  It is extremely important, extremely costly in
terms of either capital investment or service, and determines the quality
of the remainder of ones system, because it determines the character of
the raw material used by the system.

Concerning the four projects undertaken by NAL, two inside and two
performed by outside contractors, ZIDAR revealed that an inhouse service
bureau executed the first at a cost between 8 and 10 per page for
everything, including building of the database.  The project undertaken
by the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research CGIAR
cost approximately 10 per page for the conversion, plus some expenses
for the software and building of the database.  The Acid Rain Projecta
twodisk set produced by the University of Vermont, consisting of
Canadian publications on acid raincost 6.70 per page for everything,
including keying of the text, which was double keyed, scanning of the
images, and building of the database.  The inhouse project offered
considerable ease of convenience and greater control of the process.  On
the other hand, the service bureaus know their job and perform it
expeditiously, because they have more people.

As a useful comparison, ERWAY revealed AMs costs as follows:  0.75
cents to 0.85 cents per thousand characters, with an average page
containing 2,700 characters.  Requirements for coding and imaging
increase the costs.  Thus, conversion of the text, including the coding,
costs approximately 3 per page.  This figure does not include the
imaging and databasebuilding included in the NAL costs.  AM also
enjoyed a happy experience with Federal Prison Industries, which
precluded the necessity of going through the requestforproposal process
to award a contract, because it is another government agency.  The
prisoners performed AMs rekeying just as well as other service bureaus
and proved handy as well.  AM shipped them the books, which they would
photocopy on a bookedge scanner.  They would perform the markup on
photocopies, return the books as soon as they were done with them,
perform the keying, and return the material to AM on WORM disks.

ZIDAR detailed the elements that constitute the previously noted cost of
approximately 7 per page.  Most significant is the editing, correction
of errors, and spellcheckings, which though they may sound easy to
perform require, in fact, a great deal of time.  Reformatting text also
takes a while, but a significant amount of NALs expenses are for equipment,
which was extremely expensive when purchased because it was one of the few
systems on the market.  The costs of equipment are being amortized over
