


                           CHAPTER XI

                      Who Stole the Tarts?


  The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when
they arrived, with a great crowd assembled about themall sorts
of little birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards:
the Knave was standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on
each side to guard him and near the King was the White Rabbit,
with a trumpet in one hand, and a scroll of parchment in the
other.  In the very middle of the court was a table, with a large
dish of tarts upon it:  they looked so good, that it made Alice
quite hungry to look at themI wish theyd get the trial done,
she thought, and hand round the refreshments!  But there seemed
to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about
her, to pass away the time.

  Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had
read about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that
she knew the name of nearly everything there.  Thats the
judge, she said to herself, because of his great wig.

  The judge, by the way, was the King and as he wore his crown
over the wig, look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he
did it, he did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly
not becoming.

  And thats the jurybox, thought Alice, and those twelve
creatures, she was obliged to say creatures, you see, because
some of them were animals, and some were birds, I suppose they
are the jurors.  She said this last word two or three times over
to herself, being rather proud of it:  for she thought, and
rightly too, that very few little girls of her age knew the
meaning of it at all.  However, jurymen would have done just
as well.

  The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates.
What are they doing?  Alice whispered to the Gryphon.  They
cant have anything to put down yet, before the trials begun.

  Theyre putting down their names, the Gryphon whispered in
reply, for fear they should forget them before the end of the
trial.

  Stupid things! Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but
she stopped hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, Silence in
the court! and the King put on his spectacles and looked
anxiously round, to make out who was talking.

  Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their
shoulders, that all the jurors were writing down stupid things!
on their slates, and she could even make out that one of them
didnt know how to spell stupid, and that he had to ask his
neighbour to tell him.  A nice muddle their slatesll be in
before the trials over! thought Alice.

  One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked.  This of course,
Alice could not stand, and she went round the court and got
behind him, and very soon found an opportunity of taking it
away.  She did it so quickly that the poor little juror it was
Bill, the Lizard could not make out at all what had become of
it so, after hunting all about for it, he was obliged to write
with one finger for the rest of the day and this was of very
little use, as it left no mark on the slate.

  Herald, read the accusation! said the King.

  On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and
then unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:

    The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
          All on a summer day:
      The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
          And took them quite away!

  Consider your verdict, the King said to the jury.

  Not yet, not yet! the Rabbit hastily interrupted.  Theres
a great deal to come before that!

  Call the first witness, said the King and the White Rabbit
blew three blasts on the trumpet, and called out, First
witness!

  The first witness was the Hatter.  He came in with a teacup in
one hand and a piece of breadandbutter in the other.  I beg
pardon, your Majesty, he began, for bringing these in:  but I
hadnt quite finished my tea when I was sent for.

  You ought to have finished, said the King.  When did you
begin?

  The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into
the court, arminarm with the Dormouse.  Fourteenth of March, I
think it was, he said.

  Fifteenth, said the March Hare.

  Sixteenth, added the Dormouse.

  Write that down, the King said to the jury, and the jury
eagerly wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then
added them up, and reduced the answer to shillings and pence.

  Take off your hat, the King said to the Hatter.

  It isnt mine, said the Hatter.

  Stolen! the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who
instantly made a memorandum of the fact.

  I keep them to sell, the Hatter added as an explanation
Ive none of my own.  Im a hatter.

  Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the
Hatter, who turned pale and fidgeted.

  Give your evidence, said the King and dont be nervous, or
Ill have you executed on the spot.

  This did not seem to encourage the witness at all:  he kept
shifting from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the
Queen, and in his confusion he bit a large piece out of his
teacup instead of the breadandbutter.

  Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which
puzzled her a good deal until she made out what it was:  she was
beginning to grow larger again, and she thought at first she
would get up and leave the court but on second thoughts she
decided to remain where she was as long as there was room for
her.

  I wish you wouldnt squeeze so. said the Dormouse, who was
sitting next to her.  I can hardly breathe.

  I cant help it, said Alice very meekly:  Im growing.

  Youve no right to grow here, said the Dormouse.

  Dont talk nonsense, said Alice more boldly:  you know
youre growing too.

  Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace, said the Dormouse:
not in that ridiculous fashion.  And he got up very sulkily
and crossed over to the other side of the court.

  All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the
Hatter, and, just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to
one of the officers of the court, Bring me the list of the
singers in the last concert! on which the wretched Hatter
trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.

  Give your evidence, the King repeated angrily, or Ill have
you executed, whether youre nervous or not.

  Im a poor man, your Majesty, the Hatter began, in a
trembling voice, and I hadnt begun my teanot above a week
or soand what with the breadandbutter getting so thinand
the twinkling of the tea

  The twinkling of the what? said the King.

  It began with the tea, the Hatter replied.

  Of course twinkling begins with a T! said the King sharply.
Do you take me for a dunce?  Go on!

  Im a poor man, the Hatter went on, and most things
twinkled after thatonly the March Hare said

  I didnt! the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.

  You did! said the Hatter.

  I deny it! said the March Hare.

  He denies it, said the King:  leave out that part.

  Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said the Hatter went on,
looking anxiously round to see if he would deny it too:  but the
Dormouse denied nothing, being fast asleep.

  After that, continued the Hatter, I cut some more bread
andbutter

  But what did the Dormouse say? one of the jury asked.

  That I cant remember, said the Hatter.

  You MUST remember, remarked the King, or Ill have you
executed.

  The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and breadandbutter,
and went down on one knee.  Im a poor man, your Majesty, he
began.

  Youre a very poor speaker, said the King.

  Here one of the guineapigs cheered, and was immediately
suppressed by the officers of the court.  As that is rather a
hard word, I will just explain to you how it was done.  They had
a large canvas bag, which tied up at the mouth with strings:
into this they slipped the guineapig, head first, and then sat
upon it.

  Im glad Ive seen that done, thought Alice.  Ive so often
read in the newspapers, at the end of trials, "There was some
attempts at applause, which was immediately suppressed by the
officers of the court," and I never understood what it meant
till now.

  If thats all you know about it, you may stand down,
continued the King.

  I cant go no lower, said the Hatter:  Im on the floor, as
it is.

  Then you may SIT down, the King replied.

  Here the other guineapig cheered, and was suppressed.

  Come, that finished the guineapigs! thought Alice.  Now we
shall get on better.

  Id rather finish my tea, said the Hatter, with an anxious
look at the Queen, who was reading the list of singers.

  You may go, said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the
court, without even waiting to put his shoes on.

  and just take his head off outside, the Queen added to one
of the officers:  but the Hatter was out of sight before the
officer could get to the door.

  Call the next witness! said the King.

  The next witness was the Duchesss cook.  She carried the
pepperbox in her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before
she got into the court, by the way the people near the door began
sneezing all at once.

  Give your evidence, said the King.

  Shant, said the cook.

  The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said in a
low voice, Your Majesty must crossexamine THIS witness.

  Well, if I must, I must, the King said, with a melancholy
air, and, after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till
his eyes were nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, What
are tarts made of?

  Pepper, mostly, said the cook.

  Treacle, said a sleepy voice behind her.

  Collar that Dormouse, the Queen shrieked out.  Behead that
Dormouse!  Turn that Dormouse out of court!  Suppress him!  Pinch
him!  Off with his whiskers!

  For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the
Dormouse turned out, and, by the time they had settled down
again, the cook had disappeared.

  Never mind! said the King, with an air of great relief.
Call the next witness.  And he added in an undertone to the
Queen, Really, my dear, YOU must crossexamine the next witness.
It quite makes my forehead ache!

  Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list,
feeling very curious to see what the next witness would be like,
for they havent got much evidence YET, she said to herself.
Imagine her surprise, when the White Rabbit read out, at the top
of his shrill little voice, the name Alice!



                           CHAPTER XII

                        Alices Evidence


  Here! cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the
moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she
jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over the jurybox with
the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads
of the crowd below, and there they lay sprawling about, reminding
her very much of a globe of goldfish she had accidentally upset
the week before.

  Oh, I BEG your pardon! she exclaimed in a tone of great
dismay, and began picking them up again as quickly as she could,
for the accident of the goldfish kept running in her head, and
she had a vague sort of idea that they must be collected at once
and put back into the jurybox, or they would die.

  The trial cannot proceed, said the King in a very grave
voice, until all the jurymen are back in their proper places
ALL, he repeated with great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as
he said do.

  Alice looked at the jurybox, and saw that, in her haste, she
had put the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing
was waving its tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable
to move.  She soon got it out again, and put it right not that
it signifies much, she said to herself I should think it
would be QUITE as much use in the trial one way up as the other.

  As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of
being upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and
handed back to them, they set to work very diligently to write
out a history of the accident, all except the Lizard, who seemed
too much overcome to do anything but sit with its mouth open,
gazing up into the roof of the court.

  What do you know about this business? the King said to
Alice.

  Nothing, said Alice.

  Nothing WHATEVER? persisted the King.

  Nothing whatever, said Alice.

  Thats very important, the King said, turning to the jury.
They were just beginning to write this down on their slates, when
the White Rabbit interrupted:  UNimportant, your Majesty means,
of course, he said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and
making faces at him as he spoke.

  UNimportant, of course, I meant, the King hastily said, and
went on to himself in an undertone, importantunimportant
unimportantimportant as if he were trying which word
sounded best.

  Some of the jury wrote it down important, and some
unimportant.  Alice could see this, as she was near enough to
look over their slates but it doesnt matter a bit, she
thought to herself.

  At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily
writing in his notebook, cackled out Silence! and read out
from his book, Rule Fortytwo.  ALL PERSONS MORE THAN A MILE
HIGH TO LEAVE THE COURT.

  Everybody looked at Alice.

  IM not a mile high, said Alice.

  You are, said the King.

  Nearly two miles high, added the Queen.

  Well, I shant go, at any rate, said Alice:  besides,
thats not a regular rule:  you invented it just now.

  Its the oldest rule in the book, said the King.

  Then it ought to be Number One, said Alice.

  The King turned pale, and shut his notebook hastily.
Consider your verdict, he said to the jury, in a low, trembling
voice.

  Theres more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty, said
the White Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry this paper has
just been picked up.

  Whats in it? said the Queen.

  I havent opened it yet, said the White Rabbit, but it seems
to be a letter, written by the prisoner toto somebody.

  It must have been that, said the King, unless it was
written to nobody, which isnt usual, you know.

  Who is it directed to? said one of the jurymen.

  It isnt directed at all, said the White Rabbit in fact,
theres nothing written on the OUTSIDE.  He unfolded the paper
as he spoke, and added It isnt a letter, after all:  its a set
of verses.

  Are they in the prisoners handwriting? asked another of
they jurymen.

  No, theyre not, said the White Rabbit, and thats the
queerest thing about it.  The jury all looked puzzled.

  He must have imitated somebody elses hand, said the King.
The jury all brightened up again.

  Please your Majesty, said the Knave, I didnt write it, and
they cant prove I did:  theres no name signed at the end.

  If you didnt sign it, said the King, that only makes the
matter worse.  You MUST have meant some mischief, or else youd
have signed your name like an honest man.

  There was a general clapping of hands at this:  it was the
first really clever thing the King had said that day.

  That PROVES his guilt, said the Queen.

  It proves nothing of the sort! said Alice.  Why, you dont
even know what theyre about!

  Read them, said the King.

  The White Rabbit put on his spectacles.  Where shall I begin,
please your Majesty? he asked.

  Begin at the beginning, the King said gravely, and go on
till you come to the end:  then stop.

  These were the verses the White Rabbit read:

        They told me you had been to her,
          And mentioned me to him:
        She gave me a good character,
          But said I could not swim.

        He sent them word I had not gone
          We know it to be true:
        If she should push the matter on,
          What would become of you?

        I gave her one, they gave him two,
          You gave us three or more
        They all returned from him to you,
          Though they were mine before.

        If I or she should chance to be
          Involved in this affair,
        He trusts to you to set them free,
          Exactly as we were.

        My notion was that you had been
          Before she had this fit
        An obstacle that came between
          Him, and ourselves, and it.

        Dont let him know she liked them best,
          For this must ever be
        A secret, kept from all the rest,
          Between yourself and me.

  Thats the most important piece of evidence weve heard yet,
said the King, rubbing his hands so now let the jury

  If any one of them can explain it, said Alice, she had
grown so large in the last few minutes that she wasnt a bit
afraid of interrupting him, Ill give him sixpence.  I dont
believe theres an atom of meaning in it.

  The jury all wrote down on their slates, SHE doesnt believe
theres an atom of meaning in it, but none of them attempted to
explain the paper.

  If theres no meaning in it, said the King, that saves a
world of trouble, you know, as we neednt try to find any.  And
yet I dont know, he went on, spreading out the verses on his
knee, and looking at them with one eye I seem to see some
meaning in them, after all.  "SAID I COULD NOT SWIM" you
cant swim, can you? he added, turning to the Knave.

  The Knave shook his head sadly.  Do I look like it? he said.
Which he certainly did NOT, being made entirely of cardboard.

  All right, so far, said the King, and he went on muttering
over the verses to himself:  "WE KNOW IT TO BE TRUE" thats
the jury, of course "I GAVE HER ONE, THEY GAVE HIM TWO" why,
that must be what he did with the tarts, you know

  But, it goes on "THEY ALL RETURNED FROM HIM TO YOU," said
Alice.

  Why, there they are! said the King triumphantly, pointing to
the tarts on the table.  Nothing can be clearer than THAT.
Then again"BEFORE SHE HAD THIS FIT"  you never had fits, my
dear, I think? he said to the Queen.

  Never! said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the
Lizard as she spoke.  The unfortunate little Bill had left off
writing on his slate with one finger, as he found it made no
mark but he now hastily began again, using the ink, that was
trickling down his face, as long as it lasted.

  Then the words dont FIT you, said the King, looking round
the court with a smile.  There was a dead silence.

  Its a pun! the King added in an offended tone, and
everybody laughed, Let the jury consider their verdict, the
King said, for about the twentieth time that day.

  No, no! said the Queen.  Sentence firstverdict afterwards.

  Stuff and nonsense! said Alice loudly.  The idea of having
the sentence first!

  Hold your tongue! said the Queen, turning purple.

  I wont! said Alice.

  Off with her head! the Queen shouted at the top of her voice.
Nobody moved.

