
  It must be a very pretty dance, said Alice timidly.

  Would you like to see a little of it? said the Mock Turtle.

  Very much indeed, said Alice.

  Come, lets try the first figure! said the Mock Turtle to the
Gryphon.  We can do without lobsters, you know.  Which shall
sing?

  Oh, YOU sing, said the Gryphon.  Ive forgotten the words.

  So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now
and then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and
waving their forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle
sang this, very slowly and sadly:


"Will you walk a little faster?" said a whiting to a snail.
"Theres a porpoise close behind us, and hes treading on my
 tail.
See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
They are waiting on the shinglewill you come and join the
dance?

Will you, wont you, will you, wont you, will you join the
dance?
Will you, wont you, will you, wont you, wont you join the
dance?


"You can really have no notion how delightful it will be
When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to
                                                      sea!"
But the snail replied "Too far, too far!" and gave a look
                                                       askance
Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the
   dance.
    Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join
        the dance.
    Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join
        the dance.

"What matters it how far we go?" his scaly friend replied.
"There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
The further off from England the nearer is to France
Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.

    Will you, wont you, will you, wont you, will you join the
         dance?
    Will you, wont you, will you, wont you, wont you join the
         dance?"



  Thank you, its a very interesting dance to watch, said
Alice, feeling very glad that it was over at last:  and I do so
like that curious song about the whiting!

  Oh, as to the whiting, said the Mock Turtle, theyyouve
seen them, of course?

  Yes, said Alice, Ive often seen them at dinn she
checked herself hastily.

  I dont know where Dinn may be, said the Mock Turtle, but
if youve seen them so often, of course you know what theyre
like.
