In cubick phalanx firm, advanced entire,
Invulnerable, impenetrably armed
Such high advantages their innocence
Gave them above their foes not to have sinned,
Not to have disobeyed in fight they stood
Unwearied, unobnoxious to be pained
By wound, though from their place by violence moved,
Now Night her course began, and, over Heaven
Inducing darkness, grateful truce imposed,
And silence on the odious din of war:
Under her cloudy covert both retired,
Victor and vanquished:  On the foughten field
Michael and his Angels prevalent
Encamping, placed in guard their watches round,
Cherubick waving fires:  On the other part,
Satan with his rebellious disappeared,
Far in the dark dislodged and, void of rest,
His potentates to council called by night
And in the midst thus undismayed began.
O now in danger tried, now known in arms
Not to be overpowered, Companions dear,
Found worthy not of liberty alone,
Too mean pretence! but what we more affect,
Honour, dominion, glory, and renown
Who have sustained one day in doubtful fight,
And if one day, why not eternal days?
What Heavens Lord had powerfullest to send
Against us from about his throne, and judged
Sufficient to subdue us to his will,
But proves not so:  Then fallible, it seems,
Of future we may deem him, though till now
Omniscient thought.  True is, less firmly armed,
Some disadvantage we endured and pain,
Till now not known, but, known, as soon contemned
Since now we find this our empyreal form
Incapable of mortal injury,
Imperishable, and, though pierced with wound,
Soon closing, and by native vigour healed.
Of evil then so small as easy think
The remedy perhaps more valid arms,
Weapons more violent, when next we meet,
May serve to better us, and worse our foes,
Or equal what between us made the odds,
In nature none:  If other hidden cause
Left them superiour, while we can preserve
Unhurt our minds, and understanding sound,
Due search and consultation will disclose.
He sat and in the assembly next upstood
Nisroch, of Principalities the prime
As one he stood escaped from cruel fight,
Sore toiled, his riven arms to havock hewn,
And cloudy in aspect thus answering spake.
Deliverer from new Lords, leader to free
Enjoyment of our right as Gods yet hard
For Gods, and too unequal work we find,
Against unequal arms to fight in pain,
Against unpained, impassive from which evil
Ruin must needs ensue for what avails
Valour or strength, though matchless, quelled with pain
Which all subdues, and makes remiss the hands
Of mightiest?  Sense of pleasure we may well
Spare out of life perhaps, and not repine,
But live content, which is the calmest life:
But pain is perfect misery, the worst
Of evils, and, excessive, overturns
All patience.  He, who therefore can invent
With what more forcible we may offend
Our yet unwounded enemies, or arm
Ourselves with like defence, to me deserves
No less than for deliverance what we owe.
Whereto with look composed Satan replied.
Not uninvented that, which thou aright
Believest so main to our success, I bring.
Which of us who beholds the bright surface
Of this ethereous mould whereon we stand,
This continent of spacious Heaven, adorned
With plant, fruit, flower ambrosial, gems, and gold
Whose eye so superficially surveys
These things, as not to mind from whence they grow
Deep under ground, materials dark and crude,
Of spiritous and fiery spume, till touched
With Heavens ray, and tempered, they shoot forth
So beauteous, opening to the ambient light?
These in their dark nativity the deep
Shall yield us, pregnant with infernal flame
Which, into hollow engines, long and round,
Thick rammed, at the other bore with touch of fire
Dilated and infuriate, shall send forth
From far, with thundering noise, among our foes
Such implements of mischief, as shall dash
To pieces, and oerwhelm whatever stands
Adverse, that they shall fear we have disarmed
The Thunderer of his only dreaded bolt.
Nor long shall be our labour yet ere dawn,
Effect shall end our wish.  Mean while revive
Abandon fear to strength and counsel joined
Think nothing hard, much less to be despaired.
He ended, and his words their drooping cheer
Enlightened, and their languished hope revived.
The invention all admired, and each, how he
To be the inventer missed so easy it seemed
Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought
Impossible:  Yet, haply, of thy race
In future days, if malice should abound,
Some one intent on mischief, or inspired
With devilish machination, might devise
Like instrument to plague the sons of men
For sin, on war and mutual slaughter bent.
Forthwith from council to the work they flew
None arguing stood innumerable hands
Were ready in a moment up they turned
Wide the celestial soil, and saw beneath
The originals of nature in their crude
Conception sulphurous and nitrous foam
They found, they mingled, and, with subtle art,
Concocted and adusted they reduced
To blackest grain, and into store conveyed:
Part hidden veins digged up nor hath this earth
Entrails unlike of mineral and stone,
Whereof to found their engines and their balls
Of missive ruin part incentive reed
Provide, pernicious with one touch to fire.
So all ere dayspring, under conscious night,
Secret they finished, and in order set,
With silent circumspection, unespied.
Now when fair morn orient in Heaven appeared,
Up rose the victorAngels, and to arms
The matin trumpet sung:  In arms they stood
Of golden panoply, refulgent host,
Soon banded others from the dawning hills
Look round, and scouts each coast lightarmed scour,
Each quarter to descry the distant foe,
Where lodged, or whither fled, or if for fight,
In motion or in halt:  Him soon they met
Under spread ensigns moving nigh, in slow
But firm battalion back with speediest sail
Zophiel, of Cherubim the swiftest wing,
Came flying, and in mid air aloud thus cried.
Arm, Warriours, arm for fight the foe at hand,
Whom fled we thought, will save us long pursuit
This day fear not his flightso thick a cloud
He comes, and settled in his face I see
Sad resolution, and secure:  Let each
His adamantine coat gird well, and each
Fit well his helm, gripe fast his orbed shield,
Borne even or high for this day will pour down,
If I conjecture aught, no drizzling shower,
But rattling storm of arrows barbed with fire.
So warned he them, aware themselves, and soon
In order, quit of all impediment
Instant without disturb they took alarm,
And onward moved embattled:  When behold!
Not distant far with heavy pace the foe
Approaching gross and huge, in hollow cube
Training his devilish enginery, impaled
On every side with shadowing squadrons deep,
To hide the fraud.  At interview both stood
A while but suddenly at head appeared
Satan, and thus was heard commanding loud.
Vanguard, to right and left the front unfold
That all may see who hate us, how we seek
Peace and composure, and with open breast
Stand ready to receive them, if they like
Our overture and turn not back perverse:
But that I doubt however witness, Heaven!
Heaven, witness thou anon! while we discharge
Freely our part: ye, who appointed stand
Do as you have in charge, and briefly touch
What we propound, and loud that all may hear!
So scoffing in ambiguous words, he scarce
Had ended when to right and left the front
Divided, and to either flank retired:
Which to our eyes discovered, new and strange,
A triple mounted row of pillars laid
On wheels for like to pillars most they seemed,
Or hollowed bodies made of oak or fir,
With branches lopt, in wood or mountain felled,
Brass, iron, stony mould, had not their mouths
With hideous orifice gaped on us wide,
Portending hollow truce:  At each behind
A Seraph stood, and in his hand a reed
Stood waving tipt with fire while we, suspense,
Collected stood within our thoughts amused,
Not long for sudden all at once their reeds
Put forth, and to a narrow vent applied
With nicest touch.  Immediate in a flame,
But soon obscured with smoke, all Heaven appeared,
From those deepthroated engines belched, whose roar
Embowelled with outrageous noise the air,
And all her entrails tore, disgorging foul
Their devilish glut, chained thunderbolts and hail
Of iron globes which, on the victor host
Levelled, with such impetuous fury smote,
That, whom they hit, none on their feet might stand,
Though standing else as rocks, but down they fell
By thousands, Angel on ArchAngel rolled
The sooner for their arms unarmed, they might
Have easily, as Spirits, evaded swift
By quick contraction or remove but now
Foul dissipation followed, and forced rout
Nor served it to relax their serried files.
What should they do? if on they rushed, repulse
Repeated, and indecent overthrow
Doubled, would render them yet more despised,
And to their foes a laughter for in view
Stood ranked of Seraphim another row,
In posture to displode their second tire
Of thunder:  Back defeated to return
They worse abhorred.  Satan beheld their plight,
And to his mates thus in derision called.
O Friends! why come not on these victors proud
Ere while they fierce were coming and when we,
To entertain them fair with open front
And breast, what could we more? propounded terms
Of composition, straight they changed their minds,
Flew off, and into strange vagaries fell,
As they would dance yet for a dance they seemed
Somewhat extravagant and wild perhaps
For joy of offered peace:  But I suppose,
If our proposals once again were heard,
We should compel them to a quick result.
To whom thus Belial, in like gamesome mood.
Leader! the terms we sent were terms of weight,
Of hard contents, and full of force urged home
Such as we might perceive amused them all,
And stumbled many:  Who receives them right,
Had need from head to foot well understand
Not understood, this gift they have besides,
They show us when our foes walk not upright.
So they among themselves in pleasant vein
Stood scoffing, hightened in their thoughts beyond
All doubt of victory:  Eternal Might
To match with their inventions they presumed
So easy, and of his thunder made a scorn,
And all his host derided, while they stood
A while in trouble:  But they stood not long
Rage prompted them at length, and found them arms
Against such hellish mischief fit to oppose.
Forthwith behold the excellence, the power,
Which God hath in his mighty Angels placed!
Their arms away they threw, and to the hills
For Earth hath this variety from Heaven
Of pleasure situate in hill and dale,
Light as the lightning glimpse they ran, they flew
