scale and color scanning, whose advantages and disadvantages need to be
examined.  She argued further that scanning resolutions and file formats
can represent a complex tradeoff between the time it takes to capture
material, file size, fidelity to the original, and onscreen display and
printing and equipment availability.  All these factors must be taken
into consideration.

CXP placed primary emphasis on the production in a timely and
costeffective manner of printed facsimiles that consisted largely of
blackandwhite text.  With binary scanning, large files may be
compressed efficiently and in a lossless manner i.e., no data is lost in
the process of compressing and decompressing an imagethe exact
bitrepresentation is maintained using Group 4 CCITT i.e., the French
acronym for International Consultative Committee for Telegraph and
Telephone compression.  CXP was getting compression ratios of about
forty to one.  Grayscale compression, which primarily uses JPEG, is much
less economical and can represent a lossy compression i.e., not
lossless, so that as one compresses and decompresses, the illustration
is subtly changed.  While binary files produce a highquality printed
version, it appears 1 that other combinations of spatial resolution with
gray andor color hold great promise as well, and 2 that gray scale can
represent a tremendous advantage for onscreen viewing.  The quality
associated with binary and gray scale also depends on the equipment used.
For instance, binary scanning produces a much better copy on a binary
printer.

Among CXPs findings concerning the production of microfilm from digital
files, KENNEY reported that the digital files for the same Reed lecture
were used to produce sample film using an electron beam recorder.  The
resulting film was faithful to the image capture of the digital files,
and while CXP felt that the text and image pages represented in the Reed
lecture were superior to that of the lightlens film, the resolution
readings for the 600 dpi were not as high as standard microfilming.
KENNEY argued that the standards defined for lightlens technology are
not totally transferable to a digital environment.  Moreover, they are
based on definition of quality for a preservation copy.  Although making
this case will prove to be a long, uphill struggle, CXP plans to continue
to investigate the issue over the course of the next year.

KENNEY concluded this portion of her talk with a discussion of the
advantages of creating film:  it can serve as a primary backup and as a
preservation master to the digital file it could then become the print
or production master and service copies could be paper, film, optical
disks, magnetic media, or onscreen display.

Finally, KENNEY presented details re production:

      Development and testing of a moderatelyhigh resolution production
     scanning workstation represented a third goal of CXP to date, 1,000
     volumes have been scanned, or about 300,000 images.

      The resulting digital files are stored and used to produce
     hardcopy replacements for the originals and additional prints on
     demand although the initial costs are high, scanning technology
     offers an affordable means for reformatting brittle material.

      A technician in production mode can scan 300 pages per hour when
     performing singlesheet scanning, which is a necessity when working
     with truly brittle paper this figure is expected to increase
     significantly with subsequent iterations of the software from Xerox
     a threemonth timeandcost study of scanning found that the average
     300page book would take about an hour and forty minutes to scan
     this figure included the time for setup, which involves keying in
     primary bibliographic data, going into quality control mode to
