Consider, my dear:  she is only a child!

  The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave
Turn them over!

  The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

  Get up! said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the
three gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the
King, the Queen, the royal children, and everybody else.

  Leave off that! screamed the Queen.  You make me giddy.
And then, turning to the rosetree, she went on, What HAVE you
been doing here?

  May it please your Majesty, said Two, in a very humble tone,
going down on one knee as he spoke, we were trying

  I see! said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the
roses.  Off with their heads! and the procession moved on,
three of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate
gardeners, who ran to Alice for protection.

  You shant be beheaded! said Alice, and she put them into a
large flowerpot that stood near.  The three soldiers wandered
about for a minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly
marched off after the others.

  Are their heads off? shouted the Queen.

  Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty! the soldiers
shouted in reply.

  Thats right! shouted the Queen.  Can you play croquet?

  The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question
was evidently meant for her.

  Yes! shouted Alice.

  Come on, then! roared the Queen, and Alice joined the
procession, wondering very much what would happen next.

  Itsits a very fine day! said a timid voice at her side.
She was walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously
into her face.

  Very, said Alice:  wheres the Duchess?

  Hush!  Hush! said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone.  He
looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised
himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and
whispered Shes under sentence of execution.

  What for? said Alice.

  Did you say "What a pity!"? the Rabbit asked.

  No, I didnt, said Alice:  I dont think its at all a pity.
I said "What for?"

  She boxed the Queens ears the Rabbit began.  Alice gave a
little scream of laughter.  Oh, hush! the Rabbit whispered in a
frightened tone.  The Queen will hear you!  You see, she came
rather late, and the Queen said

  Get to your places! shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder,
and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up
against each other however, they got settled down in a minute or
two, and the game began.  Alice thought she had never seen such a
curious croquetground in her life it was all ridges and
furrows the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets live
