using Perseus, although the project may eventually collect papers by
people who have used it to teach.  Rather, Perseus aims to provide
primary material in a kind of electronic library, an electronic sandbox,
so to say, in which students and scholars who are working on this
material can explore by themselves.  With that, MYLONAS demonstrated
Perseus, beginning with the Perseus gateway, the first thing one sees
upon opening Perseusan effort in part to solve the contextualizing
problemwhich tells the user what the system contains.

MYLONAS demonstrated only a very small portion, beginning with primary
texts and running off the CDROM.  Having selected Aeschylus Prometheus
Bound, which was viewable in Greek and English pretty much in the same
segments together, MYLONAS demonstrated tools to use with the Greek text,
something not possible with a book:  looking up the dictionary entry form
of an unfamiliar word in Greek after subjecting it to Perseus
morphological analysis for all the texts.  After finding out about a
word, a user may then decide to see if it is used anywhere else in Greek.
Because vast amounts of indexing support all of the primary material, one
can find out where else all forms of a particular Greek word appear
often not a trivial matter because Greek is highly inflected.  Further,
since the story of Prometheus has to do with the origins of sacrifice, a
user may wish to study and explore sacrifice in Greek literature by
typing sacrifice into a small window, a user goes to the EnglishGreek
word listsomething one cannot do without the computer Perseus has
indexed the definitions of its dictionarythe string sacrifice appears
in the definitions of these sixtyfive words.  One may then find out
where any of those words is used in the works of a particular author.
The English definitions are not lemmatized.

All of the indices driving this kind of usage were originally devised for
speed, MYLONAS observed in other words, all that kind of information
all forms of all words, where they exist, the dictionary form they belong
towere collected into databases, which will expedite searching.  Then
it was discovered that one can do things searching in these databases
that could not be done searching in the full texts.  Thus, although there
are fulltext searches in Perseus, much of the work is done behind the
scenes, using prepared indices.  Re the indexing that is done behind the
scenes, MYLONAS pointed out that without the SGML forms of the text, it
could not be done effectively.  Much of this indexing is based on the
structures that are made explicit by the SGML tagging.

It was found that one of the things many of Perseus nonGreekreading
users do is start from the dictionary and then move into the close study
of words and concepts via this kind of EnglishGreek word search, by which
means they might select a concept.  This exercise has been assigned to
students in core courses at Harvardto study a concept by looking for the
English word in the dictionary, finding the Greek words, and then finding
the words in the Greek but, of course, reading across in the English.
That tells them a great deal about what a translation means as well.

Should one also wish to see images that have to do with sacrifice, that
person would go to the object key word search, which allows one to
perform a similar kind of index retrieval on the database of
archaeological objects.  Without words, pictures are useless Perseus has
not reached the point where it can do much with images that are not
cataloged.  Thus, although it is possible in Perseus with text and images
to navigate by knowing where one wants to end upfor example, a
redfigure vase from the Boston Museum of Fine Artsone can perform this
kind of navigation very easily by tracing down indices.  MYLONAS
