side of public performance is something called the right of public
display.  Moral rights also exist, which at the federal level apply only
to very limited visual works of art, but in theory may apply under
contract and other principles.  Moral rights may include the right of an
author to have his or her name on a work, the right of attribution, and
the right to object to distortion or mutilationthe right of integrity.

The way copyright law is worded gives much latitude to activities such as
preservation to use of material for scholarly and research purposes when
the user does not make multiple copies and to the generation of
facsimile copies of unpublished works by libraries for themselves and
other libraries.  But the law does not allow anyone to become the
distributor of the product for the entire world.  In todays electronic
environment, publishers are extremely concerned that the entire world is
networked and can obtain the information desired from a single copy in a
single library.  Hence, if there is to be only one sale, which publishers
may choose to live with, they will obtain their money in other ways, for
example, from access and use.  Hence, the development of site licenses
and other kinds of agreements to cover what publishers believe they
should be compensated for.  Any solution that the United States takes
today has to consider the international arena.

Noting that the United States is a member of the Berne Convention and
subscribes to its provisions, PETERS described the permissions process.
She also defined compulsory licenses.  A compulsory license, of which the
United States has had a few, builds into the law the right to use a work
subject to certain terms and conditions.  In the international arena,
however, the ability to use compulsory licenses is extremely limited.
Thus, clearinghouses and other collectives comprise one option that has
succeeded in providing for use of a work.  Often overlooked when one
begins to use copyrighted material and put products together is how
expensive the permissions process and managing it is.  According to
PETERS, the price of copyright in a digital medium, whatever solution is
worked out, will include managing and assembling the database.  She
strongly recommended that publishers and librarians or people with
various backgrounds cooperate to work out administratively feasible
systems, in order to produce better results.

In the lengthy questionandanswer period that followed PETERSs
presentation, the following points emerged:

      The Copyright Office maintains that anything mechanical and
     totally exhaustive probably is not protected.  In the event that
     what an individual did in developing potentially copyrightable
     material is not understood, the Copyright Office will ask about the
     creative choices the applicant chose to make or not to make.  As a
     practical matter, if one believes she or he has made enough of those
     choices, that person has a right to assert a copyright and someone
     else must assert that the work is not copyrightable.  The more
     mechanical, the more automatic, a thing is, the less likely it is to
     be copyrightable.

      Nearly all photographs are deemed to be copyrightable, but no one
     worries about them much, because everyone is free to take the same
     image.  Thus, a photographic copyright represents what is called a
     "thin" copyright.  The photograph itself must be duplicated, in
     order for copyright to be violated.

      The Copyright Office takes the position that Xrays are not
     copyrightable because they are mechanical.  It  can be argued
     whether or not image enhancement in scanning can be protected.  One
     must exercise care with material created with public funds and
     generally in the public domain.  An article written by a federal
     employee, if written as part of official duties, is not
     copyrightable.  However, control over a scientific article written
     by a National Institutes of Health grantee i.e., someone who
     receives money from the U.S. government, depends on NIH policy.  If
     the government agency has no policy and that policy can be
     contained in its regulations, the contract, or the grant, the
