  There was a general clapping of hands at this:  it was the
first really clever thing the King had said that day.

  That PROVES his guilt, said the Queen.

  It proves nothing of the sort! said Alice.  Why, you dont
even know what theyre about!

  Read them, said the King.

  The White Rabbit put on his spectacles.  Where shall I begin,
please your Majesty? he asked.

  Begin at the beginning, the King said gravely, and go on
till you come to the end:  then stop.

  These were the verses the White Rabbit read:

        They told me you had been to her,
          And mentioned me to him:
        She gave me a good character,
          But said I could not swim.

        He sent them word I had not gone
          We know it to be true:
        If she should push the matter on,
          What would become of you?

        I gave her one, they gave him two,
          You gave us three or more
        They all returned from him to you,
          Though they were mine before.

        If I or she should chance to be
          Involved in this affair,
        He trusts to you to set them free,
          Exactly as we were.

        My notion was that you had been
          Before she had this fit
        An obstacle that came between
          Him, and ourselves, and it.

        Dont let him know she liked them best,
          For this must ever be
        A secret, kept from all the rest,
          Between yourself and me.

  Thats the most important piece of evidence weve heard yet,
said the King, rubbing his hands so now let the jury

  If any one of them can explain it, said Alice, she had
grown so large in the last few minutes that she wasnt a bit
afraid of interrupting him, Ill give him sixpence.  I dont
believe theres an atom of meaning in it.

  The jury all wrote down on their slates, SHE doesnt believe
theres an atom of meaning in it, but none of them attempted to
explain the paper.

  If theres no meaning in it, said the King, that saves a
world of trouble, you know, as we neednt try to find any.  And
