  I believe so, Alice replied thoughtfully.  They have their
tails in their mouthsand theyre all over crumbs.

  Youre wrong about the crumbs, said the Mock Turtle:
crumbs would all wash off in the sea.  But they HAVE their tails
in their mouths and the reason is here the Mock Turtle
yawned and shut his eyes.Tell her about the reason and all
that, he said to the Gryphon.

  The reason is, said the Gryphon, that they WOULD go with
the lobsters to the dance.  So they got thrown out to sea.  So
they had to fall a long way.  So they got their tails fast in
their mouths.  So they couldnt get them out again.  Thats all.

  Thank you, said Alice, its very interesting.  I never knew
so much about a whiting before.

  I can tell you more than that, if you like, said the
Gryphon.  Do you know why its called a whiting?

  I never thought about it, said Alice.  Why?

  IT DOES THE BOOTS AND SHOES. the Gryphon replied very
solemnly.

  Alice was thoroughly puzzled.  Does the boots and shoes! she
repeated in a wondering tone.

  Why, what are YOUR shoes done with? said the Gryphon.  I
mean, what makes them so shiny?

  Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she
gave her answer.  Theyre done with blacking, I believe.

  Boots and shoes under the sea, the Gryphon went on in a deep
voice, are done with a whiting.  Now you know.

  And what are they made of? Alice asked in a tone of great
curiosity.

  Soles and eels, of course, the Gryphon replied rather
impatiently:  any shrimp could have told you that.

  If Id been the whiting, said Alice, whose thoughts were
still running on the song, Id have said to the porpoise, "Keep
back, please:  we dont want YOU with us!"

  They were obliged to have him with them, the Mock Turtle
said:  no wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.

  Wouldnt it really? said Alice in a tone of great surprise.

  Of course not, said the Mock Turtle:  why, if a fish came
to ME, and told me he was going a journey, I should say "With
what porpoise?"

  Dont you mean "purpose"? said Alice.

  I mean what I say, the Mock Turtle replied in an offended
tone.  And the Gryphon added Come, lets hear some of YOUR
adventures.

  I could tell you my adventuresbeginning from this morning,
said Alice a little timidly:  but its no use going back to
yesterday, because I was a different person then.

  Explain all that, said the Mock Turtle.

