at it!

  This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party.
Some of the birds hurried off at once:  one the old Magpie began
wrapping itself up very carefully, remarking, I really must be
getting home the nightair doesnt suit my throat! and a Canary
called out in a trembling voice to its children, Come away, my
dears!  Its high time you were all in bed!  On various pretexts
they all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.

  I wish I hadnt mentioned Dinah! she said to herself in a
melancholy tone.  Nobody seems to like her, down here, and Im
sure shes the best cat in the world!  Oh, my dear Dinah!  I
wonder if I shall ever see you any more!  And here poor Alice
began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and lowspirited.
In a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of
footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping
that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was coming back to
finish his story.



                           CHAPTER IV

                The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill


  It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and
looking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something
and she heard it muttering to itself The Duchess!  The Duchess!
Oh my dear paws!  Oh my fur and whiskers!  Shell get me
executed, as sure as ferrets are ferrets!  Where CAN I have
dropped them, I wonder?  Alice guessed in a moment that it was
looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves, and she
very goodnaturedly began hunting about for them, but they were
nowhere to be seeneverything seemed to have changed since her
swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and
the little door, had vanished completely.

  Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about,
and called out to her in an angry tone, Why, Mary Ann, what ARE
you doing out here?  Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of
gloves and a fan!  Quick, now!  And Alice was so much frightened
that she ran off at once in the direction it pointed to, without
trying to explain the mistake it had made.

  He took me for his housemaid, she said to herself as she ran.
How surprised hell be when he finds out who I am!  But Id
better take him his fan and glovesthat is, if I can find them.
As she said this, she came upon a neat little house, on the door
of which was a bright brass plate with the name W. RABBIT
engraved upon it.  She went in without knocking, and hurried
upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the real Mary Ann,
and be turned out of the house before she had found the fan and
gloves.

  How queer it seems, Alice said to herself, to be going
messages for a rabbit!  I suppose Dinahll be sending me on
messages next!  And she began fancying the sort of thing that
would happen:  "Miss Alice!  Come here directly, and get ready
for your walk!" "Coming in a minute, nurse!  But Ive got to see
that the mouse doesnt get out."  Only I dont think, Alice went
on, that theyd let Dinah stop in the house if it began ordering
people about like that!

  By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with
a table in the window, and on it as she had hoped a fan and two
