     beginning of their respective talks and in the Directory of
     Participants Appendix III.


THE MACHINEREADABLE TEXT:  MARKUP AND USE

The sections of the Workshop that dealt with machinereadable text tended
to be more concerned with access and use than with preservation, at least
in the narrow technical sense.  Michael SPERBERGMcQUEEN made a forceful
presentation on the Text Encoding Initiatives TEI implementation of
the Standard Generalized Markup Language SGML.  His ideas were echoed
by Susan HOCKEY, Elli MYLONAS, and Stuart WEIBEL.  While the
presentations made by the TEI advocates contained no practicum, their
discussion focused on the value of the finished product, what the
European Community calls reusability, but what may also be termed
durability.  They argued that marking upthat is, codinga text in a
wellconceived way will permit it to be moved from one computer
environment to another, as well as to be used by various users.  Two
kinds of markup were distinguished:  1 procedural markup, which
describes the features of a text e.g., dots on a page, and 2
descriptive markup, which describes the structure or elements of a
document e.g., chapters, paragraphs, and front matter.

The TEI proponents emphasized the importance of texts to scholarship.
They explained how heavily coded and thus analyzed and annotated texts
can underlie research, play a role in scholarly communication, and
facilitate classroom teaching.  SPERBERGMcQUEEN reminded listeners that
a written or printed item e.g., a particular edition of a book is
merely a representation of the abstraction we call a text.  To concern
ourselves with faithfully reproducing a printed instance of the text,
SPERBERGMcQUEEN argued, is to concern ourselves with the representation
of a representation "images as simulacra for the text".  The TEI proponents
interest in images tends to focus on corollary materials for use in teaching,
for example, photographs of the Acropolis to accompany a Greek text.

By the end of the Workshop, SPERBERGMcQUEEN confessed to having been
converted to a limited extent to the view that electronic images
constitute a promising alternative to microfilming indeed, an
alternative probably superior to microfilming.  But he was not convinced
that electronic images constitute a serious attempt to represent text in
electronic form.  HOCKEY and MYLONAS also conceded that their experience
at the Pierce Symposium the previous week at Georgetown University and
the present conference at the Library of Congress had compelled them to
reevaluate their perspective on the usefulness of text as images.
Attendees could see that the text and image advocates were in
constructive tension, so to say.

Three nonTEI presentations described approaches to preparing
machinereadable text that are less rigorous and thus less expensive.  In
the case of the Papers of George Washington, Dorothy TWOHIG explained
that the digital version will provide a notquiteperfect rendering of
the transcribed textsome 135,000 documents, available for research
during the decades while the perfect or print version is completed.
Members of the American Memory team and the staff of NALs Text
Digitization Program see below also outlined a middle ground concerning
searchable texts.  In the case of American Memory, contractors produce
texts with about 99percent accuracy that serve as "browse" or
"reference" versions of written or printed originals.  End users who need
faithful copies or perfect renditions must refer to accompanying sets of
digital facsimile images or consult copies of the originals in a nearby
library or archive.  American Memory staff argued that the high cost of
producing 100percent accurate copies would prevent LC from offering
access to large parts of its collections.


THE MACHINEREADABLE TEXT:  METHODS OF CONVERSION

Although the Workshop did not include a systematic examination of the
methods for converting texts from paper or from facsimile images into
machinereadable form, nevertheless, various speakers touched upon this
matter.  For example, WEIBEL reported that OCLC has experimented with a
merging of multiple optical character recognition systems that will
reduce errors from an unacceptable rate of 5 characters out of every
l,000 to an unacceptable rate of 2 characters out of every l,000.

Pamela ANDRE presented an overview of NALs Text Digitization Program and
Judith ZIDAR discussed the technical details.  ZIDAR explained how NAL
purchased hardware and software capable of performing optical character
recognition OCR and text conversion and used its own staff to convert
texts.  The process, ZIDAR said, required extensive editing and project
staff found themselves considering alternatives, including rekeying
andor creating abstracts or summaries of texts.  NAL reckoned costs at
7 per page.  By way of contrast, Ricky ERWAY explained that American
Memory had decided from the start to contract out conversion to external
service bureaus.  The criteria used to select these contractors were cost
and quality of results, as opposed to methods of conversion.  ERWAY noted
that historical documents or books often do not lend themselves to OCR.
Bound materials represent a special problem.  In her experience, quality
controlinspecting incoming materials, counting errors in samplesposed
the most timeconsuming aspect of contracting out conversion.  ERWAY
reckoned American Memorys costs at 4 per page, but cautioned that fewer
costelements had been included than in NALs figure.


OPTIONS FOR DISSEMINATION

The topic of dissemination proper emerged at various points during the
Workshop.  At the session devoted to national and international computer
networks, LYNCH, Howard BESSER, Ronald LARSEN, and Edwin BROWNRIGG
highlighted the virtues of Internet today and of the network that will
evolve from Internet.  Listeners could discern in these narratives a
vision of an information democracy in which millions of citizens freely
find and use what they need.  LYNCH noted that a lack of standards
inhibits disseminating multimedia on the network, a topic also discussed
by BESSER.  LARSEN addressed the issues of network scalability and
modularity and commented upon the difficulty of anticipating the effects
of growth in orders of magnitude.  BROWNRIGG talked about the ability of
packet radio to provide certain links in a network without the need for
wiring.  However, the presenters also called attention to the
shortcomings and incongruities of presentday computer networks.  For
example:  1 Network use is growing dramatically, but much network
traffic consists of personal communication Email.  2 Large bodies of
information are available, but a users ability to search across their
entirety is limited.  3 There are significant resources for science and
technology, but few network sources provide content in the humanities.
4 Machinereadable texts are commonplace, but the capability of the
system to deal with images let alone other media formats lags behind.
A glimpse of a multimedia future for networks, however, was provided by
Maria LEBRON in her overview of the Online Journal of Current Clinical
Trials OJCCT, and the process of scholarly publishing online.

