aspects of Perseus  Tools to use with the Greek text  Prepared indices
and fulltext searches in Perseus  EnglishGreek word search leads to
close study of words and concepts  Navigating Perseus by tracing down
indices  Using the iconography to perform research 


Elli MYLONAS, managing editor, Perseus Project, Harvard University, first
gave an overview of Perseus, a large, collaborative effort based at
Harvard University but with contributors and collaborators located at
numerous universities and colleges in the United States e.g., Bowdoin,
Maryland, Pomona, Chicago, Virginia.  Funded primarily by the
AnnenbergCPB Project, with additional funding from Apple, Harvard, and
the Packard Humanities Institute, among others, Perseus is a multimedia,
hypertextual database for teaching and research on classical Greek
civilization, which was released in February 1992 in version 1.0 and
distributed by Yale University Press.

Consisting entirely of primary materials, Perseus includes ancient Greek
texts and translations of those texts catalog entriesthat is, museum
catalog entries, not library catalog entrieson vases, sites, coins,
sculpture, and archaeological objects maps and a dictionary, among
other sources.  The number of objects and the objects for which catalog
entries exist are accompanied by thousands of color images, which
constitute a major feature of the database.  Perseus contains
approximately 30 megabytes of text, an amount that will double in
subsequent versions.  In addition to these primary materials, the Perseus
Project has been building tools for using them, making access and
navigation easier, the goal being to build part of the electronic
environment discussed earlier in the morning in which students or
scholars can work with their sources.

The demonstration of Perseus will show only a fraction of the real work
that has gone into it, because the project had to face the dilemma of
what to enter when putting something into machinereadable form:  should
one aim for very high quality or make concessions in order to get the
material in?  Since Perseus decided to opt for very high quality, all of
its primary materials exist in a systemindependentinsofar as it is
possible to be systemindependentarchival form.  Deciding what that
archival form would be and attaining it required much work and thought.
For example, all the texts are marked up in SGML, which will be made
compatible with the guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative TEI when
they are issued.

Drawings are postscript files, not meeting international standards, but
at least designed to go across platforms.  Images, or rather the real
archival forms, consist of the best available slides, which are being
digitized.  Much of the catalog material exists in database forma form
that the average user could use, manipulate, and display on a personal
computer, but only at great cost.  Thus, this is where the concession
comes in:  All of this rich, wellmarkedup information is stripped of
much of its content the images are converted into bitmaps and the text
into small formatted chunks.  All this information can then be imported
into HyperCard and run on a midrange Macintosh, which is what Perseus
users have.  This fact has made it possible for Perseus to attain wide
use fairly rapidly.  Without those archival forms the HyperCard version
being demonstrated could not be made easily, and the project could not
have the potential to move to other forms and machines and software as
they appear, none of which information is in Perseus on the CD.

Of the numerous multimedia aspects of Perseus, MYLONAS focused on the
textual.  Part of what makes Perseus such a pleasure to use, MYLONAS
said, is this effort at seamless integration and the ability to move
around both visual and textual material.  Perseus also made the decision
not to attempt to interpret its material any more than one interprets by
selecting.  But, MYLONAS emphasized, Perseus is not courseware:  No
