Well managed of that skill the more thou knowest,
The more she will acknowledge thee her head,
And to realities yield all her shows:
Made so adorn for thy delight the more,
So awful, that with honour thou mayest love
Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise.
But if the sense of touch, whereby mankind
Is propagated, seem such dear delight
Beyond all other think the same vouchsafed
To cattle and each beast which would not be
To them made common and divulged, if aught
Therein enjoyed were worthy to subdue
The soul of man, or passion in him move.
What higher in her society thou findest
Attractive, human, rational, love still
In loving thou dost well, in passion not,
Wherein true love consists not:  Love refines
The thoughts, and heart enlarges hath his seat
In reason, and is judicious is the scale
By which to heavenly love thou mayest ascend,
Not sunk in carnal pleasure for which cause,
Among the beasts no mate for thee was found.
To whom thus, half abashed, Adam replied.
Neither her outside formed so fair, nor aught
In procreation common to all kinds,
Though higher of the genial bed by far,
And with mysterious reverence I deem,
So much delights me, as those graceful acts,
Those thousand decencies, that daily flow
From all her words and actions mixed with love
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned
Union of mind, or in us both one soul
Harmony to behold in wedded pair
More grateful than harmonious sound to the ear.
Yet these subject not I to thee disclose
What inward thence I feel, not therefore foiled,
Who meet with various objects, from the sense
Variously representing yet, still free,
Approve the best, and follow what I approve.
To love, thou blamest me not for Love, thou sayest,
Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask:
Love not the heavenly Spirits, and how their love
Express they? by looks only? or do they mix
Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch?
To whom the Angel, with a smile that glowed
Celestial rosy red, Loves proper hue,
Answered.  Let it suffice thee that thou knowest
Us happy, and without love no happiness.
Whatever pure thou in the body enjoyest,
And pure thou wert created we enjoy
In eminence and obstacle find none
Of membrane, joint, or limb, exclusive bars
Easier than air with air, if Spirits embrace,
Total they mix, union of pure with pure
Desiring, nor restrained conveyance need,
As flesh to mix with flesh, or soul with soul.
But I can now no more the parting sun
Beyond the Earths green Cape and verdant Isles
Hesperian sets, my signal to depart.
Be strong, live happy, and love!  But, first of all,
Him, whom to love is to obey, and keep
His great command take heed lest passion sway
Thy judgement to do aught, which else free will
Would not admit: thine, and of all thy sons,
The weal or woe in thee is placed beware!
I in thy persevering shall rejoice,
And all the Blest:  Stand fastto stand or fall
Free in thine own arbitrement it lies.
Perfect within, no outward aid require
