  The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried
bythe frightened Mouse splashed his way through the
neighbouring poolshe could hear the rattle of the teacups as
the March Hare and his friends shared their neverending meal,
and the shrill voice of the Queen ordering off her unfortunate
guests to executiononce more the pigbaby was sneezing on the
Duchesss knee, while plates and dishes crashed around itonce
more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the Lizards
slatepencil, and the choking of the suppressed guineapigs,
filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable
Mock Turtle.

  So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in
Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and
all would change to dull realitythe grass would be only
rustling in the wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the
reedsthe rattling teacups would change to tinkling sheep
bells, and the Queens shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd
boyand the sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the Gryphon, and
all thy other queer noises, would change she knew to the
confused clamour of the busy farmyardwhile the lowing of the
cattle in the distance would take the place of the Mock Turtles
heavy sobs.

  Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of
hers would, in the aftertime, be herself a grown woman and how
she would keep, through all her riper years, the simple and
loving heart of her childhood:  and how she would gather about
her other little children, and make THEIR eyes bright and eager
with many a strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of
Wonderland of long ago:  and how she would feel with all their
simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys,
remembering her own childlife, and the happy summer days.

                             THE END
	AS YOU LIKE IT


	DRAMATIS PERSONAE


DUKE SENIOR	living in banishment.

DUKE FREDERICK	his brother, an usurper of his dominions.


AMIENS	
	  lords attending on the banished duke.
JAQUES	


LE BEAU	a courtier attending upon Frederick.

CHARLES	wrestler to Frederick.


OLIVER		
		
JAQUES JAQUES DE BOYS:  	  sons of Sir Rowland de Boys.
		
ORLANDO		


ADAM	
	  servants to Oliver.
DENNIS	


TOUCHSTONE	a clown.

SIR OLIVER MARTEXT	a vicar.


CORIN	
	  shepherds.
SILVIUS	


WILLIAM	a country fellow in love with Audrey.

	A person representing HYMEN. HYMEN:

ROSALIND	daughter to the banished duke.

CELIA	daughter to Frederick.

PHEBE	a shepherdess.

AUDREY	a country wench.

	Lords, pages, and attendants, c.
	Forester:
	A Lord:
	First Lord:
	Second Lord:
	First Page:
	Second Page:


SCENE	Olivers house Duke Fredericks court and the
	Forest of Arden.




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT I



SCENE I	Orchard of Olivers house.


	Enter ORLANDO and ADAM

ORLANDO	As I remember, Adam, it was upon this fashion
	bequeathed me by will but poor a thousand crowns,
	and, as thou sayest, charged my brother, on his
	blessing, to breed me well: and there begins my
	sadness. My brother Jaques he keeps at school, and
	report speaks goldenly of his profit: for my part,
	he keeps me rustically at home, or, to speak more
	properly, stays me here at home unkept for call you
	that keeping for a gentleman of my birth, that
	differs not from the stalling of an ox? His horses
	are bred better for, besides that they are fair
	with their feeding, they are taught their manage,
	and to that end riders dearly hired: but I, his
	brother, gain nothing under him but growth for the
	which his animals on his dunghills are as much
	bound to him as I. Besides this nothing that he so
	plentifully gives me, the something that nature gave
	me his countenance seems to take from me: he lets
	me feed with his hinds, bars me the place of a
	brother, and, as much as in him lies, mines my
