transition period, greater flexibility concerning how concepts such as
backup copies and archival copies in the CXP are defined is necessary,
or the opportunity to move forward will be lost.

In terms of cooperation, particularly in the university setting, BATTIN
also argued the need to avoid going off in a hundred different
directions.  The CPA has catalyzed a small group of universities called
the La Guardia Eightbecause La Guardia Airport is where meetings take
placeHarvard, Yale, Cornell, Princeton, Penn State, Tennessee,
Stanford, and USC, to develop a digital preservation consortium to look
at all these issues and develop de facto standards as we move along,
instead of waiting for something that is officially blessed.  Continuing
to apply analog values and definitions of standards to the digital
environment, BATTIN said, will effectively lead to forfeiture of the
benefits of digital technology to research and scholarship.

Under the second rubric, the politics of reproduction, BATTIN reiterated
an oftmade argument concerning the electronic library, namely, that it
is more difficult to transform than to create, and nowhere is that belief
expressed more dramatically than in the conversion of brittle books to
new media.  Preserving information published in electronic media involves
making sure the information remains accessible and that digital
information is not lost through reproduction.  In the analog world of
photocopies and microfilm, the issue of fidelity to the original becomes
paramount, as do issues of "Whose fidelity?" and "Whose original?"

BATTIN elaborated these arguments with a few examples from a recent study
conducted by the CPA on the problems of preserving text and image.
Discussions with scholars, librarians, and curators in a variety of
disciplines dependent on text and image generated a variety of concerns,
for example:  1 Copy what is, not what the technology is capable of.
This is very important for the history of ideas.  Scholars wish to know
what the author saw and worked from.  And make available at the
workstation the opportunity to erase all the defects and enhance the
presentation.  2 The fidelity of reproductionwhat is good enough, what
can we afford, and the difference it makesissues of subjective versus
objective resolution.  3 The differences between primary and secondary
users.  Restricting the definition of primary user to the one in whose
discipline the material has been published runs one headlong into the
reality that these printed books have had a host of other users from a
host of other disciplines, who not only were looking for very different
things, but who also shared values very different from those of the
primary user.  4 The relationship of the standard of reproduction to new
capabilities of scholarshipthe browsing standard versus an archival
standard.  How good must the archival standard be?  Can a distinction be
drawn between potential users in setting standards for reproduction?
Archival storage, use copies, browsing copiesought an attempt to set
standards even be made?  5 Finally, costs.  How much are we prepared to
pay to capture absolute fidelity?  What are the tradeoffs between vastly
enhanced access, degrees of fidelity, and costs?

These standards, BATTIN concluded, serve to complicate further the
reproduction process, and add to the long list of technical standards
that are necessary to ensure widespread access.  Ways to articulate and
analyze the costs that are attached to the different levels of standards
must be found.

Given the chaos concerning standards, which promises to linger for the
foreseeable future, BATTIN urged adoption of the following general
principles:

      Strive to understand the changing information requirements of
     scholarly disciplines as more and more technology is integrated into
     the process of research and scholarly communication in order to meet
     future scholarly needs, not to build for the past.  Capture
     deteriorating information at the highest affordable resolution, even
     though the dissemination and display technologies will lag.
