  What I was going to say, said the Dodo in an offended tone,
was, that the best thing to get us dry would be a Caucusrace.

  What IS a Caucusrace? said Alice not that she wanted much
to know, but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that SOMEBODY
ought to speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.

  Why, said the Dodo, the best way to explain it is to do it.
And, as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter
day, I will tell you how the Dodo managed it.

  First it marked out a racecourse, in a sort of circle, the
exact shape doesnt matter, it said, and then all the party
were placed along the course, here and there.  There was no One,
two, three, and away, but they began running when they liked,
and left off when they liked, so that it was not easy to know
when the race was over.  However, when they had been running half
an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the Dodo suddenly called
out The race is over! and they all crowded round it, panting,
and asking, But who has won?

  This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of
thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon
its forehead the position in which you usually see Shakespeare,
in the pictures of him, while the rest waited in silence.  At
last the Dodo said, EVERYBODY has won, and all must have
prizes.

  But who is to give the prizes? quite a chorus of voices
asked.

  Why, SHE, of course, said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with
one finger and the whole party at once crowded round her,
calling out in a confused way, Prizes! Prizes!

  Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand
in her pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, luckily the salt
water had not got into it, and handed them round as prizes.
There was exactly one apiece all round.

  But she must have a prize herself, you know, said the Mouse.

  Of course, the Dodo replied very gravely.  What else have
you got in your pocket? he went on, turning to Alice.

  Only a thimble, said Alice sadly.

  Hand it over here, said the Dodo.

  Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo
solemnly presented the thimble, saying We beg your acceptance of
this elegant thimble and, when it had finished this short
speech, they all cheered.

  Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked
so grave that she did not dare to laugh and, as she could not
think of anything to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble,
looking as solemn as she could.

  The next thing was to eat the comfits:  this caused some noise
and confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not
taste theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on
the back.  However, it was over at last, and they sat down again
in a ring, and begged the Mouse to tell them something more.

  You promised to tell me your history, you know, said Alice,
and why it is you hateC and D, she added in a whisper, half
afraid that it would be offended again.

  Mine is a long and a sad tale! said the Mouse, turning to
Alice, and sighing.

  It IS a long tail, certainly, said Alice, looking down with
wonder at the Mouses tail but why do you call it sad?  And
she kept on puzzling about it while the Mouse was speaking, so
that her idea of the tale was something like this:

                    Fury said to a
                   mouse, That he
                 met in the
               house,
            "Let us
              both go to
                law:  I will
                  prosecute
                    YOU.  Come,
                       Ill take no
                        denial We
                     must have a
                 trial:  For
              really this
           morning Ive
          nothing
         to do."
           Said the
             mouse to the
               cur, "Such
                 a trial,
                   dear Sir,
                         With
                     no jury
                  or judge,
                would be
              wasting
             our
              breath."
               "Ill be
                 judge, Ill
                   be jury,"
                         Said
                    cunning
                      old Fury:
                     "Ill
                      try the
                         whole
                          cause,
                             and
                        condemn
                       you
                      to
                       death."


  You are not attending! said the Mouse to Alice severely.
What are you thinking of?

  I beg your pardon, said Alice very humbly:  you had got to
the fifth bend, I think?

  I had NOT! cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily.

  A knot! said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and
looking anxiously about her.  Oh, do let me help to undo it!

  I shall do nothing of the sort, said the Mouse, getting up
and walking away.  You insult me by talking such nonsense!

  I didnt mean it! pleaded poor Alice.  But youre so easily
offended, you know!

  The Mouse only growled in reply.

  Please come back and finish your story! Alice called after
it and the others all joined in chorus, Yes, please do! but
the Mouse only shook its head impatiently, and walked a little
quicker.

  What a pity it wouldnt stay! sighed the Lory, as soon as it
was quite out of sight and an old Crab took the opportunity of
saying to her daughter Ah, my dear!  Let this be a lesson to you
never to lose YOUR temper!  Hold your tongue, Ma! said the
young Crab, a little snappishly.  Youre enough to try the
patience of an oyster!

  I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do! said Alice aloud,
addressing nobody in particular.  Shed soon fetch it back!

  And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question?
said the Lory.

  Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about
her pet:  Dinahs our cat.  And shes such a capital one for
catching mice you cant think!  And oh, I wish you could see her
after the birds!  Why, shell eat a little bird as soon as look
at it!

  This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party.
Some of the birds hurried off at once:  one the old Magpie began
wrapping itself up very carefully, remarking, I really must be
getting home the nightair doesnt suit my throat! and a Canary
called out in a trembling voice to its children, Come away, my
dears!  Its high time you were all in bed!  On various pretexts
they all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.

  I wish I hadnt mentioned Dinah! she said to herself in a
melancholy tone.  Nobody seems to like her, down here, and Im
sure shes the best cat in the world!  Oh, my dear Dinah!  I
wonder if I shall ever see you any more!  And here poor Alice
began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and lowspirited.
In a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of
footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping
that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was coming back to
finish his story.



                           CHAPTER IV

                The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill


  It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and
looking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something
and she heard it muttering to itself The Duchess!  The Duchess!
Oh my dear paws!  Oh my fur and whiskers!  Shell get me
executed, as sure as ferrets are ferrets!  Where CAN I have
dropped them, I wonder?  Alice guessed in a moment that it was
looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves, and she
very goodnaturedly began hunting about for them, but they were
nowhere to be seeneverything seemed to have changed since her
swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and
the little door, had vanished completely.

  Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about,
and called out to her in an angry tone, Why, Mary Ann, what ARE
you doing out here?  Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of
gloves and a fan!  Quick, now!  And Alice was so much frightened
that she ran off at once in the direction it pointed to, without
trying to explain the mistake it had made.

  He took me for his housemaid, she said to herself as she ran.
How surprised hell be when he finds out who I am!  But Id
better take him his fan and glovesthat is, if I can find them.
As she said this, she came upon a neat little house, on the door
of which was a bright brass plate with the name W. RABBIT
engraved upon it.  She went in without knocking, and hurried
upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the real Mary Ann,
and be turned out of the house before she had found the fan and
gloves.

  How queer it seems, Alice said to herself, to be going
messages for a rabbit!  I suppose Dinahll be sending me on
messages next!  And she began fancying the sort of thing that
would happen:  "Miss Alice!  Come here directly, and get ready
for your walk!" "Coming in a minute, nurse!  But Ive got to see
that the mouse doesnt get out."  Only I dont think, Alice went
on, that theyd let Dinah stop in the house if it began ordering
people about like that!

  By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with
a table in the window, and on it as she had hoped a fan and two
or three pairs of tiny white kid gloves:  she took up the fan and
a pair of the gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when
her eye fell upon a little bottle that stood near the looking
glass.  There was no label this time with the words DRINK ME,
but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips.  I know
SOMETHING interesting is sure to happen, she said to herself,
whenever I eat or drink anything so Ill just see what this
bottle does.  I do hope itll make me grow large again, for
really Im quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!

  It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected:
before she had drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing
against the ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from being
broken.  She hastily put down the bottle, saying to herself
Thats quite enoughI hope I shant grow any moreAs it is, I
cant get out at the doorI do wish I hadnt drunk quite so
much!

  Alas! it was too late to wish that!  She went on growing, and
growing, and very soon had to kneel down on the floor:  in
another minute there was not even room for this, and she tried
the effect of lying down with one elbow against the door, and the
other arm curled round her head.  Still she went on growing, and,
as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one
foot up the chimney, and said to herself Now I can do no more,
whatever happens.  What WILL become of me?

  Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full
effect, and she grew no larger:  still it was very uncomfortable,
and, as there seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting
out of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy.

  It was much pleasanter at home, thought poor Alice, when one
wasnt always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about
by mice and rabbits.  I almost wish I hadnt gone down that
rabbitholeand yetand yetits rather curious, you know,
this sort of life!  I do wonder what CAN have happened to me!
When I used to read fairytales, I fancied that kind of thing
never happened, and now here I am in the middle of one!  There
ought to be a book written about me, that there ought!  And when
I grow up, Ill write onebut Im grown up now, she added in a
sorrowful tone at least theres no room to grow up any more
HERE.

  But then, thought Alice, shall I NEVER get any older than I
am now?  Thatll be a comfort, one waynever to be an old woman
but thenalways to have lessons to learn!  Oh, I shouldnt like
THAT!

  Oh, you foolish Alice! she answered herself.  How can you
learn lessons in here?  Why, theres hardly room for YOU, and no
room at all for any lessonbooks!

  And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other,
and making quite a conversation of it altogether but after a few
minutes she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

  Mary Ann!  Mary Ann! said the voice.  Fetch me my gloves
this moment!  Then came a little pattering of feet on the
stairs.  Alice knew it was the Rabbit coming to look for her, and
she trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she
was now about a thousand times as large as the Rabbit, and had no
reason to be afraid of it.

  Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it
but, as the door opened inwards, and Alices elbow was pressed
hard against it, that attempt proved a failure.  Alice heard it
say to itself Then Ill go round and get in at the window.

  THAT you wont thought Alice, and, after waiting till she
fancied she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly
spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air.  She did not
get hold of anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall,
and a crash of broken glass, from which she concluded that it was
just possible it had fallen into a cucumberframe, or something
of the sort.

  Next came an angry voicethe RabbitsPat! Pat!  Where are
you?  And then a voice she had never heard before, Sure then
Im here!  Digging for apples, yer honour!

  Digging for apples, indeed! said the Rabbit angrily.  Here!
Come and help me out of THIS!  Sounds of more broken glass.

  Now tell me, Pat, whats that in the window?

  Sure, its an arm, yer honour!  He pronounced it arrum.

  An arm, you goose!   Who ever saw one that size?  Why, it
fills the whole window!

  Sure, it does, yer honour:  but its an arm for all that.

  Well, its got no business there, at any rate:  go and take it
away!

  There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear
whispers now and then such as, Sure, I dont like it, yer
honour, at all, at all!  Do as I tell you, you coward! and at
last she spread out her hand again, and made another snatch in
the air.  This time there were TWO little shrieks, and more
sounds of broken glass.  What a number of cucumberframes there
must be! thought Alice.  I wonder what theyll do next!  As for
pulling me out of the window, I only wish they COULD!  Im sure I
dont want to stay in here any longer!

  She waited for some time without hearing anything more:  at
last came a rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a
good many voice all talking together:  she made out the words:
Wheres the other ladder?Why, I hadnt to bring but one
Bills got the otherBill! fetch it here, lad!Here, put em up
at this cornerNo, tie em together firstthey dont reach half
high enough yetOh! theyll do well enough dont be particular
Here, Bill! catch hold of this ropeWill the roof bear?Mind
that loose slateOh, its coming down!  Heads below! a loud
crashNow, who did that?It was Bill, I fancyWhos to go
down the chimney?Nay, I shant! YOU do it!That I wont,
then!Bills to go downHere, Bill! the master says youre to
go down the chimney!

  Oh! So Bills got to come down the chimney, has he? said
Alice to herself.  Shy, they seem to put everything upon Bill!
I wouldnt be in Bills place for a good deal:  this fireplace is
narrow, to be sure but I THINK I can kick a little!

  She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and
waited till she heard a little animal she couldnt guess of what
sort it was scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close
above her:  then, saying to herself This is Bill, she gave one
sharp kick, and waited to see what would happen next.

  The first thing she heard was a general chorus of There goes
Bill! then the Rabbits voice alongCatch him, you by the
hedge! then silence, and then another confusion of voicesHold
up his headBrandy nowDont choke himHow was it, old fellow?
What happened to you?  Tell us all about it!

  Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, Thats Bill,
thought Alice, Well, I hardly knowNo more, thank ye Im
better nowbut Im a deal too flustered to tell youall I know
is, something comes at me like a Jackinthebox, and up I goes
like a skyrocket!

  So you did, old fellow! said the others.

  We must burn the house down! said the Rabbits voice and
Alice called out as loud as she could, If you do.  Ill set
Dinah at you!

  There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to
herself, I wonder what they WILL do next!  If they had any
sense, theyd take the roof off.  After a minute or two, they
began moving about again, and Alice heard the Rabbit say, A
barrowful will do, to begin with.

  A barrowful of WHAT? thought Alice but she had not long to
doubt, for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came
rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face.
Ill put a stop to this, she said to herself, and shouted out,
Youd better not do that again! which produced another dead
silence.

  Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all
turning into little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright
idea came into her head.  If I eat one of these cakes, she
thought, its sure to make SOME change in my size and as it
cant possibly make me larger, it must make me smaller, I
suppose.

  So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find
that she began shrinking directly.  As soon as she was small
enough to get through the door, she ran out of the house, and
found quite a crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside.
The poor little Lizard, Bill, was in the middle, being held up by
two guineapigs, who were giving it something out of a bottle.
They all made a rush at Alice the moment she appeared but she
ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself safe in a
thick wood.

  The first thing Ive got to do, said Alice to herself, as she
wandered about in the wood, is to grow to my right size again
and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden.
I think that will be the best plan.

  It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and
simply arranged the only difficulty was, that she had not the
smallest idea how to set about it and while she was peering
about anxiously among the trees, a little sharp bark just over
her head made her look up in a great hurry.

  An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round
eyes, and feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her.
Poor little thing! said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried
hard to whistle to it but she was terribly frightened all the
time at the thought that it might be hungry, in which case it
would be very likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing.

  Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of
stick, and held it out to the puppy whereupon the puppy jumped
into the air off all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight,
and rushed at the stick, and made believe to worry it then Alice
dodged behind a great thistle, to keep herself from being run
over and the moment she appeared on the other side, the puppy
made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head over heels in
its hurry to get hold of it then Alice, thinking it was very
like having a game of play with a carthorse, and expecting every
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle
again then the puppy began a series of short charges at the
stick, running a very little way forwards each time and a long
way back, and barking hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat
down a good way off, panting, with its tongue hanging out of its
mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

  This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape
so she set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out
of breath, and till the puppys bark sounded quite faint in the
distance.

  And yet what a dear little puppy it was! said Alice, as she
leant against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself
with one of the leaves:  I should have liked teaching it tricks
very much, ifif Id only been the right size to do it!  Oh
dear!  Id nearly forgotten that Ive got to grow up again!  Let
me seehow IS it to be managed?  I suppose I ought to eat or
drink something or other but the great question is, what?

  The great question certainly was, what?  Alice looked all round
her at the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see
anything that looked like the right thing to eat or drink under
the circumstances.  There was a large mushroom growing near her,
about the same height as herself and when she had looked under
it, and on both sides of it, and behind it, it occurred to her
that she might as well look and see what was on the top of it.

  She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of
the mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large
caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded,
quietly smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice
of her or of anything else.



                            CHAPTER V

                    Advice from a Caterpillar


  The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some time in
silence:  at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its
mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.

  Who are YOU? said the Caterpillar.

  This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation.  Alice
replied, rather shyly, II hardly know, sir, just at present
at least I know who I WAS when I got up this morning, but I think
I must have been changed several times since then.

  What do you mean by that? said the Caterpillar sternly.
Explain yourself!

  I cant explain MYSELF, Im afraid, sir said Alice, because
Im not myself, you see.

  I dont see, said the Caterpillar.

  Im afraid I cant put it more clearly, Alice replied very
politely, for I cant understand it myself to begin with and
being so many different sizes in a day is very confusing.

  It isnt, said the Caterpillar.

  Well, perhaps you havent found it so yet, said Alice but
when you have to turn into a chrysalisyou will some day, you
knowand then after that into a butterfly, I should think youll
feel it a little queer, wont you?

  Not a bit, said the Caterpillar.

  Well, perhaps your feelings may be different, said Alice
all I know is, it would feel very queer to ME.

  You! said the Caterpillar contemptuously.  Who are YOU?
