                          CHAPTER VIII

                   The Queens CroquetGround


  A large rosetree stood near the entrance of the garden:  the
roses growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at
it, busily painting them red.  Alice thought this a very curious
thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up
to them she heard one of them say, Look out now, Five!  Dont go
splashing paint over me like that!

  I couldnt help it, said Five, in a sulky tone Seven jogged
my elbow.

  On which Seven looked up and said, Thats right, Five!  Always
lay the blame on others!

  YOUD better not talk! said Five.  I heard the Queen say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!

  What for? said the one who had spoken first.

  Thats none of YOUR business, Two! said Seven.

  Yes, it IS his business! said Five, and Ill tell himit
was for bringing the cook tuliproots instead of onions.

  Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun Well, of all
the unjust things when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as
she stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly:  the
others looked round also, and all of them bowed low.

  Would you tell me, said Alice, a little timidly, why you are
painting those roses?

  Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two.  Two began in a
low voice, Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to
have been a RED rosetree, and we put a white one in by mistake
and if the Queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads
cut off, you know.  So you see, Miss, were doing our best, afore
she comes, to  At this moment Five, who had been anxiously
looking across the garden, called out The Queen!  The Queen!
and the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon
their faces.  There was a sound of many footsteps, and Alice
looked round, eager to see the Queen.

  First came ten soldiers carrying clubs these were all shaped
like the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and
feet at the corners:  next the ten courtiers these were
ornamented all over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the
soldiers did.  After these came the royal children there were
ten of them, and the little dears came jumping merrily along hand
in hand, in couples:  they were all ornamented with hearts.  Next
came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among them Alice
recognised the White Rabbit:  it was talking in a hurried nervous
manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without
noticing her.  Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the
Kings crown on a crimson velvet cushion and, last of all this
grand procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.

  Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on
her face like the three gardeners, but she could not remember
every having heard of such a rule at processions and besides,
what would be the use of a procession, thought she, if people
had all to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldnt see
it?  So she stood still where she was, and waited.

  When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped
and looked at her, and the Queen said severely Who is this?
She said it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in
reply.

  Idiot! said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently and,
turning to Alice, she went on, Whats your name, child?

  My name is Alice, so please your Majesty, said Alice very
politely but she added, to herself, Why, theyre only a pack of
cards, after all.  I neednt be afraid of them!

  And who are THESE? said the Queen, pointing to the three
gardeners who were lying round the rosetree for, you see, as
they were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs
was the same as the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether
they were gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her
own children.

  How should I know? said Alice, surprised at her own courage.
Its no business of MINE.

  The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her
for a moment like a wild beast, screamed Off with her head!
Off

  Nonsense! said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the
Queen was silent.

