The monster moving onward came as fast
With horrid strides Hell trembled as he strode.
Th undaunted Fiend what this might be admired
Admired, not feared God and his Son except,
Created thing naught valued he nor shunned,
And with disdainful look thus first began:
  "Whence and what art thou, execrable Shape,
That darst, though grim and terrible, advance
Thy miscreated front athwart my way
To yonder gates? Through them I mean to pass,
That be assured, without leave asked of thee.
Retire or taste thy folly, and learn by proof,
Hellborn, not to contend with Spirits of Heaven."
  To whom the Goblin, full of wrath, replied:
"Art thou that traitor Angel? art thou he,
Who first broke peace in Heaven and faith, till then
Unbroken, and in proud rebellious arms
Drew after him the third part of Heavens sons,
Conjured against the Highestfor which both thou
And they, outcast from God, are here condemned
To waste eternal days in woe and pain?
And reckonst thou thyself with Spirits of Heaven
Helldoomed, and breathst defiance here and scorn,
Where I reign king, and, to enrage thee more,
Thy king and lord? Back to thy punishment,
False fugitive and to thy speed add wings,
Lest with a whip of scorpions I pursue
Thy lingering, or with one stroke of this dart
Strange horror seize thee, and pangs unfelt before."
  So spake the grisly Terror, and in shape,
So speaking and so threatening, grew tenfold,
More dreadful and deform. On th other side,
Incensed with indignation, Satan stood
Unterrified, and like a comet burned,
That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
In th arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
Shakes pestilence and war. Each at the head
Levelled his deadly aim their fatal hands
No second stroke intend and such a frown
Each cast at th other as when two black clouds,
With heavens artillery fraught, came rattling on
Over the Caspian,then stand front to front
Hovering a space, till winds the signal blow
To join their dark encounter in midair.
So frowned the mighty combatants that Hell
Grew darker at their frown so matched they stood
For never but once more was wither like
To meet so great a foe. And now great deeds
Had been achieved, whereof all Hell had rung,
Had not the snaky Sorceress, that sat
Fast by Hellgate and kept the fatal key,
Risen, and with hideous outcry rushed between.
  "O father, what intends thy hand," she cried,
"Against thy only son? What fury, O son,
Possesses thee to bend that mortal dart
Against thy fathers head? And knowst for whom?
For him who sits above, and laughs the while
At thee, ordained his drudge to execute
Whateer his wrath, which he calls justice, bids
His wrath, which one day will destroy ye both!"
  She spake, and at her words the hellish Pest
