Cast on themselves from their own mouths.  There stood
A grove hard by, sprung up with this their change,
His will who reigns above, to aggravate
Their penance, laden with fair fruit, like that
Which grew in Paradise, the bait of Eve
Used by the Tempter: on that prospect strange
Their earnest eyes they fixed, imagining
For one forbidden tree a multitude
Now risen, to work them further woe or shame
Yet, parched with scalding thirst and hunger fierce,
Though to delude them sent, could not abstain
But on they rolled in heaps, and, up the trees
Climbing, sat thicker than the snaky locks
That curled Megaera: greedily they plucked
The fruitage fair to sight, like that which grew
Near that bituminous lake where Sodom flamed
This more delusive, not the touch, but taste
Deceived they, fondly thinking to allay
Their appetite with gust, instead of fruit
Chewed bitter ashes, which the offended taste
With spattering noise rejected: oft they assayed,
Hunger and thirst constraining drugged as oft,
With hatefullest disrelish writhed their jaws,
With soot and cinders filled so oft they fell
Into the same illusion, not as Man
Whom they triumphed once lapsed.  Thus were they plagued
And worn with famine, long and ceaseless hiss,
Till their lost shape, permitted, they resumed
Yearly enjoined, some say, to undergo,
This annual humbling certain numbered days,
To dash their pride, and joy, for Man seduced.
However, some tradition they dispersed
Among the Heathen, of their purchase got,
And fabled how the Serpent, whom they called
Ophion, with Eurynome, the wide
Encroaching Eve perhaps, had first the rule
Of high Olympus thence by Saturn driven
And Ops, ere yet Dictaean Jove was born.
Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair
Too soon arrived Sin, there in power before,
Once actual now in body, and to dwell
Habitual habitant behind her Death,
Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet
On his pale horse: to whom Sin thus began.
Second of Satan sprung, allconquering Death!
What thinkest thou of our empire now, though earned
With travel difficult, not better far
Than still at Hells dark threshold to have sat watch,
Unnamed, undreaded, and thyself half starved?
Whom thus the Sinborn monster answered soon.
To me, who with eternal famine pine,
Alike is Hell, or Paradise, or Heaven
There best, where most with ravine I may meet
Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems
To stuff this maw, this vast unhidebound corps.
To whom the incestuous mother thus replied.
Thou therefore on these herbs, and fruits, and flowers,
Feed first on each beast next, and fish, and fowl
No homely morsels! and, whatever thing
