And elegant, of sapience no small part
Since to each meaning savour we apply,
And palate call judicious I the praise
Yield thee, so well this day thou hast purveyed.
Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstained
From this delightful fruit, nor known till now
True relish, tasting if such pleasure be
In things to us forbidden, it might be wished,
For this one tree had been forbidden ten.
But come, so well refreshed, now let us play,
As meet is, after such delicious fare
For never did thy beauty, since the day
I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorned
With all perfections, so inflame my sense
With ardour to enjoy thee, fairer now
Than ever bounty of this virtuous tree!
So said he, and forbore not glance or toy
Of amorous intent well understood
Of Eve, whose eye darted contagious fire.
Her hand he seised and to a shady bank,
Thick overhead with verdant roof imbowered,
He led her nothing loth flowers were the couch,
Pansies, and violets, and asphodel,
And hyacinth  Earths freshest softest lap.
There they their fill of love and loves disport
Took largely, of their mutual guilt the seal,
The solace of their sin till dewy sleep
Oppressed them, wearied with their amorous play,
Soon as the force of that fallacious fruit,
That with exhilarating vapour bland
About their spirits had played, and inmost powers
Made err, was now exhaled and grosser sleep,
Bred of unkindly fumes, with conscious dreams
Incumbered, now had left them up they rose
As from unrest and, each the other viewing,
Soon found their eyes how opened, and their minds
How darkened innocence, that as a veil
Had shadowed them from knowing ill, was gone
Just confidence, and native righteousness,
And honour, from about them, naked left
To guilty Shame he covered, but his robe
Uncovered more.  So rose the Danite strong,
Herculean Samson, from the harlotlap
Of Philistean Dalilah, and waked
Shorn of his strength.  They destitute and bare
Of all their virtue:  Silent, and in face
Confounded, long they sat, as strucken mute:
Till Adam, though not less than Eve abashed,
At length gave utterance to these words constrained.
O Eve, in evil hour thou didst give ear
To that false worm, of whomsoever taught
To counterfeit Mans voice true in our fall,
False in our promised rising since our eyes
Opened we find indeed, and find we know
Both good and evil good lost, and evil got
Bad fruit of knowledge, if this be to know
Which leaves us naked thus, of honour void,
Of innocence, of faith, of purity,
Our wonted ornaments now soiled and stained,
And in our faces evident the signs
Of foul concupiscence whence evil store
Even shame, the last of evils of the first
Be sure then.How shall I behold the face
Henceforth of God or Angel, erst with joy
And rapture so oft beheld?  Those heavenly shapes
Will dazzle now this earthly with their blaze
Insufferably bright.  O! might I here
In solitude live savage in some glade
Obscured, where highest woods, impenetrable
To star or sunlight, spread their umbrage broad
And brown as evening:  Cover me, ye Pines!
Ye Cedars, with innumerable boughs
Hide me, where I may never see them more!
But let us now, as in bad plight, devise
What best may for the present serve to hide
The parts of each from other, that seem most
To shame obnoxious, and unseemliest seen
Some tree, whose broad smooth leaves together sewed,
And girded on our loins, may cover round
Those middle parts that this new comer, Shame,
There sit not, and reproach us as unclean.
So counselled he, and both together went
Into the thickest wood there soon they chose
The figtree not that kind for fruit renowned,
But such as at this day, to Indians known,
In Malabar or Decan spreads her arms
Branching so broad and long, that in the ground
The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow
About the mother tree, a pillared shade
High overarched, and echoing walks between:
There oft the Indian herdsman, shunning heat,
Shelters in cool, and tends his pasturing herds
At loopholes cut through thickest shade:  Those leaves
They gathered, broad as Amazonian targe
And, with what skill they had, together sewed,
To gird their waist vain covering, if to hide
Their guilt and dreaded shame!  O, how unlike
To that first naked glory!  Such of late
Columbus found the American, so girt
With feathered cincture naked else, and wild
Among the trees on isles and woody shores.
Thus fenced, and, as they thought, their shame in part
Covered, but not at rest or ease of mind,
They sat them down to weep nor only tears
