ROSALIND	Nay you must call me Rosalind. Come, sister, will you go?

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE III	The forest.


	Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY JAQUES behind

TOUCHSTONE	Come apace, good Audrey: I will fetch up your
	goats, Audrey. And how, Audrey? am I the man yet?
	doth my simple feature content you?

AUDREY	Your features! Lord warrant us! what features!

TOUCHSTONE	I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most
	capricious poet, honest Ovid, was among the Goths.

JAQUES	Aside  O knowledge illinhabited, worse than Jove
	in a thatched house!

TOUCHSTONE	When a mans verses cannot be understood, nor a
	mans good wit seconded with the forward child
	Understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a
	great reckoning in a little room. Truly, I would
	the gods had made thee poetical.

AUDREY	I do not know what poetical is: is it honest in
	deed and word? is it a true thing?

TOUCHSTONE	No, truly for the truest poetry is the most
	feigning and lovers are given to poetry, and what
	they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do feign.

AUDREY	Do you wish then that the gods had made me poetical?

TOUCHSTONE	I do, truly for thou swearest to me thou art
	honest: now, if thou wert a poet, I might have some
	hope thou didst feign.

AUDREY	Would you not have me honest?

TOUCHSTONE	No, truly, unless thou wert hardfavoured for
	honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.

JAQUES	Aside  A material fool!

AUDREY	 Well, I am not fair and therefore I pray the gods
	make me honest.

TOUCHSTONE	Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut
	were to put good meat into an unclean dish.

AUDREY	I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am foul.

TOUCHSTONE	Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness!
	sluttishness may come hereafter. But be it as it may
	be, I will marry thee, and to that end I have been
	with Sir Oliver Martext, the vicar of the next
	village, who hath promised to meet me in this place
	of the forest and to couple us.

JAQUES	Aside  I would fain see this meeting.

AUDREY	Well, the gods give us joy!

TOUCHSTONE	Amen. A man may, if he were of a fearful heart,
	stagger in this attempt for here we have no temple
	but the wood, no assembly but hornbeasts. But what
	though? Courage! As horns are odious, they are
	necessary. It is said, many a man knows no end of
	his goods: right many a man has good horns, and
	knows no end of them. Well, that is the dowry of
	his wife tis none of his own getting. Horns?
	Even so. Poor men alone? No, no the noblest deer
	hath them as huge as the rascal. Is the single man
	therefore blessed? No: as a walled town is more
	worthier than a village, so is the forehead of a
	married man more honourable than the bare brow of a
	bachelor and by how much defence is better than no
	skill, by so much is a horn more precious than to
	want. Here comes Sir Oliver.

	Enter SIR OLIVER MARTEXT

	Sir Oliver Martext, you are well met: will you
	dispatch us here under this tree, or shall we go
	with you to your chapel?

SIR OLIVER MARTEXT	Is there none here to give the woman?

TOUCHSTONE	I will not take her on gift of any man.

SIR OLIVER MARTEXT	Truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.

JAQUES	Advancing

	Proceed, proceed	Ill give her.

TOUCHSTONE	Good even, good Master Whatyecallt: how do you,
	sir? You are very well met: God ild you for your
	last company: I am very glad to see you: even a
	toy in hand here, sir: nay, pray be covered.

JAQUES	Will you be married, motley?

TOUCHSTONE	As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb and
	the falcon her bells, so man hath his desires and
	as pigeons bill, so wedlock would be nibbling.

JAQUES	And will you, being a man of your breeding, be
	married under a bush like a beggar? Get you to
	church, and have a good priest that can tell you
	what marriage is: this fellow will but join you
	together as they join wainscot then one of you will
	prove a shrunk panel and, like green timber, warp, warp.

TOUCHSTONE	Aside  I am not in the mind but I were better to be
	married of him than of another: for he is not like
	to marry me well and not being well married, it
	will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my wife.

JAQUES	Go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.

TOUCHSTONE	Come, sweet Audrey:
	We must be married, or we must live in bawdry.
	Farewell, good Master Oliver: not,
	O sweet Oliver,
	O brave Oliver,
	Leave me not behind thee: but,
	Wind away,
	Begone, I say,
	I will not to wedding with thee.

	Exeunt JAQUES, TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

SIR OLIVER MARTEXT	Tis no matter: neer a fantastical knave of them
	all shall flout me out of my calling.

	Exit




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE IV	The forest.


	Enter ROSALIND and CELIA

ROSALIND	Never talk to me I will weep.

CELIA	Do, I prithee but yet have the grace to consider
	that tears do not become a man.

ROSALIND	But have I not cause to weep?

CELIA	As good cause as one would desire therefore weep.

ROSALIND	His very hair is of the dissembling colour.

CELIA	Something browner than Judass marry, his kisses are
	Judass own children.

ROSALIND	I faith, his hair is of a good colour.

CELIA	An excellent colour: your chestnut was ever the only colour.

ROSALIND	And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch
	of holy bread.

CELIA	He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana: a nun
	of winters sisterhood kisses not more religiously
	the very ice of chastity is in them.

ROSALIND	But why did he swear he would come this morning, and
	comes not?

CELIA	Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.

ROSALIND	Do you think so?

CELIA	Yes I think he is not a pickpurse nor a
