
          Discussion of approaches to structuring text for the computer
          pros and cons of text coding, description of methods in
          practice, and comparison of textcoding methods.

          Moderator:  Susan Hockey, Director, Center for Electronic Texts
             in the Humanities CETH, Rutgers and Princeton Universities
          David Woodley Packard
          C.M. SperbergMcQueen, Editor, Text Encoding Initiative TEI,
             University of IllinoisChicago
          Eric M. Calaluca, Vice President, ChadwyckHealey, Inc.

3:30
4:00 PM   Break

4:00 PM   Session VI.  Copyright Issues.

          Marybeth Peters, Policy Planning Adviser to the Register of
             Copyrights, Library of Congress

5:00 PM   Session VII. Conclusion.

          General discussion.
          What topics were omitted or given short shrift that anyone
             would like to talk about now?
          Is there a "group" here?  What should the group do next, if
             anything?  What should the Library of Congress do next, if
             anything?
          Moderator:  Prosser Gifford, Director for Scholarly Programs,
             Library of Congress

6:00 PM   Adjourn


                                 


                         Appendix II:  ABSTRACTS


SESSION I

Avra MICHELSON           Forecasting the Use of Electronic Texts by
                         Social Sciences and Humanities Scholars

This presentation explores the ways in which electronic texts are likely
to be used by the nonscientific scholarly community.  Many of the
remarks are drawn from a report the speaker coauthored with Jeff
Rothenberg, a computer scientist at The RAND Corporation.

The speaker assesses 1 current scholarly use of information technology
and 2 the key trends in information technology most relevant to the
research process, in order to predict how social sciences and humanities
scholars are apt to use electronic texts.  In introducing the topic,
current use of electronic texts is explored broadly within the context of
scholarly communication.  From the perspective of scholarly
communication, the work of humanities and social sciences scholars
involves five processes:  1 identification of sources, 2 communication
with colleagues, 3 interpretation and analysis of data, 4 dissemination
of research findings, and 5 curriculum development and instruction.  The
