Cornell project are creating digital image sets of older books in the
public domain as a source for a fresh paper facsimile or, in a future
phase, microfilm.  The books returned to the library shelves are
highquality and useful replacements on acidfree paper that should last
a long time.  To date, the Cornell project has placed little or no
emphasis on creating searchable texts one would not be surprised to find
that the project participants view such texts as new editions, and thus
not as faithful reproductions.

In her talk on preservation, Patricia BATTIN struck an ecumenical and
flexible note as she endorsed the creation and dissemination of a variety
of types of digital copies.  Do not be too narrow in defining what counts
as a preservation element, BATTIN counseled for the present, at least,
digital copies made with preservation in mind cannot be as narrowly
standardized as, say, microfilm copies with the same objective.  Setting
standards precipitously can inhibit creativity, but delay can result in
chaos, she advised.

In part, BATTINs position reflected the unsettled nature of imageformat
standards, and attendees could hear echoes of this unsettledness in the
comments of various speakers.  For example, Jean BARONAS reviewed the
status of several formal standards moving through committees of experts
and Clifford LYNCH encouraged the use of a new guideline for transmitting
document images on Internet.  Testimony from participants in the National
Agricultural Librarys NAL Text Digitization Program and LCs American
Memory project highlighted some of the challenges to the actual creation
or interchange of images, including difficulties in converting
preservation microfilm to digital form.  Donald WATERS reported on the
progress of a master plan for a project at Yale University to convert
books on microfilm to digital image sets, Project Open Book POB.

The Workshop offered rather less of an imaging practicum than planned,
but "howto" hints emerge at various points, for example, throughout
KENNEYs presentation and in the discussion of arcana such as
thresholding and dithering offered by George THOMA and FLEISCHHAUER.

NOTES:
     3  Although there is a sense in which any reproductions of
     historical materials preserve the human record, specialists in the
     field have developed particular guidelines for the creation of
     acceptable preservation copies.

     4  Titles and affiliations of presenters are given at the
     beginning of their respective talks and in the Directory of
     Participants Appendix III.


THE MACHINEREADABLE TEXT:  MARKUP AND USE

The sections of the Workshop that dealt with machinereadable text tended
to be more concerned with access and use than with preservation, at least
in the narrow technical sense.  Michael SPERBERGMcQUEEN made a forceful
presentation on the Text Encoding Initiatives TEI implementation of
the Standard Generalized Markup Language SGML.  His ideas were echoed
by Susan HOCKEY, Elli MYLONAS, and Stuart WEIBEL.  While the
presentations made by the TEI advocates contained no practicum, their
discussion focused on the value of the finished product, what the
European Community calls reusability, but what may also be termed
durability.  They argued that marking upthat is, codinga text in a
wellconceived way will permit it to be moved from one computer
environment to another, as well as to be used by various users.  Two
kinds of markup were distinguished:  1 procedural markup, which
describes the features of a text e.g., dots on a page, and 2
descriptive markup, which describes the structure or elements of a
document e.g., chapters, paragraphs, and front matter.
