And trust themselves to fear no second fate!
Me though just right, and the fixed laws of Heaven,
Did first create your leadernext, free choice
With what besides in council or in fight
Hath been achieved of merityet this loss,
Thus far at least recovered, hath much more
Established in a safe, unenvied throne,
Yielded with full consent. The happier state
In Heaven, which follows dignity, might draw
Envy from each inferior but who here
Will envy whom the highest place exposes
Foremost to stand against the Thunderers aim
Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share
Of endless pain? Where there is, then, no good
For which to strive, no strife can grow up there
From faction: for none sure will claim in Hell
Precedence none whose portion is so small
Of present pain that with ambitious mind
Will covet more! With this advantage, then,
To union, and firm faith, and firm accord,
More than can be in Heaven, we now return
To claim our just inheritance of old,
Surer to prosper than prosperity
Could have assured us and by what best way,
Whether of open war or covert guile,
We now debate. Who can advise may speak."
  He ceased and next him Moloch, sceptred king,
Stood upthe strongest and the fiercest Spirit
That fought in Heaven, now fiercer by despair.
His trust was with th Eternal to be deemed
Equal in strength, and rather than be less
Cared not to be at all with that care lost
Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worse,
He recked not, and these words thereafter spake:
  "My sentence is for open war. Of wiles,
More unexpert, I boast not: them let those
Contrive who need, or when they need not now.
For, while they sit contriving, shall the rest
Millions that stand in arms, and longing wait
The signal to ascendsit lingering here,
Heavens fugitives, and for their dwellingplace
Accept this dark opprobrious den of shame,
The prison of his ryranny who reigns
By our delay? No! let us rather choose,
Armed with Hellflames and fury, all at once
Oer Heavens high towers to force resistless way,
Turning our tortures into horrid arms
Against the Torturer when, to meet the noise
Of his almighty engine, he shall hear
Infernal thunder, and, for lightning, see
Black fire and horror shot with equal rage
Among his Angels, and his throne itself
Mixed with Tartarean sulphur and strange fire,
His own invented torments. But perhaps
The way seems difficult, and steep to scale
With upright wing against a higher foe!
Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench
Of that forgetful lake benumb not still,
That in our porper motion we ascend
