  The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question
was evidently meant for her.

  Yes! shouted Alice.

  Come on, then! roared the Queen, and Alice joined the
procession, wondering very much what would happen next.

  Itsits a very fine day! said a timid voice at her side.
She was walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously
into her face.

  Very, said Alice:  wheres the Duchess?

  Hush!  Hush! said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone.  He
looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised
himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and
whispered Shes under sentence of execution.

  What for? said Alice.

  Did you say "What a pity!"? the Rabbit asked.

  No, I didnt, said Alice:  I dont think its at all a pity.
I said "What for?"

  She boxed the Queens ears the Rabbit began.  Alice gave a
little scream of laughter.  Oh, hush! the Rabbit whispered in a
frightened tone.  The Queen will hear you!  You see, she came
rather late, and the Queen said

  Get to your places! shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder,
and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up
against each other however, they got settled down in a minute or
two, and the game began.  Alice thought she had never seen such a
curious croquetground in her life it was all ridges and
furrows the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets live
flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to
stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

  The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her
flamingo:  she succeeded in getting its body tucked away,
comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down,
but generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened
out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it
WOULD twist itself round and look up in her face, with such a
puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out laughing:
and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again,
it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled
itself, and was in the act of crawling away:  besides all this,
there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she
wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubledup soldiers
were always getting up and walking off to other parts of the
ground, Alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very
difficult game indeed.

  The players all played at once without waiting for turns,
quarrelling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs and in
a very short time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went
stamping about, and shouting Off with his head! or Off with
her head! about once in a minute.

  Alice began to feel very uneasy:  to be sure, she had not as
yet had any dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might
happen any minute, and then, thought she, what would become of
me?  Theyre dreadfully fond of beheading people here the great
wonder is, that theres any one left alive!

  She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering
whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a
curious appearance in the air:  it puzzled her very much at
first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to
be a grin, and she said to herself Its the Cheshire Cat:  now I
shall have somebody to talk to.

  How are you getting on? said the Cat, as soon as there was
mouth enough for it to speak with.

  Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded.  Its no
use speaking to it, she thought, till its ears have come, or at
least one of them.  In another minute the whole head appeared,
and then Alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the
game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her.  The
Cat seemed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and
no more of it appeared.

  I dont think they play at all fairly, Alice began, in rather
a complaining tone, and they all quarrel so dreadfully one cant
hear oneself speakand they dont seem to have any rules in
particular at least, if there are, nobody attends to themand
youve no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive
for instance, theres the arch Ive got to go through next
walking about at the other end of the groundand I should have
croqueted the Queens hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it
saw mine coming!

  How do you like the Queen? said the Cat in a low voice.

  Not at all, said Alice:  shes so extremely  Just then
she noticed that the Queen was close behind her, listening:  so
she went on, likely to win, that its hardly worth while
finishing the game.

  The Queen smiled and passed on.

  Who ARE you talking to? said the King, going up to Alice, and
looking at the Cats head with great curiosity.

  Its a friend of minea Cheshire Cat, said Alice:  allow me
to introduce it.

  I dont like the look of it at all, said the King:  however,
it may kiss my hand if it likes.

  Id rather not, the Cat remarked.

  Dont be impertinent, said the King, and dont look at me
like that!  He got behind Alice as he spoke.

  A cat may look at a king, said Alice.  Ive read that in
some book, but I dont remember where.

  Well, it must be removed, said the King very decidedly, and
he called the Queen, who was passing at the moment, My dear!  I
wish you would have this cat removed!

  The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great
or small.  Off with his head! she said, without even looking
round.

  Ill fetch the executioner myself, said the King eagerly, and
he hurried off.

  Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game
was going on, as she heard the Queens voice in the distance,
screaming with passion.  She had already heard her sentence three
of the players to be executed for having missed their turns, and
she did not like the look of things at all, as the game was in
such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or
not.  So she went in search of her hedgehog.

  The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog,
which seemed to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one
of them with the other:  the only difficulty was, that her
flamingo was gone across to the other side of the garden, where
Alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up
into a tree.

  By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back,
the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight:
but it doesnt matter much, thought Alice, as all the arches
are gone from this side of the ground.  So she tucked it away
under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back for
a little more conversation with her friend.

  When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to
find quite a large crowd collected round it:  there was a dispute
going on between the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who
were all talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent,
and looked very uncomfortable.

  The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to
settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her,
though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed
to make out exactly what they said.

  The executioners argument was, that you couldnt cut off a
head unless there was a body to cut it off from:  that he had
never had to do such a thing before, and he wasnt going to begin
at HIS time of life.

  The Kings argument was, that anything that had a head could be
beheaded, and that you werent to talk nonsense.

  The Queens argument was, that if something wasnt done about
it in less than no time shed have everybody executed, all round.
It was this last remark that had made the whole party look so
grave and anxious.

  Alice could think of nothing else to say but It belongs to the
Duchess:  youd better ask HER about it.

  Shes in prison, the Queen said to the executioner:  fetch
her here.  And the executioner went off like an arrow.

   The Cats head began fading away the moment he was gone, and,
by the time he had come back with the Dutchess, it had entirely
disappeared so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and
down looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.



                           CHAPTER IX

                     The Mock Turtles Story


  You cant think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old
thing! said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately
into Alices, and they walked off together.

  Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and
thought to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had
made her so savage when they met in the kitchen.

  When IM a Duchess, she said to herself, not in a very
hopeful tone though, I wont have any pepper in my kitchen AT
ALL.  Soup does very well withoutMaybe its always pepper that
makes people hottempered, she went on, very much pleased at
having found out a new kind of rule, and vinegar that makes them
sourand camomile that makes them bitterandand barleysugar
and such things that make children sweettempered.  I only wish
people knew that:  then they wouldnt be so stingy about it, you
know

  She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a
little startled when she heard her voice close to her ear.
Youre thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you
forget to talk.  I cant tell you just now what the moral of that
is, but I shall remember it in a bit.

  Perhaps it hasnt one, Alice ventured to remark.

  Tut, tut, child! said the Duchess.  Everythings got a
