multimedia experiments.  In a networked information world the database
builder or service builder publisher does not exercise the same
extensive control over the integrity of the presentation strange
programs "munge" with ones data before the user sees it.  Serious
thought must be given to what guarantees integrity of presentation.  Part
of that is related to where one draws the boundaries around a networked
information service.  This question of presentation integrity in
clientserver computing has not been stressed enough in the academic
world, LYNCH argued, though commercial service providers deal with it
regularly.

Concerning multimedia, LYNCH observed that good multimedia at the moment
is hideously expensive to produce.  He recommended producing multimedia
with either very high sale value, or multimedia with a very long life
span, or multimedia that will have a very broad usage base and whose
costs therefore can be amortized among large numbers of users.  In this
connection, historical and humanistically oriented material may be a good
place to start, because it tends to have a longer life span than much of
the scientific material, as well as a wider user base.  LYNCH noted, for
example, that American Memory fits many of the criteria outlined.  He
remarked the extensive discussion about bringing the Internet or the
National Research and Education Network NREN into the K12 environment
as a way of helping the American educational system.

LYNCH closed by noting that the kinds of applications demonstrated struck
him as excellent justifications of broadscale networking for K12, but
that at this time no "killer" application exists to mobilize the K12
community to obtain connectivity.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Dearth of genuinely interesting applications on the network
a slowchanging situation  The issue of the integrity of presentation in
a networked environment  Several reasons why CDROM software does not
network 


During the discussion period that followed LYNCHs presentation, several
additional points were made.

LYNCH reiterated even more strongly his contention that, historically,
once one goes outside highend science and the group of those who need
access to supercomputers, there is a great dearth of genuinely
interesting applications on the network.  He saw this situation changing
slowly, with some of the scientific databases and scholarly discussion
groups and electronic journals coming on as well as with the availability
of Wide Area Information Servers WAIS and some of the databases that
are being mounted there.  However, many of those things do not seem to
have piqued great popular interest.  For instance, most high school
students of LYNCHs acquaintance would not qualify as devotees of serious
molecular biology.

Concerning the issue of the integrity of presentation, LYNCH believed
that a couple of information providers have laid down the law at least on
certain things.  For example, his recollection was that the National
Library of Medicine feels strongly that one needs to employ the
identifier field if he or she is to mount a database commercially.  The
problem with a real networked environment is that one does not know who
is reformatting and reprocessing ones data when one enters a client
server mode.  It becomes anybodys guess, for example, if the network
uses a Z39.50 server, or what clients are doing with ones data.  A data
provider can say that his contract will only permit clients to have
