whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a
curious appearance in the air:  it puzzled her very much at
first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to
be a grin, and she said to herself Its the Cheshire Cat:  now I
shall have somebody to talk to.

  How are you getting on? said the Cat, as soon as there was
mouth enough for it to speak with.

  Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded.  Its no
use speaking to it, she thought, till its ears have come, or at
least one of them.  In another minute the whole head appeared,
and then Alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the
game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her.  The
Cat seemed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and
no more of it appeared.

  I dont think they play at all fairly, Alice began, in rather
a complaining tone, and they all quarrel so dreadfully one cant
hear oneself speakand they dont seem to have any rules in
particular at least, if there are, nobody attends to themand
youve no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive
for instance, theres the arch Ive got to go through next
walking about at the other end of the groundand I should have
croqueted the Queens hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it
saw mine coming!

  How do you like the Queen? said the Cat in a low voice.

  Not at all, said Alice:  shes so extremely  Just then
she noticed that the Queen was close behind her, listening:  so
she went on, likely to win, that its hardly worth while
finishing the game.

  The Queen smiled and passed on.

  Who ARE you talking to? said the King, going up to Alice, and
looking at the Cats head with great curiosity.

  Its a friend of minea Cheshire Cat, said Alice:  allow me
to introduce it.

  I dont like the look of it at all, said the King:  however,
it may kiss my hand if it likes.

  Id rather not, the Cat remarked.

  Dont be impertinent, said the King, and dont look at me
like that!  He got behind Alice as he spoke.

  A cat may look at a king, said Alice.  Ive read that in
some book, but I dont remember where.

  Well, it must be removed, said the King very decidedly, and
he called the Queen, who was passing at the moment, My dear!  I
wish you would have this cat removed!

  The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great
or small.  Off with his head! she said, without even looking
round.
