Of Paradise, so late their happy seat,
Waved over by that flaming brand the gate
With dreadful faces thronged, and fiery arms:
Some natural tears they dropt, but wiped them soon
The world was all before them, where to choose
Their place of rest, and Providence their guide:
They, hand in hand, with wandering steps and slow,
Through Eden took their solitary way.

The Project Gutenberg Edition of THE WORLD FACTBOOK 1992
This file should be named world92.zip or world92.txt

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, world921.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, world92a.txt.

Information about Project Gutenberg one page

We produce about one million dollars for each hour we work.  One
hundred hours is a conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar, then we produce a
million dollars per hour next year we will have to do four text
files per month, thus upping our productivity to two millionhr.
The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  10,000 x 100,000,000Trillion
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers.

We need your donations more than ever!

All donations should be made to "Project GutenbergIBC", and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law "IBC" is Illinois
Benedictine College.  Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go
to IBC, too

For these and other matters, please mail to:

David Turner, Project Gutenberg
Illinois  Benedictine  College
5700  College  Road
Lisle, IL 605320900

Email requests to:
Internet:    chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu David Turner
Compuserve:  chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu David Turner
Attmail:     internet!chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu David Turner
MCImail:     David Turner
ADDRESS TYPE: MCI  EMS: INTERNET  MBX:chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu

When all other email fails try our Michael S. Hart, Executive Director:
hartvmd.cso.uiuc.edu internet   hartuiucvmd   bitnet

We would prefer to send you this information by email
Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail.


If you have an FTP program or emulator, please:

FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
ftp mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  yourlogin
cd etextetext91
or cd etext92 for new books  now also cd etextetext92
or cd etextarticles get suggest gut for more information
dir to see files
get or mget to get files. . .set bin for zip files
GET INDEX and AAINDEX
