CPA, addressed the implications of standards for preservation.  She
listed several areas where the library profession and the analog world of
the printed book had made enormous contributions over the past hundred
yearsfor example, in bibliographic formats, binding standards, and, most
important, in determining what constitutes longevity or archival quality.

Although standards have lightened the preservation burden through the
development of national and international collaborative programs,
nevertheless, a pervasive mistrust of other peoples standards remains a
major obstacle to successful cooperation, BATTIN said.

The zeal to achieve perfection, regardless of the cost, has hindered
rather than facilitated access in some instances, and in the digital
environment, where no real standards exist, has brought an ironically
just reward.

BATTIN argued that standards are a doubleedged sword for those concerned
with the preservation of the human record, that is, the provision of
access to recorded knowledge in a multitude of media as far into the
future as possible.  Standards are essential to facilitate
interconnectivity and access, but, BATTIN said, as LYNCH pointed out
yesterday, if set too soon they can hinder creativity, expansion of
capability, and the broadening of access.  The characteristics of
standards for digital imagery differ radically from those for analog
imagery.  And the nature of digital technology implies continuing
volatility and change.  To reiterate, precipitous standardsetting can
inhibit creativity, but delayed standardsetting results in chaos.

Since in BATTINS opinion the nearterm prognosis for reliable archival
standards, as defined by librarians in the analog world, is poor, two
alternatives remain:  standing pat with the old technology, or
reconceptualizing.

Preservation concerns for electronic media fall into two general domains.
One is the continuing assurance of access to knowledge originally
generated, stored, disseminated, and used in electronic form.  This
domain contains several subdivisions, including 1 the closed,
proprietary systems discussed the previous day, bundled information such
as electronic journals and government agency records, and electronically
produced or captured raw data and 2 the application of digital
technologies to the reformatting of materials originally published on a
deteriorating analog medium such as acid paper or videotape.

The preservation of electronic media requires a reconceptualizing of our
preservation principles during a volatile, standardless transition which
may last far longer than any of us envision today.  BATTIN urged the
necessity of shifting focus from assessing, measuring, and setting
standards for the permanence of the medium to the concept of managing
continuing access to information stored on a variety of media and
requiring a variety of everchanging hardware and software for accessa
fundamental shift for the library profession.

BATTIN offered a primer on how to move forward with reasonable confidence
in a world without standards.  Her comments fell roughly into two sections:
1 standards in the real world and 2 the politics of reproduction.

In regard to realworld standards, BATTIN argued the need to redefine the
concept of archive and to begin to think in terms of life cycles.  In
the past, the naive assumption that paper would last forever produced a
cavalier attitude toward life cycles.  The transient nature of the
electronic media has compelled people to recognize and accept upfront the
concept of life cycles in place of permanency.

Digital standards have to be developed and set in a cooperative context
