programs which will begin to learn a bit more about the structure of the
language, and then, can go to tag more text.

HOCKEY said that the more that is tagged accurately, the more one can
refine the tagging process and thus the bigger body of text one can build
up with linguistic tagging incorporated into it.  Hence, the more tagging
or annotation there is in the text, the more one may begin to learn about
language and the more it will help accomplish more intelligent OCR.  She
recommended the development of software tools that will help one begin to
understand more about a text, which can then be applied to scanning
images of that text in that format and to using more intelligence to help
one interpret or understand the text.

HOCKEY posited the need to think about common methods of textencoding
for a long time to come, because building these large bodies of text is
extremely expensive and will only be done once.

In the more general discussion on approaches to encoding that followed,
these points were made:

BESSER identified the underlying problem with standards that all have to
struggle with in adopting a standard, namely, the tension between a very
highly defined standard that is very interchangeable but does not work
for everyone because something is lacking, and a standard that is less
defined, more open, more adaptable, but less interchangeable.  Contending
that the way in which people use SGML is not sufficiently defined, BESSER
wondered 1 if people resist the TEI because they think it is too defined
in certain things they do not fit into, and 2 how progress with
interchangeability can be made without frightening people away.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN replied that the published drafts of the TEI had met
with surprisingly little objection on the grounds that they do not allow
one to handle X or Y or Z.  Particular concerns of the affiliated
projects have led, in practice, to discussions of how extensions are to
be made the primary concern of any project has to be how it can be
represented locally, thus making interchange secondary.  The TEI has
received much criticism based on the notion that everything in it is
required or even recommended, which, as it happens, is a misconception
from the beginning,   because none of it is required and very little is
actually actively recommended for all cases, except that one document
ones source.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN agreed with BESSER about this tradeoff:  all the
projects in a set of twenty TEIconformant projects will not necessarily
tag the material in the same way.  One result of the TEI will be that the
easiest problems will be solvedthose dealing with the external form of
the information but the problem that is hardest in interchange is that
one is not encoding what another wants, and vice versa.  Thus, after
the adoption of a common notation, the differences in the underlying
conceptions of what is interesting about texts become more visible.
The success of a standard like the TEI will lie in the ability of
the recipient of interchanged texts to use some of what it contains
and to add the information that was not encoded that one wants, in a
layered way, so that texts can be gradually enriched and one does not
have to put in everything all at once.  Hence, having a wellbehaved
markup scheme is important.

STEVENS followed up on the paradoxical analogy that BESSER alluded to in
the example of the MARC records, namely, the formats that are the same
except that they are different.  STEVENS drew a parallel between
documenttype definitions and MARC records for books and serials and maps,
where one has a tagging structure and there is a textinterchange.
STEVENS opined that the producers of the information will set the terms
for the standard i.e., develop documenttype definitions for the users
of their products, creating a situation that will be problematical for
an institution like the Library of Congress, which will have to deal with
the DTDs in the event that a multiplicity of them develops.  Thus,
numerous people are seeking a standard but cannot find the tag set that
will be acceptable to them and their clients.  SPERBERGMcQUEEN agreed
with this view, and said that the situation was in a way worse:  attempting
to unify arbitrary DTDs resembled attempting to unify a MARC record with a
bibliographic record done according to the Prussian instructions.
According to STEVENS, this situation occurred very early in the process.

WATERS recalled from early discussions on Project Open Book the concern
of many people that merely by producing images, POB was not really
enhancing intellectual access to the material.  Nevertheless, not wishing
to overemphasize the opposition between imaging and full text, WATERS
stated that POB views getting the images as a first step toward possibly
converting to full text through character recognition, if the technology
is appropriate.  WATERS also emphasized that encoding is involved even
with a set of images.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN agreed with WATERS that one can create an SGML document
consisting wholly of images.  At first sight, organizing graphic images
with an SGML document may not seem to offer great advantages, but the
advantages of the scheme WATERS described would be precisely that
ability to move into something that is more of a multimedia document:
a combination of transcribed text and page images.  WEIBEL concurred in
this judgment, offering evidence from Project ADAPT, where a page is
divided into text elements and graphic elements, and in fact the text
elements are organized by columns and lines.  These lines may be used as
the basis for distributing documents in a network environment.  As one
develops software intelligent enough to recognize what those elements
are, it makes sense to apply SGML to an image initially, that may, in
fact, ultimately become more and more text, either through OCR or edited
OCR or even just through keying.  For WATERS, the labor of composing the
document and saying this set of documents or this set of images belongs
to this document constitutes a significant investment.

WEIBEL also made the point that the AAP tag sets, while not excessively
prescriptive, offer a common starting point they do not define the
structure of the documents, though.  They have some recommendations about
DTDs one could use as examples, but they do just suggest tag sets.   For
example, the CORE project attempts to use the AAP markup as much as
possible, but there are clearly areas where structure must be added.
That in no way contradicts the use of AAP tag sets.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN noted that the TEI prepared a long working paper early
on about the AAP tag set and what it lacked that the TEI thought it
needed, and a fairly long critique of the naming conventions, which has
led to a very different style of naming in the TEI.  He stressed the
importance of the opposition between prescriptive markup, the kind that a
publisher or anybody can do when producing documents de novo, and
descriptive markup, in which one has to take what the text carrier
provides.  In these particular tag sets it is easy to overemphasize this
opposition, because the AAP tag set is extremely flexible.  Even if one
just used the DTDs, they allow almost anything to appear almost anywhere.

                                 

SESSION VI.  COPYRIGHT ISSUES


