    Lebanon and increase the influence of Syria. Awn was granted amnesty and
    allowed to travel in France in August 199l. Since the removal of Awn, the
    Lebanese Government has made substantial progress in strengthening the
    central government, rebuilding government institutions, and extending its
    authority throughout the nation. The LAF has deployed from Beirut north
    along the coast road to Tripoli, southeast into the Shuf mountains, and
    south to Sidon and Tyre. Many militiamen from Christian and Muslim groups
    have evacuated Beirut for their strongholds in the north, south, and east of
    the country. Some heavy weapons possessed by the militias have been turned
    over to the government, or sold outside the country, which has begun a plan
    to integrate some militiamen into the military and the internal security
    forces. Lebanon and Syria signed a treaty of friendship and cooperation in
    May 1991. Lebanon continues to be partially occupied by Syrian troops, which
    are deployed in Beirut, its southern suburbs, the Bekaa Valley, and northern
    Lebanon. Iran also maintains a small contingent of revolutionary guards in
    the Bekaa Valley to support Lebanese Islamic fundamentalist groups. Israel
    withdrew the bulk of its forces from the south in 1985, although it still
    retains troops in a 10kmdeep security zone north of its border with
    Lebanon. Israel arms and trains the Army of South Lebanon ASL, which also
    occupies the security zone and is Israels first line of defense against
    attacks on its northern border. The following description is based on the
    present constitutional and customary practices of the Lebanese system.

:Lebanon Economy

Overview:
    Since 1975 civil war has seriously damaged Lebanons economic
    infrastructure, cut national output by half, and all but ended Lebanons
    position as a Middle Eastern entrepot and banking hub. Following October
    1990, however, a tentative peace has enabled the central government to begin
    restoring control in Beirut, collect taxes, and regain access to key port
    and government facilities. The battered economy has also been propped up by
    a financially sound banking system and resilient small and mediumscale
