viewing workstation has been created by Xerox, with input into the design
by a committee of Cornell librarians and computer professionals.  This
will allow us to experiment with patron access to the images that make up
the digital library.  The viewing station provides search, retrieval, and
ultimately printing functions with enhancements to facilitate
navigation through multiple documents.

Cornell currently is working to extend access to the digital library to
readers using workstations from their offices.  This year is devoted to
the development of a network resident image conversion and delivery
server, and client software that will support readers who use Apple
Macintosh computers, IBM windows platforms, and Sun workstations.
Equipment for this development was provided by Sun Microsystems with
support from the Commission on Preservation and Access.

During the showandtell session of the Workshop on Electronic Texts, a
prototype view station will be demonstrated.  In addition, a display of
original library books that have been digitized will be available for
review with associated printed copies for comparison.  The fifteenminute
overview of the project will include a slide presentation that
constitutes a "tour" of the preservation digitizing process.

The final networkconnected version of the viewing station will provide
library users with another mechanism for accessing the digital library,
and will also provide the capability of viewing images directly.  This
will not require special software, although a powerful computer with good
graphics will be needed.

The Joint Study in Digital Preservation has generated a great deal of
interest in the library community.  Unfortunately, or perhaps
fortunately, this project serves to raise a vast number of other issues
surrounding the use of digital technology for the preservation and use of
deteriorating library materials, which subsequent projects will need to
examine.  Much work remains.

SESSION III

Howard BESSER                      Networking Multimedia Databases

What do we have to consider in building and distributing databases of
visual materials in a multiuser environment?  This presentation examines
a variety of concerns that need to be addressed before a multimedia
database can be set up in a networked environment.

In the past it has not been feasible to implement databases of visual
materials in shareduser environments because of technological barriers.
Each of the two basic models for multiuser multimedia databases has
posed its own problem.  The analog multimedia storage model represented
by Project Athenas parallel analog and digital networks has required an
incredibly complex and expensive infrastructure.  The economies of
scale that make multiuser setups cheaper per user served do not operate
in an environment that requires a computer workstation, videodisc player,
and two display devices for each user.

The digital multimedia storage model has required vast amounts of storage
space as much as one gigabyte per thirty still images.  In the past the
cost of such a large amount of storage space made this model a
prohibitive choice as well.  But plunging storage costs are finally
making this second alternative viable.

If storage no longer poses such an impediment, what do we need to
consider in building digitally stored multiuser databases of visual
materials?  This presentation will examine the networking and
telecommunication constraints that must be overcome before such databases
can become commonplace and useful to a large number of people.

The key problem is the vast size of multimedia documents, and how this
affects not only storage but telecommunications transmission time.
Anything slower than T1 speed is impractical for files of 1 megabyte or
larger which is likely to be small for a multimedia document.  For
instance, even on a 56 Kb line it would take three minutes to transfer a
1megabyte file.  And these figures assume ideal circumstances, and do
not take into consideration other users contending for network bandwidth,
disk access time, or the time needed for remote display.  Current common
telephone transmission rates would be completely impractical few users
would be willing to wait the hour necessary to transmit a single image at
2400 baud.

This necessitates compression, which itself raises a number of other
issues.  In order to decrease file sizes significantly, we must employ
lossy compression algorithms.  But how much quality can we afford to
lose?  To date there has been only one significant study done of
imagequality needs for a particular user group, and this study did not
look at loss resulting from compression.  Only after identifying
imagequality needs can we begin to address storage and network bandwidth
needs.

Experience with XWindowsbased applications such as Imagequery, the
University of California at Berkeley image database demonstrates the
utility of a clientserver topology, but also points to the limitation of
current software for a distributed environment.  For example,
applications like Imagequery can incorporate compression, but current X
implementations do not permit decompression at the end users
workstation.  Such decompression at the host computer alleviates storage
capacity problems while doing nothing to address problems of
telecommunications bandwidth.

We need to examine the effects on network throughput of moving
multimedia documents around on a network.  We need to examine various
topologies that will help us avoid bottlenecks around servers and
gateways.  Experience with applications such as these raise still broader
questions. How closely is the multimedia document tied to the software
for viewing it?  Can it be accessed and viewed from other applications?
Experience with the MARC format and more recently with the Z39.50
protocols shows how useful it can be to store documents in a form in
which they can be accessed by a variety of application software.

Finally, from an intellectualaccess standpoint, we need to address the
issue of providing access to these multimedia documents in
interdisciplinary environments.  We need to examine terminology and
indexing strategies that will allow us to provide access to this material
in a crossdisciplinary way.

Ronald LARSEN            Directions in HighPerformance Networking for
                         Libraries

The pace at which computing technology has advanced over the past forty
years shows no sign of abating.  Roughly speaking, each fiveyear period
has yielded an orderofmagnitude improvement in price and performance of
computing equipment.  No fundamental hurdles are likely to prevent this
pace from continuing for at least the next decade.  It is only in the
past five years, though, that computing has become ubiquitous in
libraries, affecting all staff and patrons, directly or indirectly.

During these same five years, communications rates on the Internet, the
principal academic computing network, have grown from 56 kbps to 1.5
Mbps, and the NSFNet backbone is now running 45 Mbps.  Over the next five
years, communication rates on the backbone are expected to exceed 1 Gbps.
Growth in both the population of network users and the volume of network
traffic  has continued to grow geometrically, at rates approaching 15
percent per month.  This flood of capacity and use, likened by some to
"drinking from a firehose,"  creates immense opportunities and challenges
for libraries.  Libraries must anticipate the future implications of this
technology, participate in its development, and deploy it to ensure
access to the worlds information resources.

The infrastructure for the information age is being put in place.
Libraries face strategic decisions about their role in the development,
deployment, and use of this infrastructure.  The emerging infrastructure
is much more than computers and communication lines.  It is more than the
ability to compute at a remote site, send electronic mail to a peer
across the country, or move a file from one library to another.  The next
five years will witness substantial development of the information
infrastructure of the network.

In order to provide appropriate leadership, library professionals must
have a fundamental understanding of and appreciation for computer
networking, from local area networks to the National Research and
Education Network NREN.  This presentation addresses these
fundamentals, and how they relate to libraries today and in the near
future.

Edwin BROWNRIGG               Electronic Library Visions and Realities

The electronic library has been a vision desired by manyand rejected by
somesince Vannevar Bush coined the term memex to describe an automated,
intelligent, personal information system.  Variations on this vision have
included Ted Nelsons Xanadau, Alan Kays Dynabook, and Lancasters
"paperless library," with the most recent incarnation being the
"Knowledge Navigator" described by John Scully of Apple.  But the reality
of library service has been less visionary and the leap to the electronic
library has eluded universities, publishers, and information technology
files.

The Memex Research Institute MemRI, an independent, nonprofit research
and development organization, has created an Electronic Library Program
of shared research and development in order to make the collective vision
more concrete.  The program is working toward the creation of large,
indexed publicly available electronic image collections of published
documents in academic, special, and public libraries.  This strategic
plan is the result of the first stage of the program, which has been an
investigation of the information technologies available to support such
an effort, the economic parameters of electronic service compared to
traditional library operations, and the business and political factors
affecting the shift from print distribution to electronic networked
access.

The strategic plan envisions a combination of publicly searchable access
databases, image and text document collections stored on network "file
servers," local and remote network access, and an intellectual property
managementcontrol system.  This combination of technology and
information content is defined in this plan as an Elibrary or Elibrary
collection.  Some participating sponsors are already developing projects
based on MemRIs recommended directions.

The Elibrary strategy projected in this plan is a visionary one that can
enable major changes and improvements in academic, public, and special
library service.  This vision is, though, one that can be realized with
todays technology.  At the same time, it will challenge the political
and social structure within which libraries operate:  in academic
libraries, the traditional emphasis on local collections, extending to
accreditation issues in public libraries, the potential of electronic
branch and central libraries fully available to the public and for
special libraries, new opportunities for shared collections and networks.

The environment in which this strategic plan has been developed is, at
the moment, dominated by a sense of library limits.  The continued
expansion and rapid growth of local academic library collections is now
clearly at an end.  Corporate libraries, and even law libraries, are
faced with operating within a difficult economic climate, as well as with
very active competition from commercial information sources.  For
example, public libraries may be seen as a desirable but not critical
municipal service in a time when the budgets of safety and health
