Exempt from death to show thee what reward
Awaits the good the rest what punishment
Which now direct thine eyes and soon behold.
He looked, and saw the face of things quite changed
The brazen throat of war had ceased to roar
All now was turned to jollity and game,
To luxury and riot, feast and dance
Marrying or prostituting, as befel,
Rape or adultery, where passing fair
Allured them thence from cups to civil broils.
At length a reverend sire among them came,
And of their doings great dislike declared,
And testified against their ways he oft
Frequented their assemblies, whereso met,
Triumphs or festivals and to them preached
Conversion and repentance, as to souls
In prison, under judgements imminent:
But all in vain: which when he saw, he ceased
Contending, and removed his tents far off
Then, from the mountain hewing timber tall,
Began to build a vessel of huge bulk
Measured by cubit, length, and breadth, and highth
Smeared round with pitch and in the side a door
Contrived and of provisions laid in large,
For man and beast: when lo, a wonder strange!
Of every beast, and bird, and insect small,
Came sevens, and pairs and entered in as taught
Their order: last the sire and his three sons,
With their four wives and God made fast the door.
Mean while the southwind rose, and, with black wings
Widehovering, all the clouds together drove
From under Heaven the hills to their supply
Vapour, and exhalation dusk and moist,
Sent up amain and now the thickened sky
Like a dark cieling stood down rushed the rain
Impetuous and continued, till the earth
No more was seen: the floating vessel swum
Uplifted, and secure with beaked prow
Rode tilting oer the waves all dwellings else
Flood overwhelmed, and them with all their pomp
Deep under water rolled sea covered sea,
Sea without shore and in their palaces,
Where luxury late reigned, seamonsters whelped
And stabled of mankind, so numerous late,
All left, in one small bottom swum imbarked.
How didst thou grieve then, Adam, to behold
The end of all thy offspring, end so sad,
Depopulation!  Thee another flood,
Of tears and sorrow a flood, thee also drowned,
And sunk thee as thy sons till, gently reared
By the Angel, on thy feet thou stoodest at last,
Though comfortless as when a father mourns
His children, all in view destroyed at once
And scarce to the Angel utterdst thus thy plaint.
O visions ill foreseen!  Better had I
Lived ignorant of future! so had borne
My part of evil only, each days lot
Enough to bear those now, that were dispensed
The burden of many ages, on me light
At once, by my foreknowledge gaining birth
Abortive, to torment me ere their being,
With thought that they must be.  Let no man seek
Henceforth to be foretold, what shall befall
Him or his children evil he may be sure,
Which neither his foreknowing can prevent
And he the future evil shall no less
In apprehension than in substance feel,
Grievous to bear: but that care now is past,
Man is not whom to warn: those few escaped
