Infant mortality rate: The number of deaths to infants under one year old in
a given year per l,000 live births occurring in the same year.

Land use: Human use of the land surface is categorized as arable land  land
cultivated for crops that are replanted after each harvest wheat, maize,
rice permanent crops  land cultivated for crops that are not replanted
after each harvest citrus, coffee, rubber meadows and pastures  land
permanently used for herbaceous forage crops forest and woodland  land
under dense or open stands of trees and other  any land type not specifi
cally mentioned above urban areas, roads, desert. The percentage figure for
irrigated land refers to the portion of the entire amount of land area that
is artificially supplied with water.

Leaders: The chief of state is the titular leader of the country who
represents the state at official and ceremonial funcions but is not involved
with the daytoday activities of the government. The head of government is
the administrative leader who manages the daytoday activities of the
government. In the UK, the monarch is the chief of state, and the Prime
Minister is the head of government. In the US, the President is both the
chief of state and the head of government.

Life expectancy at birth: The average number of years to be lived by a group
of people all born in the same year, if mortality at each age remains
constant in the future.

Literacy: There are no universal definitions and standards of literacy.
Unless otherwise noted, all rates are based on the most common definition 
the ability to read and write at a specified age. Detailing the standards
that individual countries use to assess the ability to read and write is
beyond the scope of this publication.

Maps: All maps will be available only in the printed version for the fore
seeable future.

Maritime claims: The proximity of neighboring states may prevent some
national claims from being fully extended.

Merchant marine: All ships engaged in the carriage of goods. All commercial
vessels as opposed to all nonmilitary ships, which excludes tugs, fishing
vessels, offshore oil rigs, etc. also, a grouping of merchant ships by
nationality or register.

Captive register  A register of ships maintained by a territory, possession,
or colony primarily or exclusively for the use of ships owned in the parent
country also referred to as an offshore register, the offshore equivalent
of an internal register. Ships on a captive register will fly the same flag
as the parent country, or a local variant of it, but will be subject to the
maritime laws and taxation rules of the offshore territory. Although the
nature of a captive register makes it especially desirable for ships owned in
the parent country, just as in the internal register, the ships may also be
owned abroad. The captive register then acts as a flag of convenience
register, except that it is not the register of an independent state.

Flag of convenience register  A national register offering registration to a
merchant ship not owned in the flag state. The major flags of convenience
FOC attract ships to their register by virtue of low fees, low or
nonexistent taxation of profits, and liberal manning requirements. True FOC
registers are characterized by having relatively few of the ships registered
actually owned in the flag state. Thus, while virtually any flag can be used
for ships under a given set of circumstances, an FOC register is one where
the majority of the merchant fleet is owned abroad.
It is also referred to as an open register.

Flag state  The nation in which a ship is registered and which holds legal
