
CORIN	Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new mistresss brother.

	Enter ROSALIND, with a paper, reading

ROSALIND	     From the east to western Ind,
	No jewel is like Rosalind.
	Her worth, being mounted on the wind,
	Through all the world bears Rosalind.
	All the pictures fairest lined
	Are but black to Rosalind.
	Let no fair be kept in mind
	But the fair of Rosalind.

TOUCHSTONE	Ill rhyme you so eight years together, dinners and
	suppers and sleepinghours excepted: it is the
	right butterwomens rank to market.

ROSALIND	Out, fool!

TOUCHSTONE	For a taste:
	If a hart do lack a hind,
	Let him seek out Rosalind.
	If the cat will after kind,
	So be sure will Rosalind.
	Winter garments must be lined,
	So must slender Rosalind.
	They that reap must sheaf and bind
	Then to cart with Rosalind.
	Sweetest nut hath sourest rind,
	Such a nut is Rosalind.
	He that sweetest rose will find
	Must find loves prick and Rosalind.
	This is the very false gallop of verses: why do you
	infect yourself with them?

ROSALIND	Peace, you dull fool! I found them on a tree.

TOUCHSTONE	Truly, the tree yields bad fruit.

ROSALIND	Ill graff it with you, and then I shall graff it
	with a medlar: then it will be the earliest fruit
	i the country for youll be rotten ere you be half
	ripe, and thats the right virtue of the medlar.

TOUCHSTONE	You have said but whether wisely or no, let the
	forest judge.

	Enter CELIA, with a writing

ROSALIND	Peace! Here comes my sister, reading: stand aside.

CELIA	Reads

	Why should this a desert be?
	For it is unpeopled? No:
	Tongues Ill hang on every tree,
	That shall civil sayings show:
	Some, how brief the life of man
	Runs his erring pilgrimage,
	That the stretching of a span
	Buckles in his sum of age
	Some, of violated vows
	Twixt the souls of friend and friend:
	But upon the fairest boughs,
	Or at every sentence end,
	Will I Rosalinda write,
	Teaching all that read to know
	The quintessence of every sprite
	Heaven would in little show.
	Therefore Heaven Nature charged
	That one body should be filld
	With all graces wideenlarged:
	Nature presently distilld
	Helens cheek, but not her heart,
	Cleopatras majesty,
	Atalantas better part,
	Sad Lucretias modesty.
	Thus Rosalind of many parts
	By heavenly synod was devised,
	Of many faces, eyes and hearts,
	To have the touches dearest prized.
	Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
	And I to live and die her slave.

ROSALIND	O most gentle pulpiter! what tedious homily of love
	have you wearied your parishioners withal, and never
	cried Have patience, good people!

CELIA	How now! back, friends! Shepherd, go off a little.
	Go with him, sirrah.

TOUCHSTONE	Come, shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat
	though not with bag and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.

	Exeunt CORIN and TOUCHSTONE

CELIA	Didst thou hear these verses?

ROSALIND	O, yes, I heard them all, and more too for some of
	them had in them more feet than the verses would bear.

CELIA	Thats no matter: the feet might bear the verses.

ROSALIND	Ay, but the feet were lame and could not bear
	themselves without the verse and therefore stood
	lamely in the verse.

CELIA	But didst thou hear without wondering how thy name
	should be hanged and carved upon these trees?

ROSALIND	I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder
	before you came for look here what I found on a
	palmtree. I was never so berhymed since
	Pythagoras time, that I was an Irish rat, which I
	can hardly remember.

CELIA	Trow you who hath done this?

ROSALIND	Is it a man?

CELIA	And a chain, that you once wore, about his neck.
	Change you colour?

ROSALIND	I prithee, who?

CELIA	O Lord, Lord! it is a hard matter for friends to
	meet but mountains may be removed with earthquakes
	and so encounter.

ROSALIND	Nay, but who is it?

CELIA	Is it possible?

ROSALIND	Nay, I prithee now with most petitionary vehemence,
	tell me who it is.

CELIA	O wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful
	wonderful! and yet again wonderful, and after that,
	out of all hooping!

ROSALIND	Good my complexion! dost thou think, though I am
	caparisoned like a man, I have a doublet and hose in
	my disposition? One inch of delay more is a
	Southsea of discovery I prithee, tell me who is it
	quickly, and speak apace. I would thou couldst
	stammer, that thou mightst pour this concealed man
	out of thy mouth, as wine comes out of a narrow
	mouthed bottle, either too much at once, or none at
	all. I prithee, take the cork out of thy mouth that
	may drink thy tidings.

CELIA	So you may put a man in your belly.

ROSALIND	Is he of Gods making? What manner of man? Is his
	head worth a hat, or his chin worth a beard?

CELIA	Nay, he hath but a little beard.

ROSALIND	Why, God will send more, if the man will be
	thankful: let me stay the growth of his beard, if
	thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.

CELIA	It is young Orlando, that tripped up the wrestlers
	heels and your heart both in an instant.

ROSALIND	Nay, but the devil take mocking: speak, sad brow and
	true maid.

CELIA	I faith, coz, tis he.

ROSALIND	Orlando?

CELIA	Orlando.

ROSALIND	Alas the day! what shall I do with my doublet and
	hose? What did he when thou sawest him? What said
	he? How looked he? Wherein went he? What makes
	him here? Did he ask for me? Where remains he?
	How parted he with thee? and when shalt thou see
	him again? Answer me in one word.

CELIA	You must borrow me Gargantuas mouth first: tis a
	word too great for any mouth of this ages size. To
	say ay and no to these particulars is more than to
	answer in a catechism.

ROSALIND	But doth he know that I am in this forest and in
	mans apparel? Looks he as freshly as he did the
	day he wrestled?

CELIA	It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the
	propositions of a lover but take a taste of my
	finding him, and relish it with good observance.
	I found him under a tree, like a dropped acorn.

ROSALIND	It may well be called Joves tree, when it drops
	forth such fruit.

CELIA	Give me audience, good madam.

ROSALIND	Proceed.

CELIA	There lay he, stretched along, like a wounded knight.

ROSALIND	Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well
	becomes the ground.

CELIA	Cry holla to thy tongue, I prithee it curvets
	unseasonably. He was furnished like a hunter.

ROSALIND	O, ominous! he comes to kill my heart.

CELIA	I would sing my song without a burden: thou bringest
	me out of tune.

ROSALIND	Do you not know I am a woman? when I think, I must
	speak. Sweet, say on.

CELIA	You bring me out. Soft! comes he not here?

	Enter ORLANDO and JAQUES

ROSALIND	Tis he: slink by, and note him.

JAQUES	I thank you for your company but, good faith, I had
	as lief have been myself alone.

ORLANDO	And so had I but yet, for fashion sake, I thank you
	too for your society.

JAQUES	God be wi you: lets meet as little as we can.

ORLANDO	I do desire we may be better strangers.

JAQUES	I pray you, mar no more trees with writing
	lovesongs in their barks.

ORLANDO	I pray you, mar no more of my verses with reading
	them illfavouredly.

JAQUES	Rosalind is your loves name?

ORLANDO	Yes, just.

JAQUES	I do not like her name.

ORLANDO	There was no thought of pleasing you when she was
	christened.

JAQUES	What stature is she of?

ORLANDO	Just as high as my heart.

JAQUES	You are full of pretty answers. Have you not been
	acquainted with goldsmiths wives, and conned them
	out of rings?

ORLANDO	Not so but I answer you right painted cloth, from
	whence you have studied your questions.

JAQUES	You have a nimble wit: I think twas made of
	Atalantas heels. Will you sit down with me? and
	we two will rail against our mistress the world and
	all our misery.

ORLANDO	I will chide no breather in the world but myself,
	against whom I know most faults.

JAQUES	The worst fault you have is to be in love.

ORLANDO	Tis a fault I will not change for your best virtue.
	I am weary of you.

JAQUES	By my troth, I was seeking for a fool when I found
	you.

ORLANDO	He is drowned in the brook: look but in, and you
	shall see him.

JAQUES	There I shall see mine own figure.

ORLANDO	Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher.

JAQUES	Ill tarry no longer with you: farewell, good
	Signior Love.

ORLANDO	I am glad of your departure: adieu, good Monsieur
	Melancholy.

	Exit JAQUES

ROSALIND	Aside to CELIA  I will speak to him, like a saucy
	lackey and under that habit play the knave with him.
	Do you hear, forester?

ORLANDO	Very well: what would you?

ROSALIND	I pray you, what ist oclock?

ORLANDO	You should ask me what time o day: theres no clock
	in the forest.

ROSALIND	Then there is no true lover in the forest else
	sighing every minute and groaning every hour would
	detect the lazy foot of Time as well as a clock.

ORLANDO	And why not the swift foot of Time? had not that
	been as proper?

ROSALIND	By no means, sir: Time travels in divers paces with
	divers persons. Ill tell you who Time ambles
	withal, who Time trots withal, who Time gallops
	withal and who he stands still withal.

ORLANDO	I prithee, who doth he trot withal?

ROSALIND	Marry, he trots hard with a young maid between the
	contract of her marriage and the day it is
	solemnized: if the interim be but a sennight,
	Times pace is so hard that it seems the length of
	seven year.

ORLANDO	Who ambles Time withal?

ROSALIND	With a priest that lacks Latin and a rich man that
	hath not the gout, for the one sleeps easily because
	he cannot study, and the other lives merrily because
	he feels no pain, the one lacking the burden of lean
	and wasteful learning, the other knowing no burden
	of heavy tedious penury these Time ambles withal.

ORLANDO	Who doth he gallop withal?

ROSALIND	With a thief to the gallows, for though he go as
	softly as foot can fall, he thinks himself too soon there.

ORLANDO	Who stays it still withal?

ROSALIND	With lawyers in the vacation, for they sleep between
	term and term and then they perceive not how Time moves.

ORLANDO	Where dwell you, pretty youth?

ROSALIND	With this shepherdess, my sister here in the
	skirts of the forest, like fringe upon a petticoat.

ORLANDO	Are you native of this place?

ROSALIND	As the cony that you see dwell where she is kindled.

ORLANDO	Your accent is something finer than you could
	purchase in so removed a dwelling.

ROSALIND	I have been told so of many: but indeed an old
	religious uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was
	in his youth an inland man one that knew courtship
	too well, for there he fell in love. I have heard
	him read many lectures against it, and I thank God
	I am not a woman, to be touched with so many
	giddy offences as he hath generally taxed their
	whole sex withal.

ORLANDO	Can you remember any of the principal evils that he
	laid to the charge of women?

ROSALIND	There were none principal they were all like one
	another as halfpence are, every one fault seeming
	monstrous till his fellow fault came to match it.

ORLANDO	I prithee, recount some of them.

ROSALIND	No, I will not cast away my physic but on those that
	are sick. There is a man haunts the forest, that
	abuses our young plants with carving Rosalind on
	their barks hangs odes upon hawthorns and elegies
	on brambles, all, forsooth, deifying the name of
	Rosalind: if I could meet that fancymonger I would
	give him some good counsel, for he seems to have the
	quotidian of love upon him.

ORLANDO	I am he that is so loveshaked: I pray you tell me
	your remedy.

ROSALIND	There is none of my uncles marks upon you: he
	taught me how to know a man in love in which cage
	of rushes I am sure you are not prisoner.

ORLANDO	What were his marks?

ROSALIND	A lean cheek, which you have not, a blue eye and
	sunken, which you have not, an unquestionable
	spirit, which you have not, a beard neglected,
	which you have not but I pardon you for that, for
	simply your having in beard is a younger brothers
	revenue: then your hose should be ungartered, your
	bonnet unbanded, your sleeve unbuttoned, your shoe
	untied and every thing about you demonstrating a
	careless desolation but you are no such man you
	are rather pointdevice in your accoutrements as
	loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other.

ORLANDO	Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I love.

ROSALIND	Me believe it! you may as soon make her that you
	love believe it which, I warrant, she is apter to
	do than to confess she does: that is one of the
	points in the which women still give the lie to
	their consciences. But, in good sooth, are you he
	that hangs the verses on the trees, wherein Rosalind
	is so admired?

ORLANDO	I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of
	Rosalind, I am that he, that unfortunate he.

ROSALIND	But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?

ORLANDO	Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.

ROSALIND	Love is merely a madness, and, I tell you, deserves
	as well a dark house and a whip as madmen do: and
	the reason why they are not so punished and cured
	is, that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers
	are in love too. Yet I profess curing it by counsel.

ORLANDO	Did you ever cure any so?

ROSALIND	Yes, one, and in this manner. He was to imagine me
	his love, his mistress and I set him every day to
	woo me: at which time would I, being but a moonish
	youth, grieve, be effeminate, changeable, longing
	and liking, proud, fantastical, apish, shallow,
	inconstant, full of tears, full of smiles, for every
	passion something and for no passion truly any
	thing, as boys and women are for the most part
	cattle of this colour would now like him, now loathe
	him then entertain him, then forswear him now weep
	for him, then spit at him that I drave my suitor
	from his mad humour of love to a living humour of
	madness which was, to forswear the full stream of
	the world, and to live in a nook merely monastic.
	And thus I cured him and this way will I take upon
	me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheeps
	heart, that there shall not be one spot of love int.

ORLANDO	I would not be cured, youth.

ROSALIND	I would cure you, if you would but call me Rosalind
	and come every day to my cote and woo me.

ORLANDO	Now, by the faith of my love, I will: tell me
	where it is.

ROSALIND	Go with me to it and Ill show it you and by the way
	you shall tell me where in the forest you live.
	Will you go?

ORLANDO	With all my heart, good youth.

ROSALIND	Nay you must call me Rosalind. Come, sister, will you go?

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE III	The forest.


	Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY JAQUES behind

TOUCHSTONE	Come apace, good Audrey: I will fetch up your
	goats, Audrey. And how, Audrey? am I the man yet?
	doth my simple feature content you?

AUDREY	Your features! Lord warrant us! what features!

TOUCHSTONE	I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most
	capricious poet, honest Ovid, was among the Goths.

JAQUES	Aside  O knowledge illinhabited, worse than Jove
	in a thatched house!

TOUCHSTONE	When a mans verses cannot be understood, nor a
	mans good wit seconded with the forward child
	Understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a
	great reckoning in a little room. Truly, I would
	the gods had made thee poetical.

AUDREY	I do not know what poetical is: is it honest in
	deed and word? is it a true thing?

TOUCHSTONE	No, truly for the truest poetry is the most
	feigning and lovers are given to poetry, and what
	they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do feign.

AUDREY	Do you wish then that the gods had made me poetical?

TOUCHSTONE	I do, truly for thou swearest to me thou art
	honest: now, if thou wert a poet, I might have some
	hope thou didst feign.

AUDREY	Would you not have me honest?

TOUCHSTONE	No, truly, unless thou wert hardfavoured for
	honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.

JAQUES	Aside  A material fool!

AUDREY	 Well, I am not fair and therefore I pray the gods
	make me honest.

TOUCHSTONE	Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut
	were to put good meat into an unclean dish.

AUDREY	I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am foul.

TOUCHSTONE	Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness!
	sluttishness may come hereafter. But be it as it may
	be, I will marry thee, and to that end I have been
	with Sir Oliver Martext, the vicar of the next
	village, who hath promised to meet me in this place
	of the forest and to couple us.

JAQUES	Aside  I would fain see this meeting.

AUDREY	Well, the gods give us joy!

TOUCHSTONE	Amen. A man may, if he were of a fearful heart,
	stagger in this attempt for here we have no temple
	but the wood, no assembly but hornbeasts. But what
	though? Courage! As horns are odious, they are
	necessary. It is said, many a man knows no end of
	his goods: right many a man has good horns, and
	knows no end of them. Well, that is the dowry of
	his wife tis none of his own getting. Horns?
	Even so. Poor men alone? No, no the noblest deer
	hath them as huge as the rascal. Is the single man
	therefore blessed? No: as a walled town is more
	worthier than a village, so is the forehead of a
	married man more honourable than the bare brow of a
	bachelor and by how much defence is better than no
	skill, by so much is a horn more precious than to
	want. Here comes Sir Oliver.

	Enter SIR OLIVER MARTEXT

	Sir Oliver Martext, you are well met: will you
	dispatch us here under this tree, or shall we go
	with you to your chapel?

SIR OLIVER MARTEXT	Is there none here to give the woman?

TOUCHSTONE	I will not take her on gift of any man.

SIR OLIVER MARTEXT	Truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.

JAQUES	Advancing

	Proceed, proceed	Ill give her.

TOUCHSTONE	Good even, good Master Whatyecallt: how do you,
	sir? You are very well met: God ild you for your
	last company: I am very glad to see you: even a
	toy in hand here, sir: nay, pray be covered.

JAQUES	Will you be married, motley?

TOUCHSTONE	As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb and
	the falcon her bells, so man hath his desires and
	as pigeons bill, so wedlock would be nibbling.

JAQUES	And will you, being a man of your breeding, be
	married under a bush like a beggar? Get you to
	church, and have a good priest that can tell you
	what marriage is: this fellow will but join you
	together as they join wainscot then one of you will
	prove a shrunk panel and, like green timber, warp, warp.

TOUCHSTONE	Aside  I am not in the mind but I were better to be
	married of him than of another: for he is not like
	to marry me well and not being well married, it
	will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my wife.

JAQUES	Go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.

TOUCHSTONE	Come, sweet Audrey:
	We must be married, or we must live in bawdry.
	Farewell, good Master Oliver: not,
	O sweet Oliver,
	O brave Oliver,
	Leave me not behind thee: but,
	Wind away,
	Begone, I say,
	I will not to wedding with thee.

	Exeunt JAQUES, TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

SIR OLIVER MARTEXT	Tis no matter: neer a fantastical knave of them
	all shall flout me out of my calling.

	Exit




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE IV	The forest.


	Enter ROSALIND and CELIA

ROSALIND	Never talk to me I will weep.

CELIA	Do, I prithee but yet have the grace to consider
	that tears do not become a man.

ROSALIND	But have I not cause to weep?

CELIA	As good cause as one would desire therefore weep.

ROSALIND	His very hair is of the dissembling colour.

CELIA	Something browner than Judass marry, his kisses are
	Judass own children.

ROSALIND	I faith, his hair is of a good colour.

CELIA	An excellent colour: your chestnut was ever the only colour.

ROSALIND	And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch
	of holy bread.

CELIA	He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana: a nun
	of winters sisterhood kisses not more religiously
	the very ice of chastity is in them.

ROSALIND	But why did he swear he would come this morning, and
	comes not?

CELIA	Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.

ROSALIND	Do you think so?

CELIA	Yes I think he is not a pickpurse nor a
	horsestealer, but for his verity in love, I do
	think him as concave as a covered goblet or a
	wormeaten nut.

ROSALIND	Not true in love?

CELIA	Yes, when he is in but I think he is not in.

ROSALIND	You have heard him swear downright he was.

CELIA	Was is not is: besides, the oath of a lover is
	no stronger than the word of a tapster they are
	both the confirmer of false reckonings. He attends
	here in the forest on the duke your father.

ROSALIND	I met the duke yesterday and had much question with
	him: he asked me of what parentage I was I told
	him, of as good as he so he laughed and let me go.
	But what talk we of fathers, when there is such a
	man as Orlando?

CELIA	O, thats a brave man! he writes brave verses,
	speaks brave words, swears brave oaths and breaks
	them bravely, quite traverse, athwart the heart of
	his lover as a puisny tilter, that spurs his horse
	but on one side, breaks his staff like a noble
	goose: but alls brave that youth mounts and folly
	guides. Who comes here?

	Enter CORIN

CORIN	Mistress and master, you have oft inquired
	After the shepherd that complaind of love,
	Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,
	Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
	That was his mistress.

CELIA	Well, and what of him?

CORIN	If you will see a pageant truly playd,
	Between the pale complexion of true love
	And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
	Go hence a little and I shall conduct you,
	If you will mark it.

ROSALIND	O, come, let us remove:
	The sight of lovers feedeth those in love.
	Bring us to this sight, and you shall say
	Ill prove a busy actor in their play.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE V	Another part of the forest.


	Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE

SILVIUS	Sweet Phebe, do not scorn me do not, Phebe
	Say that you love me not, but say not so
	In bitterness. The common executioner,
	Whose heart the accustomd sight of death makes hard,
	Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck
	But first begs pardon: will you sterner be
	Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?

	Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and CORIN, behind

PHEBE	I would not be thy executioner:
	I fly thee, for I would not injure thee.
	Thou tellst me there is murder in mine eye:
	Tis pretty, sure, and very probable,
	That eyes, that are the frailst and softest things,
	Who shut their coward gates on atomies,
	Should be calld tyrants, butchers, murderers!
	Now I do frown on thee with all my heart
	And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee:
	Now counterfeit to swoon why now fall down
	Or if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,
	Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers!
	Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee:
	Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
	Some scar of it lean but upon a rush,
	The cicatrice and capable impressure
	Thy palm some moment keeps but now mine eyes,
	Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not,
	Nor, I am sure, there is no force in eyes
	That can do hurt.

SILVIUS	                  O dear Phebe,
	If ever,as that ever may be near,
	You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
	Then shall you know the wounds invisible
	That loves keen arrows make.

PHEBE	But till that time
	Come not thou near me: and when that time comes,
	Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not
	As till that time I shall not pity thee.

ROSALIND	And why, I pray you? Who might be your mother,
	That you insult, exult, and all at once,
	Over the wretched? What though you have no beauty,
	As, by my faith, I see no more in you
	Than without candle may go dark to bed
	Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
	Why, what means this? Why do you look on me?
	I see no more in you than in the ordinary
	Of natures salework. Ods my little life,
	I think she means to tangle my eyes too!
	No, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it:
	Tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
	Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream,
	That can entame my spirits to your worship.
	You foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her,
	Like foggy south puffing with wind and rain?
	You are a thousand times a properer man
	Than she a woman: tis such fools as you
	That makes the world full of illfavourd children:
	Tis not her glass, but you, that flatters her
	And out of you she sees herself more proper
	Than any of her lineaments can show her.
	But, mistress, know yourself: down on your knees,
	And thank heaven, fasting, for a good mans love:
	For I must tell you friendly in your ear,
	Sell when you can: you are not for all markets:
	Cry the man mercy love him take his offer:
	Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.
	So take her to thee, shepherd: fare you well.

PHEBE	Sweet youth, I pray you, chide a year together:
	I had rather hear you chide than this man woo.

ROSALIND	Hes fallen in love with your foulness and shell
	fall in love with my anger. If it be so, as fast as
	she answers thee with frowning looks, Ill sauce her
	with bitter words. Why look you so upon me?

PHEBE	For no ill will I bear you.

ROSALIND	I pray you, do not fall in love with me,
	For I am falser than vows made in wine:
	Besides, I like you not. If you will know my house,
	Tis at the tuft of olives here hard by.
	Will you go, sister? Shepherd, ply her hard.
	Come, sister. Shepherdess, look on him better,
	And be not proud: though all the world could see,
	None could be so abused in sight as he.
	Come, to our flock.

	Exeunt ROSALIND, CELIA and CORIN

PHEBE	Dead Shepherd, now I find thy saw of might,
	Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?

SILVIUS	Sweet Phebe,

PHEBE	                  Ha, what sayst thou, Silvius?

SILVIUS	Sweet Phebe, pity me.

PHEBE	Why, I am sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.

SILVIUS	Wherever sorrow is, relief would be:
	If you do sorrow at my grief in love,
	By giving love your sorrow and my grief
	Were both extermined.

PHEBE	Thou hast my love: is not that neighbourly?

SILVIUS	I would have you.

PHEBE	                  Why, that were covetousness.
	Silvius, the time was that I hated thee,
	And yet it is not that I bear thee love
	But since that thou canst talk of love so well,
	Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
	I will endure, and Ill employ thee too:
	But do not look for further recompense
	Than thine own gladness that thou art employd.

SILVIUS	So holy and so perfect is my love,
	And I in such a poverty of grace,
	That I shall think it a most plenteous crop
	To glean the broken ears after the man
	That the main harvest reaps: loose now and then
	A scatterd smile, and that Ill live upon.

PHEBE	Knowst now the youth that spoke to me erewhile?

SILVIUS	Not very well, but I have met him oft
	And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds
	That the old carlot once was master of.

PHEBE	Think not I love him, though I ask for him:
	Tis but a peevish boy yet he talks well
	But what care I for words? yet words do well
	When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.
	It is a pretty youth: not very pretty:
	But, sure, hes proud, and yet his pride becomes him:
	Hell make a proper man: the best thing in him
	Is his complexion and faster than his tongue
	Did make offence his eye did heal it up.
	He is not very tall yet for his years hes tall:
	His leg is but so so and yet tis well:
	There was a pretty redness in his lip,
	A little riper and more lusty red
	Than that mixd in his cheek twas just the difference
	Between the constant red and mingled damask.
	There be some women, Silvius, had they markd him
	In parcels as I did, would have gone near
	To fall in love with him but, for my part,
	I love him not nor hate him not and yet
	I have more cause to hate him than to love him:
	For what had he to do to chide at me?
	He said mine eyes were black and my hair black:
	And, now I am rememberd, scornd at me:
	I marvel why I answerd not again:
	But thats all one omittance is no quittance.
	Ill write to him a very taunting letter,
	And thou shalt bear it: wilt thou, Silvius?

SILVIUS	Phebe, with all my heart.

PHEBE	Ill write it straight
	The matters in my head and in my heart:
	I will be bitter with him and passing short.
	Go with me, Silvius.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT IV



SCENE I	The forest.


	Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and JAQUES

JAQUES	I prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted
	with thee.

ROSALIND	They say you are a melancholy fellow.

JAQUES	I am so I do love it better than laughing.

ROSALIND	Those that are in extremity of either are abominable
	fellows and betray themselves to every modern
	censure worse than drunkards.

JAQUES	Why, tis good to be sad and say nothing.

ROSALIND	Why then, tis good to be a post.

JAQUES	I have neither the scholars melancholy, which is
	emulation, nor the musicians, which is fantastical,
	nor the courtiers, which is proud, nor the
	soldiers, which is ambitious, nor the lawyers,
	which is politic, nor the ladys, which is nice, nor
	the lovers, which is all these: but it is a
	melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples,
	extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundrys
	contemplation of my travels, in which my often
	rumination wraps me m a most humorous sadness.

ROSALIND	A traveller! By my faith, you have great reason to
	be sad: I fear you have sold your own lands to see
	other mens then, to have seen much and to have
	nothing, is to have rich eyes and poor hands.

JAQUES	Yes, I have gained my experience.

ROSALIND	And your experience makes you sad: I had rather have
	a fool to make me merry than experience to make me
	sad and to travel for it too!

	Enter ORLANDO

ORLANDO	Good day and happiness, dear Rosalind!

JAQUES	Nay, then, God be wi you, an you talk in blank verse.

	Exit

ROSALIND	Farewell, Monsieur Traveller: look you lisp and
	wear strange suits, disable all the benefits of your
	own country, be out of love with your nativity and
	almost chide God for making you that countenance you
	are, or I will scarce think you have swam in a
	gondola. Why, how now, Orlando! where have you been
	all this while? You a lover! An you serve me such
	another trick, never come in my sight more.

ORLANDO	My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.

ROSALIND	Break an hours promise in love! He that will
	divide a minute into a thousand parts and break but
	a part of the thousandth part of a minute in the
	affairs of love, it may be said of him that Cupid
	hath clapped him o the shoulder, but Ill warrant
	him heartwhole.

ORLANDO	Pardon me, dear Rosalind.

ROSALIND	Nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight: I
	had as lief be wooed of a snail.

ORLANDO	Of a snail?

ROSALIND	Ay, of a snail for though he comes slowly, he
	carries his house on his head a better jointure,
	I think, than you make a woman: besides he brings
	his destiny with him.

ORLANDO	Whats that?

ROSALIND	Why, horns, which such as you are fain to be
	beholding to your wives for: but he comes armed in
	his fortune and prevents the slander of his wife.

ORLANDO	Virtue is no hornmaker and my Rosalind is virtuous.

ROSALIND	And I am your Rosalind.

CELIA	It pleases him to call you so but he hath a
	Rosalind of a better leer than you.

ROSALIND	Come, woo me, woo me, for now I am in a holiday
	humour and like enough to consent. What would you
	say to me now, an I were your very very Rosalind?

ORLANDO	I would kiss before I spoke.

ROSALIND	Nay, you were better speak first, and when you were
	gravelled for lack of matter, you might take
	occasion to kiss. Very good orators, when they are
	out, they will spit and for lovers lackingGod
	warn us!matter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss.

ORLANDO	How if the kiss be denied?

ROSALIND	Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.

ORLANDO	Who could be out, being before his beloved mistress?

ROSALIND	Marry, that should you, if I were your mistress, or
	I should think my honesty ranker than my wit.

ORLANDO	What, of my suit?

ROSALIND	Not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit.
	Am not I your Rosalind?

ORLANDO	I take some joy to say you are, because I would be
	talking of her.

ROSALIND	Well in her person I say I will not have you.

ORLANDO	Then in mine own person I die.

ROSALIND	No, faith, die by attorney. The poor world is
	almost six thousand years old, and in all this time
	there was not any man died in his own person,
	videlicit, in a lovecause. Troilus had his brains
	dashed out with a Grecian club yet he did what he
	could to die before, and he is one of the patterns
	of love. Leander, he would have lived many a fair
	year, though Hero had turned nun, if it had not been
	for a hot midsummer night for, good youth, he went
	but forth to wash him in the Hellespont and being
	taken with the cramp was drowned and the foolish
	coroners of that age found it was Hero of Sestos.
	But these are all lies: men have died from time to
	time and worms have eaten them, but not for love.

ORLANDO	I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind,
	for, I protest, her frown might kill me.

ROSALIND	By this hand, it will not kill a fly. But come, now
	I will be your Rosalind in a more comingon
	disposition, and ask me what you will. I will grant
	it.

ORLANDO	Then love me, Rosalind.

ROSALIND	Yes, faith, will I, Fridays and Saturdays and all.

ORLANDO	And wilt thou have me?

ROSALIND	Ay, and twenty such.

ORLANDO	What sayest thou?

ROSALIND	Are you not good?

ORLANDO	I hope so.

ROSALIND	Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing?
	Come, sister, you shall be the priest and marry us.
	Give me your hand, Orlando. What do you say, sister?

ORLANDO	Pray thee, marry us.

CELIA	I cannot say the words.

ROSALIND	You must begin, Will you, Orlando

CELIA	Go to. Will you, Orlando, have to wife this Rosalind?

ORLANDO	I will.

ROSALIND	Ay, but when?

ORLANDO	Why now as fast as she can marry us.

ROSALIND	Then you must say I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.

ORLANDO	I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.

ROSALIND	I might ask you for your commission but I do take
	thee, Orlando, for my husband: theres a girl goes
	before the priest and certainly a womans thought
	runs before her actions.

ORLANDO	So do all thoughts they are winged.

ROSALIND	Now tell me how long you would have her after you
	have possessed her.

ORLANDO	For ever and a day.

ROSALIND	Say a day, without the ever. No, no, Orlando
	men are April when they woo, December when they wed:
	maids are May when they are maids, but the sky
	changes when they are wives. I will be more jealous
	of thee than a Barbary cockpigeon over his hen,
	more clamorous than a parrot against rain, more
	newfangled than an ape, more giddy in my desires
	than a monkey: I will weep for nothing, like Diana
	in the fountain, and I will do that when you are
	disposed to be merry I will laugh like a hyen, and
	that when thou art inclined to sleep.

ORLANDO	But will my Rosalind do so?

ROSALIND	By my life, she will do as I do.

ORLANDO	O, but she is wise.

ROSALIND	Or else she could not have the wit to do this: the
	wiser, the waywarder: make the doors upon a womans
	wit and it will out at the casement shut that and
	twill out at the keyhole stop that, twill fly
	with the smoke out at the chimney.

ORLANDO	A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say
	Wit, whither wilt?

ROSALIND	Nay, you might keep that cheque for it till you met
	your wifes wit going to your neighbours bed.

ORLANDO	And what wit could wit have to excuse that?

ROSALIND	Marry, to say she came to seek you there. You shall
	never take her without her answer, unless you take
	her without her tongue. O, that woman that cannot
	make her fault her husbands occasion, let her
	never nurse her child herself, for she will breed
	it like a fool!

ORLANDO	For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave thee.

ROSALIND	Alas! dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours.

ORLANDO	I must attend the duke at dinner: by two oclock I
	will be with thee again.

ROSALIND	Ay, go your ways, go your ways I knew what you
	would prove: my friends told me as much, and I
	thought no less: that flattering tongue of yours
	won me: tis but one cast away, and so, come,
	death! Two oclock is your hour?

ORLANDO	Ay, sweet Rosalind.

ROSALIND	By my troth, and in good earnest, and so God mend
	me, and by all pretty oaths that are not dangerous,
	if you break one jot of your promise or come one
	minute behind your hour, I will think you the most
	pathetical breakpromise and the most hollow lover
	and the most unworthy of her you call Rosalind that
	may be chosen out of the gross band of the
	unfaithful: therefore beware my censure and keep
	your promise.

ORLANDO	With no less religion than if thou wert indeed my
	Rosalind: so adieu.

ROSALIND	Well, Time is the old justice that examines all such
	offenders, and let Time try: adieu.

	Exit ORLANDO

CELIA	You have simply misused our sex in your loveprate:
	we must have your doublet and hose plucked over your
	head, and show the world what the bird hath done to
	her own nest.

ROSALIND	O coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou
	didst know how many fathom deep I am in love! But
	it cannot be sounded: my affection hath an unknown
	bottom, like the bay of Portugal.

CELIA	Or rather, bottomless, that as fast as you pour
	affection in, it runs out.

ROSALIND	No, that same wicked bastard of Venus that was begot
	of thought, conceived of spleen and born of madness,
	that blind rascally boy that abuses every ones eyes
	because his own are out, let him be judge how deep I
	am in love. Ill tell thee, Aliena, I cannot be out
	of the sight of Orlando: Ill go find a shadow and
	sigh till he come.

CELIA	And Ill sleep.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT IV



SCENE II	The forest.


	Enter JAQUES, Lords, and Foresters

JAQUES	Which is he that killed the deer?

A Lord	Sir, it was I.

JAQUES	Lets present him to the duke, like a Roman
	conqueror and it would do well to set the deers
	horns upon his head, for a branch of victory. Have
	you no song, forester, for this purpose?

Forester	Yes, sir.

JAQUES	Sing it: tis no matter how it be in tune, so it
	make noise enough.

	SONG.
Forester	What shall he have that killd the deer?
	His leather skin and horns to wear.
	Then sing him home

	The rest shall bear this burden

	Take thou no scorn to wear the horn
	It was a crest ere thou wast born:
	Thy fathers father wore it,
	And thy father bore it:
	The horn, the horn, the lusty horn
	Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT IV



SCENE III	The forest.


	Enter ROSALIND and CELIA

ROSALIND	How say you now? Is it not past two oclock? and
	here much Orlando!

CELIA	I warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain, he
	hath taen his bow and arrows and is gone forth to
	sleep. Look, who comes here.

	Enter SILVIUS

SILVIUS	My errand is to you, fair youth
	My gentle Phebe bid me give you this:
	I know not the contents but, as I guess
	By the stern brow and waspish action
	Which she did use as she was writing of it,
	It bears an angry tenor: pardon me:
	I am but as a guiltless messenger.

ROSALIND	Patience herself would startle at this letter
	And play the swaggerer bear this, bear all:
	She says I am not fair, that I lack manners
	She calls me proud, and that she could not love me,
	Were man as rare as phoenix. Ods my will!
	Her love is not the hare that I do hunt:
	Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well,
	This is a letter of your own device.

SILVIUS	No, I protest, I know not the contents:
	Phebe did write it.

ROSALIND	Come, come, you are a fool
	And turnd into the extremity of love.
	I saw her hand: she has a leathern hand.
	A freestonecolourd hand I verily did think
	That her old gloves were on, but twas her hands:
	She has a huswifes hand but thats no matter:
	I say she never did invent this letter
	This is a mans invention and his hand.

SILVIUS	Sure, it is hers.

ROSALIND	Why, tis a boisterous and a cruel style.
	A style forchallengers why, she defies me,
	Like Turk to Christian: womens gentle brain
	Could not drop forth such giantrude invention
	Such Ethiope words, blacker in their effect
	Than in their countenance. Will you hear the letter?

SILVIUS	So please you, for I never heard it yet
	Yet heard too much of Phebes cruelty.

ROSALIND	She Phebes me: mark how the tyrant writes.

	Reads

	Art thou god to shepherd turnd,
	That a maidens heart hath burnd?
	Can a woman rail thus?

SILVIUS	Call you this railing?

ROSALIND	Reads

	Why, thy godhead laid apart,
	Warrst thou with a womans heart?
	Did you ever hear such railing?
	Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
	That could do no vengeance to me.
	Meaning me a beast.
	If the scorn of your bright eyne
	Have power to raise such love in mine,
	Alack, in me what strange effect
	Would they work in mild aspect!
	Whiles you chid me, I did love
	How then might your prayers move!
	He that brings this love to thee
	Little knows this love in me:
	And by him seal up thy mind
	Whether that thy youth and kind
	Will the faithful offer take
	Of me and all that I can make
	Or else by him my love deny,
	And then Ill study how to die.

SILVIUS	Call you this chiding?

CELIA	Alas, poor shepherd!

ROSALIND	Do you pity him? no, he deserves no pity. Wilt
	thou love such a woman? What, to make thee an
	instrument and play false strains upon thee! not to
	be endured! Well, go your way to her, for I see
	love hath made thee a tame snake, and say this to
	her: that if she love me, I charge her to love
	thee if she will not, I will never have her unless
	thou entreat for her. If you be a true lover,
	hence, and not a word for here comes more company.

	Exit SILVIUS

	Enter OLIVER

OLIVER	Good morrow, fair ones: pray you, if you know,
	Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
	A sheepcote fenced about with olive trees?

CELIA	West of this place, down in the neighbour bottom:
	The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
	Left on your right hand brings you to the place.
	But at this hour the house doth keep itself
	Theres none within.

OLIVER	If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
	Then should I know you by description
	Such garments and such years: The boy is fair,
	Of female favour, and bestows himself
	Like a ripe sister: the woman low
	And browner than her brother. Are not you
	The owner of the house I did inquire for?

CELIA	It is no boast, being askd, to say we are.

OLIVER	Orlando doth commend him to you both,
	And to that youth he calls his Rosalind
	He sends this bloody napkin. Are you he?

ROSALIND	I am: what must we understand by this?

OLIVER	Some of my shame if you will know of me
	What man I am, and how, and why, and where
	This handkercher was staind.

CELIA	I pray you, tell it.

OLIVER	When last the young Orlando parted from you
	He left a promise to return again
	Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,
	Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
	Lo, what befell! he threw his eye aside,
	And mark what object did present itself:
	Under an oak, whose boughs were mossd with age
	And high top bald with dry antiquity,
	A wretched ragged man, oergrown with hair,
	Lay sleeping on his back: about his neck
	A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself,
	Who with her head nimble in threats approachd
	The opening of his mouth but suddenly,
	Seeing Orlando, it unlinkd itself,
	And with indented glides did slip away
	Into a bush: under which bushs shade
	A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
	Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch,
	When that the sleeping man should stir for tis
	The royal disposition of that beast
	To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead:
	This seen, Orlando did approach the man
	And found it was his brother, his elder brother.

CELIA	O, I have heard him speak of that same brother
	And he did render him the most unnatural
	That lived amongst men.

OLIVER	And well he might so do,
	For well I know he was unnatural.

ROSALIND	But, to Orlando: did he leave him there,
	Food to the suckd and hungry lioness?

OLIVER	Twice did he turn his back and purposed so
	But kindness, nobler ever than revenge,
	And nature, stronger than his just occasion,
	Made him give battle to the lioness,
	Who quickly fell before him: in which hurtling
	From miserable slumber I awaked.

CELIA	Are you his brother?

ROSALIND	Wast you he rescued?

CELIA	Wast you that did so oft contrive to kill him?

OLIVER	Twas I but tis not I	I do not shame
	To tell you what I was, since my conversion
	So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.

ROSALIND	But, for the bloody napkin?

OLIVER	By and by.
	When from the first to last betwixt us two
	Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed,
	As how I came into that desert place:
	In brief, he led me to the gentle duke,
	Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,
	Committing me unto my brothers love
	Who led me instantly unto his cave,
	There strippd himself, and here upon his arm
	The lioness had torn some flesh away,
	Which all this while had bled and now he fainted
	And cried, in fainting, upon Rosalind.
	Brief, I recoverd him, bound up his wound
	And, after some small space, being strong at heart,
	He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
	To tell this story, that you might excuse
	His broken promise, and to give this napkin
	Dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth
	That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.

	ROSALIND swoons

CELIA	Why, how now, Ganymede! sweet Ganymede!

OLIVER	Many will swoon when they do look on blood.

CELIA	There is more in it. Cousin Ganymede!

OLIVER	Look, he recovers.

ROSALIND	I would I were at home.

CELIA	Well lead you thither.
	I pray you, will you take him by the arm?

OLIVER	Be of good cheer, youth: you a man! you lack a
	mans heart.

ROSALIND	I do so, I confess it. Ah, sirrah, a body would
	think this was well counterfeited! I pray you, tell
	your brother how well I counterfeited. Heighho!

OLIVER	This was not counterfeit: there is too great
	testimony in your complexion that it was a passion
	of earnest.

ROSALIND	Counterfeit, I assure you.

OLIVER	Well then, take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man.

ROSALIND	So I do: but, i faith, I should have been a woman by right.

CELIA	Come, you look paler and paler: pray you, draw
	homewards. Good sir, go with us.

OLIVER	That will I, for I must bear answer back
	How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.

ROSALIND	I shall devise something: but, I pray you, commend
	my counterfeiting to him. Will you go?

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT V



SCENE I	The forest.


	Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

TOUCHSTONE	We shall find a time, Audrey patience, gentle Audrey.

AUDREY	Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old
	gentlemans saying.

TOUCHSTONE	A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile
	Martext. But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the
	forest lays claim to you.

AUDREY	Ay, I know who tis he hath no interest in me in
	the world: here comes the man you mean.

TOUCHSTONE	It is meat and drink to me to see a clown: by my
	troth, we that have good wits have much to answer
	for we shall be flouting we cannot hold.

	Enter WILLIAM

WILLIAM	Good even, Audrey.

AUDREY	God ye good even, William.

WILLIAM	And good even to you, sir.

TOUCHSTONE	Good even, gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy
	head nay, prithee, be covered. How old are you, friend?

WILLIAM	Five and twenty, sir.

TOUCHSTONE	A ripe age. Is thy name William?

WILLIAM	William, sir.

TOUCHSTONE	A fair name. Wast born i the forest here?

WILLIAM	Ay, sir, I thank God.

TOUCHSTONE	Thank God a good answer. Art rich?

WILLIAM	Faith, sir, so so.

TOUCHSTONE	So so is good, very good, very excellent good and
	yet it is not it is but so so. Art thou wise?

WILLIAM	Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.

TOUCHSTONE	Why, thou sayest well. I do now remember a saying,
	The fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man
	knows himself to be a fool. The heathen
	philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape,
	would open his lips when he put it into his mouth
	meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and
	lips to open. You do love this maid?

WILLIAM	I do, sir.

TOUCHSTONE	Give me your hand. Art thou learned?

WILLIAM	No, sir.

TOUCHSTONE	Then learn this of me: to have, is to have for it
	is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured out
	of a cup into a glass, by filling the one doth empty
	the other for all your writers do consent that ipse
	is he: now, you are not ipse, for I am he.

WILLIAM	Which he, sir?

TOUCHSTONE	He, sir, that must marry this woman. Therefore, you
	clown, abandon,which is in the vulgar leave,the
	society,which in the boorish is company,of this
	female,which in the common is woman which
	together is, abandon the society of this female, or,
	clown, thou perishest or, to thy better
	understanding, diest or, to wit I kill thee, make
	thee away, translate thy life into death, thy
	liberty into bondage: I will deal in poison with
	thee, or in bastinado, or in steel I will bandy
	with thee in faction I will oerrun thee with
	policy I will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways:
	therefore tremble and depart.

AUDREY	Do, good William.

WILLIAM	God rest you merry, sir.

	Exit

	Enter CORIN

CORIN	Our master and mistress seeks you come, away, away!

TOUCHSTONE	Trip, Audrey! trip, Audrey! I attend, I attend.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT V



SCENE II	The forest.


	Enter ORLANDO and OLIVER

ORLANDO	Ist possible that on so little acquaintance you
	should like her? that but seeing you should love
	her? and loving woo? and, wooing, she should
	grant? and will you persever to enjoy her?

OLIVER	Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the
	poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden
	wooing, nor her sudden consenting but say with me,
	I love Aliena say with her that she loves me
	consent with both that we may enjoy each other: it
	shall be to your good for my fathers house and all
	the revenue that was old Sir Rowlands will I
	estate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.

ORLANDO	You have my consent. Let your wedding be tomorrow:
	thither will I invite the duke and alls contented
	followers. Go you and prepare Aliena for look
	you, here comes my Rosalind.

	Enter ROSALIND

ROSALIND	God save you, brother.

OLIVER	And you, fair sister.

	Exit

ROSALIND	O, my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee
	wear thy heart in a scarf!

ORLANDO	It is my arm.

ROSALIND	I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws
	of a lion.

ORLANDO	Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.

ROSALIND	Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to
	swoon when he showed me your handkerchief?

ORLANDO	Ay, and greater wonders than that.

ROSALIND	O, I know where you are: nay, tis true: there was
	never any thing so sudden but the fight of two rams
	and Caesars thrasonical brag of I came, saw, and
	overcame: for your brother and my sister no sooner
	met but they looked, no sooner looked but they
	loved, no sooner loved but they sighed, no sooner
	sighed but they asked one another the reason, no
	sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy
	and in these degrees have they made a pair of stairs
	to marriage which they will climb incontinent, or
	else be incontinent before marriage: they are in
	the very wrath of love and they will together clubs
	cannot part them.

ORLANDO	They shall be married tomorrow, and I will bid the
	duke to the nuptial. But, O, how bitter a thing it
	is to look into happiness through another mans
	eyes! By so much the more shall I tomorrow be at
	the height of heartheaviness, by how much I shall
	think my brother happy in having what he wishes for.

ROSALIND	Why then, tomorrow I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?

ORLANDO	I can live no longer by thinking.

ROSALIND	I will weary you then no longer with idle talking.
	Know of me then, for now I speak to some purpose,
	that I know you are a gentleman of good conceit: I
	speak not this that you should bear a good opinion
	of my knowledge, insomuch I say I know you are
	neither do I labour for a greater esteem than may in
	some little measure draw a belief from you, to do
	yourself good and not to grace me. Believe then, if
	you please, that I can do strange things: I have,
	since I was three year old, conversed with a
	magician, most profound in his art and yet not
	damnable. If you do love Rosalind so near the heart
	as your gesture cries it out, when your brother
	marries Aliena, shall you marry her: I know into
	what straits of fortune she is driven and it is
	not impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient
	to you, to set her before your eyes tomorrow human
	as she is and without any danger.

ORLANDO	Speakest thou in sober meanings?

ROSALIND	By my life, I do which I tender dearly, though I
	say I am a magician. Therefore, put you in your
	best array: bid your friends for if you will be
	married tomorrow, you shall, and to Rosalind, if you will.

	Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE

	Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.

PHEBE	Youth, you have done me much ungentleness,
	To show the letter that I writ to you.

ROSALIND	I care not if I have: it is my study
	To seem despiteful and ungentle to you:
	You are there followed by a faithful shepherd
	Look upon him, love him he worships you.

PHEBE	Good shepherd, tell this youth what tis to love.

SILVIUS	It is to be all made of sighs and tears
	And so am I for Phebe.

PHEBE	And I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO	And I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND	And I for no woman.

SILVIUS	It is to be all made of faith and service
	And so am I for Phebe.

PHEBE	And I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO	And I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND	And I for no woman.

SILVIUS	It is to be all made of fantasy,
	All made of passion and all made of wishes,
	All adoration, duty, and observance,
	All humbleness, all patience and impatience,
	All purity, all trial, all observance
	And so am I for Phebe.

PHEBE	And so am I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO	And so am I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND	And so am I for no woman.

PHEBE	If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

SILVIUS	If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

ORLANDO	If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

ROSALIND	Who do you speak to, Why blame you me to love you?

ORLANDO	To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.

ROSALIND	Pray you, no more of this tis like the howling
	of Irish wolves against the moon.

	To SILVIUS

	I will help you, if I can:

	To PHEBE

	I would love you, if I could. Tomorrow meet me all together.

	To PHEBE

	I will marry you, if ever I marry woman, and Ill be
	married tomorrow:

	To ORLANDO

	I will satisfy you, if ever I satisfied man, and you
	shall be married tomorrow:

	To SILVIUS

	I will content you, if what pleases you contents
	you, and you shall be married tomorrow.

	To ORLANDO

	As you love Rosalind, meet:

	To SILVIUS

	as you love Phebe, meet: and as I love no woman,
	Ill meet. So fare you well: I have left you commands.

SILVIUS	Ill not fail, if I live.

PHEBE	Nor I.

ORLANDO	Nor I.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT V



SCENE III	The forest.


	Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

TOUCHSTONE	Tomorrow is the joyful day, Audrey tomorrow will
	we be married.

AUDREY	I do desire it with all my heart and I hope it is
	no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the
	world. Here comes two of the banished dukes pages.

	Enter two Pages

First Page	Well met, honest gentleman.

TOUCHSTONE	By my troth, well met. Come, sit, sit, and a song.

Second Page	We are for you: sit i the middle.

First Page	Shall we clap intot roundly, without hawking or
	spitting or saying we are hoarse, which are the only
	prologues to a bad voice?

Second Page	Ifaith, ifaith and both in a tune, like two
	gipsies on a horse.

	SONG.
	It was a lover and his lass,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
	That oer the green cornfield did pass
	In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,
	When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding:
	Sweet lovers love the spring.

	Between the acres of the rye,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino
	These pretty country folks would lie,
	In spring time, c.

	This carol they began that hour,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
	How that a life was but a flower
	In spring time, c.

	And therefore take the present time,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino
	For love is crowned with the prime
	In spring time, c.

TOUCHSTONE	Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great
	matter in the ditty, yet the note was very
	untuneable.

First Page	You are deceived, sir: we kept time, we lost not our time.

TOUCHSTONE	By my troth, yes I count it but time lost to hear
	such a foolish song. God be wi you and God mend
	your voices! Come, Audrey.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT V



SCENE IV	The forest.


	Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, JAQUES, ORLANDO, OLIVER,
	and CELIA

DUKE SENIOR	Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
	Can do all this that he hath promised?

ORLANDO	I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not
	As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.

	Enter ROSALIND, SILVIUS, and PHEBE

ROSALIND	Patience once more, whiles our compact is urged:
	You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,
	You will bestow her on Orlando here?

DUKE SENIOR	That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.

ROSALIND	And you say, you will have her, when I bring her?

ORLANDO	That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.

ROSALIND	You say, youll marry me, if I be willing?

PHEBE	That will I, should I die the hour after.

ROSALIND	But if you do refuse to marry me,
	Youll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?

PHEBE	So is the bargain.

ROSALIND	You say, that youll have Phebe, if she will?

SILVIUS	Though to have her and death were both one thing.

ROSALIND	I have promised to make all this matter even.
	Keep you your word, O duke, to give your daughter
	You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter:
	Keep your word, Phebe, that youll marry me,
	Or else refusing me, to wed this shepherd:
	Keep your word, Silvius, that youll marry her.
	If she refuse me: and from hence I go,
	To make these doubts all even.

	Exeunt ROSALIND and CELIA

DUKE SENIOR	I do remember in this shepherd boy
	Some lively touches of my daughters favour.

ORLANDO	My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
	Methought he was a brother to your daughter:
	But, my good lord, this boy is forestborn,
	And hath been tutord in the rudiments
	Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
	Whom he reports to be a great magician,
	Obscured in the circle of this forest.

	Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

JAQUES	There is, sure, another flood toward, and these
	couples are coming to the ark. Here comes a pair of
	very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called fools.

TOUCHSTONE	Salutation and greeting to you all!

JAQUES	Good my lord, bid him welcome: this is the
	motleyminded gentleman that I have so often met in
	the forest: he hath been a courtier, he swears.

TOUCHSTONE	If any man doubt that, let him put me to my
	purgation. I have trod a measure I have flattered
	a lady I have been politic with my friend, smooth
	with mine enemy I have undone three tailors I have
	had four quarrels, and like to have fought one.

JAQUES	And how was that taen up?

TOUCHSTONE	Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the
	seventh cause.

JAQUES	How seventh cause? Good my lord, like this fellow.

DUKE SENIOR	I like him very well.

TOUCHSTONE	God ild you, sir I desire you of the like. I
	press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country
	copulatives, to swear and to forswear: according as
	marriage binds and blood breaks: a poor virgin,
	sir, an illfavoured thing, sir, but mine own a poor
	humour of mine, sir, to take that that no man else
	will: rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a
	poor house as your pearl in your foul oyster.

DUKE SENIOR	By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.

TOUCHSTONE	According to the fools bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.

JAQUES	But, for the seventh cause how did you find the
	quarrel on the seventh cause?

TOUCHSTONE	Upon a lie seven times removed:bear your body more
	seeming, Audrey:as thus, sir. I did dislike the
	cut of a certain courtiers beard: he sent me word,
	if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the
	mind it was: this is called the Retort Courteous.
	If I sent him word again it was not well cut, he
	would send me word, he cut it to please himself:
	this is called the Quip Modest. If again it was
	not well cut, he disabled my judgment: this is
	called the Reply Churlish. If again it was not
	well cut, he would answer, I spake not true: this
	is called the Reproof Valiant. If again it was not
	well cut, he would say I lied: this is called the
	Countercheque Quarrelsome: and so to the Lie
	Circumstantial and the Lie Direct.

JAQUES	And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?

TOUCHSTONE	I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial,
	nor he durst not give me the Lie Direct and so we
	measured swords and parted.

JAQUES	Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?

TOUCHSTONE	O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book as you have
	books for good manners: I will name you the degrees.
	The first, the Retort Courteous the second, the
	Quip Modest the third, the Reply Churlish the
	fourth, the Reproof Valiant the fifth, the
	Countercheque Quarrelsome the sixth, the Lie with
	Circumstance the seventh, the Lie Direct. All
	these you may avoid but the Lie Direct and you may
	avoid that too, with an If. I knew when seven
	justices could not take up a quarrel, but when the
	parties were met themselves, one of them thought but
	of an If, as, If you said so, then I said so and
	they shook hands and swore brothers. Your If is the
	only peacemaker much virtue in If.

JAQUES	Is not this a rare fellow, my lord? hes as good at
	any thing and yet a fool.

DUKE SENIOR	He uses his folly like a stalkinghorse and under
	the presentation of that he shoots his wit.

	Enter HYMEN, ROSALIND, and CELIA

	Still Music

HYMEN	        Then is there mirth in heaven,
	When earthly things made even
	Atone together.
	Good duke, receive thy daughter
	Hymen from heaven brought her,
	Yea, brought her hither,
	That thou mightst join her hand with his
	Whose heart within his bosom is.

ROSALIND	To DUKE SENIOR  To you I give myself, for I am yours.

	To ORLANDO

	To you I give myself, for I am yours.

DUKE SENIOR	If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.

ORLANDO	If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.

PHEBE	If sight and shape be true,
	Why then, my love adieu!

ROSALIND	Ill have no father, if you be not he:
	Ill have no husband, if you be not he:
	Nor neer wed woman, if you be not she.

HYMEN	        Peace, ho! I bar confusion:
	Tis I must make conclusion
	Of these most strange events:
	Heres eight that must take hands
	To join in Hymens bands,
	If truth holds true contents.
	You and you no cross shall part:
	You and you are heart in heart
	You to his love must accord,
	Or have a woman to your lord:
	You and you are sure together,
	As the winter to foul weather.
	Whiles a wedlockhymn we sing,
	Feed yourselves with questioning
	That reason wonder may diminish,
	How thus we met, and these things finish.

	SONG.
	Wedding is great Junos crown:
	O blessed bond of board and bed!
	Tis Hymen peoples every town
	High wedlock then be honoured:
	Honour, high honour and renown,
	To Hymen, god of every town!

DUKE SENIOR	O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me!
	Even daughter, welcome, in no less degree.

PHEBE	I will not eat my word, now thou art mine
	Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.

	Enter JAQUES DE BOYS

JAQUES DE BOYS	Let me have audience for a word or two:
	I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
	That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
	Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
	Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
	Addressd a mighty power which were on foot,
	In his own conduct, purposely to take
	His brother here and put him to the sword:
	And to the skirts of this wild wood he came
	Where meeting with an old religious man,
	After some question with him, was converted
	Both from his enterprise and from the world,
	His crown bequeathing to his banishd brother,
	And all their lands restored to them again
	That were with him exiled. This to be true,
	I do engage my life.

DUKE SENIOR	Welcome, young man
	Thou offerst fairly to thy brothers wedding:
	To one his lands withheld, and to the other
	A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.
	First, in this forest, let us do those ends
	That here were well begun and well begot:
	And after, every of this happy number
	That have endured shrewd days and nights with us
	Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
	According to the measure of their states.
	Meantime, forget this newfalln dignity
	And fall into our rustic revelry.
	Play, music! And you, brides and bridegrooms all,
	With measure heapd in joy, to the measures fall.

JAQUES	Sir, by your patience. If I heard you rightly,
	The duke hath put on a religious life
	And thrown into neglect the pompous court?

JAQUES DE BOYS	He hath.

JAQUES	To him will I : out of these convertites
	There is much matter to be heard and learnd.

	To DUKE SENIOR

	You to your former honour I bequeath
	Your patience and your virtue well deserves it:

	To ORLANDO

	You to a love that your true faith doth merit:

	To OLIVER

	You to your land and love and great allies:

	To SILVIUS

	You to a long and welldeserved bed:

	To TOUCHSTONE

	And you to wrangling for thy loving voyage
	Is but for two months victualld. So, to your pleasures:
	I am for other than for dancing measures.

DUKE SENIOR	Stay, Jaques, stay.

JAQUES	To see no pastime I	what you would have
	Ill stay to know at your abandond cave.

	Exit

DUKE SENIOR	Proceed, proceed: we will begin these rites,
	As we do trust theyll end, in true delights.

	A dance




	AS YOU LIKE IT

	EPILOGUE


ROSALIND	It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue
	but it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord
	the prologue. If it be true that good wine needs
	no bush, tis true that a good play needs no
	epilogue yet to good wine they do use good bushes,
	and good plays prove the better by the help of good
	epilogues. What a case am I in then, that am
	neither a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with
	you in the behalf of a good play! I am not
	furnished like a beggar, therefore to beg will not
	become me: my way is to conjure you and Ill begin
	with the women. I charge you, O women, for the love
	you bear to men, to like as much of this play as
	please you: and I charge you, O men, for the love
	you bear to womenas I perceive by your simpering,
	none of you hates themthat between you and the
	women the play may please. If I were a woman I
	would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased
	me, complexions that liked me and breaths that I
	defied not: and, I am sure, as many as have good
	beards or good faces or sweet breaths will, for my
	kind offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell.

	Exeunt


The Project Gutenberg Etext of LOC WORKSHOP ON ELECTRONIC TEXTS




                      WORKSHOP ON ELECTRONIC TEXTS

                               PROCEEDINGS



                          Edited by James Daly







                             910 June 1992


                           Library of Congress
                            Washington, D.C.



    Supported by a Grant from the David and Lucile Packard Foundation


                                 


                            TABLE OF CONTENTS


Acknowledgements

Introduction

Proceedings
   Welcome
      Prosser Gifford and Carl Fleischhauer

   Session I.  Content in a New Form:  Who Will Use It and What Will They Do?
      James Daly Moderator
      Avra Michelson, Overview
      Susan H. Veccia, User Evaluation
      Joanne Freeman, Beyond the Scholar
         Discussion

   Session II.  Show and Tell
      Jacqueline Hess Moderator
      Elli Mylonas, Perseus Project
         Discussion
      Eric M. Calaluca, Patrologia Latina Database
      Carl Fleischhauer and Ricky Erway, American Memory
         Discussion
      Dorothy Twohig, The Papers of George Washington
         Discussion
      Maria L. Lebron, The Online Journal of Current Clinical Trials
         Discussion
      Lynne K. Personius, Cornell mathematics books
         Discussion

   Session III.  Distribution, Networks, and Networking:
                 Options for Dissemination
      Robert G. Zich Moderator
      Clifford A. Lynch
         Discussion
      Howard Besser
         Discussion
      Ronald L. Larsen
      Edwin B. Brownrigg
         Discussion

   Session IV.  Image Capture, Text Capture, Overview of Text and
                Image Storage Formats
         William L. Hooton Moderator
      A Principal Methods for Image Capture of Text:
            direct scanning, use of microform
         Anne R. Kenney
         Pamela Q.J. Andre
         Judith A. Zidar
         Donald J. Waters
            Discussion
      B Special Problems:  bound volumes, conservation,
                            reproducing printed halftones
         George Thoma
         Carl Fleischhauer
            Discussion
      C Image Standards and Implications for Preservation
         Jean Baronas
         Patricia Battin
            Discussion
      D Text Conversion:  OCR vs. rekeying, standards of accuracy
                           and use of imperfect texts, service bureaus
         Michael Lesk
         Ricky Erway
         Judith A. Zidar
            Discussion

   Session V.  Approaches to Preparing Electronic Texts
      Susan Hockey Moderator
      Stuart Weibel
         Discussion
      C.M. SperbergMcQueen
         Discussion
      Eric M. Calaluca
         Discussion

   Session VI.  Copyright Issues
      Marybeth Peters

   Session VII.  Conclusion
      Prosser Gifford Moderator
      General discussion

Appendix I:  Program

Appendix II:  Abstracts

Appendix III:  Directory of Participants


                                 


                            Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Carl Fleischhauer and Prosser Gifford for the
opportunity to learn about areas of human activity unknown to me a scant
ten months ago, and the David and Lucile Packard Foundation for
supporting that opportunity.  The help given by others is acknowledged on
a separate page.

                                                          19 October 1992


                                 


                              INTRODUCTION

The Workshop on Electronic Texts 1 drew together representatives of
various projects and interest groups to compare ideas, beliefs,
experiences, and, in particular, methods of placing and presenting
historical textual materials in computerized form.  Most attendees gained
much in insight and outlook from the event.  But the assembly did not
form a new nation, or, to put it another way, the diversity of projects
and interests was too great to draw the representatives into a cohesive,
actionoriented body.2

Everyone attending the Workshop shared an interest in preserving and
providing access to historical texts.  But within this broad field the
attendees represented a variety of formal, informal, figurative, and
literal groups, with many individuals belonging to more than one.  These
groups may be defined roughly according to the following topics or
activities:

 Imaging
 Searchable coded texts
 National and international computer networks
 CDROM production and dissemination
 Methods and technology for converting older paper materials into
electronic form
 Study of the use of digital materials by scholars and others

This summary is arranged thematically and does not follow the actual
sequence of presentations.

NOTES:
     1  In this document, the phrase electronic text is used to mean
     any computerized reproduction or version of a document, book,
     article, or manuscript including images, and not merely a machine
     readable or machinesearchable text.

     2  The Workshop was held at the Library of Congress on 910 June
     1992, with funding from the David and Lucile Packard Foundation.
     The document that follows represents a summary of the presentations
     made at the Workshop and was compiled by James DALY.  This
     introduction was written by DALY and Carl FLEISCHHAUER.


PRESERVATION AND IMAGING

Preservation, as that term is used by archivists,3 was most explicitly
discussed in the context of imaging.  Anne KENNEY and Lynne PERSONIUS
explained how the concept of a faithful copy and the userfriendliness of
the traditional book have guided their project at Cornell University.4
Although interested in computerized dissemination, participants in the
Cornell project are creating digital image sets of older books in the
public domain as a source for a fresh paper facsimile or, in a future
phase, microfilm.  The books returned to the library shelves are
highquality and useful replacements on acidfree paper that should last
a long time.  To date, the Cornell project has placed little or no
emphasis on creating searchable texts one would not be surprised to find
that the project participants view such texts as new editions, and thus
not as faithful reproductions.

In her talk on preservation, Patricia BATTIN struck an ecumenical and
flexible note as she endorsed the creation and dissemination of a variety
of types of digital copies.  Do not be too narrow in defining what counts
as a preservation element, BATTIN counseled for the present, at least,
digital copies made with preservation in mind cannot be as narrowly
standardized as, say, microfilm copies with the same objective.  Setting
standards precipitously can inhibit creativity, but delay can result in
chaos, she advised.

In part, BATTINs position reflected the unsettled nature of imageformat
standards, and attendees could hear echoes of this unsettledness in the
comments of various speakers.  For example, Jean BARONAS reviewed the
status of several formal standards moving through committees of experts
and Clifford LYNCH encouraged the use of a new guideline for transmitting
document images on Internet.  Testimony from participants in the National
Agricultural Librarys NAL Text Digitization Program and LCs American
Memory project highlighted some of the challenges to the actual creation
or interchange of images, including difficulties in converting
preservation microfilm to digital form.  Donald WATERS reported on the
progress of a master plan for a project at Yale University to convert
books on microfilm to digital image sets, Project Open Book POB.

The Workshop offered rather less of an imaging practicum than planned,
but "howto" hints emerge at various points, for example, throughout
KENNEYs presentation and in the discussion of arcana such as
thresholding and dithering offered by George THOMA and FLEISCHHAUER.

NOTES:
     3  Although there is a sense in which any reproductions of
     historical materials preserve the human record, specialists in the
     field have developed particular guidelines for the creation of
     acceptable preservation copies.

     4  Titles and affiliations of presenters are given at the
     beginning of their respective talks and in the Directory of
     Participants Appendix III.


THE MACHINEREADABLE TEXT:  MARKUP AND USE

The sections of the Workshop that dealt with machinereadable text tended
to be more concerned with access and use than with preservation, at least
in the narrow technical sense.  Michael SPERBERGMcQUEEN made a forceful
presentation on the Text Encoding Initiatives TEI implementation of
the Standard Generalized Markup Language SGML.  His ideas were echoed
by Susan HOCKEY, Elli MYLONAS, and Stuart WEIBEL.  While the
presentations made by the TEI advocates contained no practicum, their
discussion focused on the value of the finished product, what the
European Community calls reusability, but what may also be termed
durability.  They argued that marking upthat is, codinga text in a
wellconceived way will permit it to be moved from one computer
environment to another, as well as to be used by various users.  Two
kinds of markup were distinguished:  1 procedural markup, which
describes the features of a text e.g., dots on a page, and 2
descriptive markup, which describes the structure or elements of a
document e.g., chapters, paragraphs, and front matter.

The TEI proponents emphasized the importance of texts to scholarship.
They explained how heavily coded and thus analyzed and annotated texts
can underlie research, play a role in scholarly communication, and
facilitate classroom teaching.  SPERBERGMcQUEEN reminded listeners that
a written or printed item e.g., a particular edition of a book is
merely a representation of the abstraction we call a text.  To concern
ourselves with faithfully reproducing a printed instance of the text,
SPERBERGMcQUEEN argued, is to concern ourselves with the representation
of a representation "images as simulacra for the text".  The TEI proponents
interest in images tends to focus on corollary materials for use in teaching,
for example, photographs of the Acropolis to accompany a Greek text.

By the end of the Workshop, SPERBERGMcQUEEN confessed to having been
converted to a limited extent to the view that electronic images
constitute a promising alternative to microfilming indeed, an
alternative probably superior to microfilming.  But he was not convinced
that electronic images constitute a serious attempt to represent text in
electronic form.  HOCKEY and MYLONAS also conceded that their experience
at the Pierce Symposium the previous week at Georgetown University and
the present conference at the Library of Congress had compelled them to
reevaluate their perspective on the usefulness of text as images.
Attendees could see that the text and image advocates were in
constructive tension, so to say.

Three nonTEI presentations described approaches to preparing
machinereadable text that are less rigorous and thus less expensive.  In
the case of the Papers of George Washington, Dorothy TWOHIG explained
that the digital version will provide a notquiteperfect rendering of
the transcribed textsome 135,000 documents, available for research
during the decades while the perfect or print version is completed.
Members of the American Memory team and the staff of NALs Text
Digitization Program see below also outlined a middle ground concerning
searchable texts.  In the case of American Memory, contractors produce
texts with about 99percent accuracy that serve as "browse" or
"reference" versions of written or printed originals.  End users who need
faithful copies or perfect renditions must refer to accompanying sets of
digital facsimile images or consult copies of the originals in a nearby
library or archive.  American Memory staff argued that the high cost of
producing 100percent accurate copies would prevent LC from offering
access to large parts of its collections.


THE MACHINEREADABLE TEXT:  METHODS OF CONVERSION

Although the Workshop did not include a systematic examination of the
methods for converting texts from paper or from facsimile images into
machinereadable form, nevertheless, various speakers touched upon this
matter.  For example, WEIBEL reported that OCLC has experimented with a
merging of multiple optical character recognition systems that will
reduce errors from an unacceptable rate of 5 characters out of every
l,000 to an unacceptable rate of 2 characters out of every l,000.

Pamela ANDRE presented an overview of NALs Text Digitization Program and
Judith ZIDAR discussed the technical details.  ZIDAR explained how NAL
purchased hardware and software capable of performing optical character
recognition OCR and text conversion and used its own staff to convert
texts.  The process, ZIDAR said, required extensive editing and project
staff found themselves considering alternatives, including rekeying
andor creating abstracts or summaries of texts.  NAL reckoned costs at
7 per page.  By way of contrast, Ricky ERWAY explained that American
Memory had decided from the start to contract out conversion to external
service bureaus.  The criteria used to select these contractors were cost
and quality of results, as opposed to methods of conversion.  ERWAY noted
that historical documents or books often do not lend themselves to OCR.
Bound materials represent a special problem.  In her experience, quality
controlinspecting incoming materials, counting errors in samplesposed
the most timeconsuming aspect of contracting out conversion.  ERWAY
reckoned American Memorys costs at 4 per page, but cautioned that fewer
costelements had been included than in NALs figure.


OPTIONS FOR DISSEMINATION

The topic of dissemination proper emerged at various points during the
Workshop.  At the session devoted to national and international computer
networks, LYNCH, Howard BESSER, Ronald LARSEN, and Edwin BROWNRIGG
highlighted the virtues of Internet today and of the network that will
evolve from Internet.  Listeners could discern in these narratives a
vision of an information democracy in which millions of citizens freely
find and use what they need.  LYNCH noted that a lack of standards
inhibits disseminating multimedia on the network, a topic also discussed
by BESSER.  LARSEN addressed the issues of network scalability and
modularity and commented upon the difficulty of anticipating the effects
of growth in orders of magnitude.  BROWNRIGG talked about the ability of
packet radio to provide certain links in a network without the need for
wiring.  However, the presenters also called attention to the
shortcomings and incongruities of presentday computer networks.  For
example:  1 Network use is growing dramatically, but much network
traffic consists of personal communication Email.  2 Large bodies of
information are available, but a users ability to search across their
entirety is limited.  3 There are significant resources for science and
technology, but few network sources provide content in the humanities.
4 Machinereadable texts are commonplace, but the capability of the
system to deal with images let alone other media formats lags behind.
A glimpse of a multimedia future for networks, however, was provided by
Maria LEBRON in her overview of the Online Journal of Current Clinical
Trials OJCCT, and the process of scholarly publishing online.

The contrasting form of the CDROM disk was never systematically
analyzed, but attendees could glean an impression from several of the
showandtell presentations.  The Perseus and American Memory examples
demonstrated recently published disks, while the descriptions of the
IBYCUS version of the Papers of George Washington and ChadwyckHealeys
Patrologia Latina Database PLD told of disks to come.  According to
Eric CALALUCA, PLDs principal focus has been on converting JacquesPaul
Mignes definitive collection of Latin texts to machinereadable form.
Although everyone could share the network advocates enthusiasm for an
online future, the possibility of rolling up ones sleeves for a session
with a CDROM containing both textual materials and a powerful retrieval
engine made the disk seem an appealing vessel indeed.  The overall
discussion suggested that the transition from CDROM to online networked
access may prove far slower and more difficult than has been anticipated.


WHO ARE THE USERS AND WHAT DO THEY DO?

Although concerned with the technicalities of production, the Workshop
never lost sight of the purposes and uses of electronic versions of
textual materials.  As noted above, those interested in imaging discussed
the problematical matter of digital preservation, while the TEI proponents
described how machinereadable texts can be used in research.  This latter
topic received thorough treatment in the paper read by Avra MICHELSON.
She placed the phenomenon of electronic texts within the context of
broader trends in information technology and scholarly communication.

Among other things, MICHELSON described online conferences that
represent a vigorous and important intellectual forum for certain
disciplines.  Internet now carries more than 700 conferences, with about
80 percent of these devoted to topics in the social sciences and the
humanities.  Other scholars use online networks for "distance learning."
Meanwhile, there has been a tremendous growth in enduser computing
professors today are less likely than their predecessors to ask the
campus computer center to process their data.  Electronic texts are one
key to these sophisticated applications, MICHELSON reported, and more and
more scholars in the humanities now work in an online environment.
Toward the end of the Workshop, Michael LESK presented a corollary to
MICHELSONs talk, reporting the results of an experiment that compared
the work of one group of chemistry students using traditional printed
texts and two groups using electronic sources.  The experiment
demonstrated that in the event one does not know what to read, one needs
the electronic systems the electronic systems hold no advantage at the
moment if one knows what to read, but neither do they impose a penalty.

DALY provided an anecdotal account of the revolutionizing impact of the
new technology on his previous methods of research in the field of classics.
His account, by extrapolation, served to illustrate in part the arguments
made by MICHELSON concerning the positive effects of the sudden and radical
transformation being wrought in the ways scholars work.

Susan VECCIA and Joanne FREEMAN delineated the use of electronic
materials outside the university.  The most interesting aspect of their
use, FREEMAN said, could be seen as a paradox:  teachers in elementary
and secondary schools requested access to primary source materials but,
at the same time, found that "primariness" itself made these materials
difficult for their students to use.


OTHER TOPICS

Marybeth PETERS reviewed copyright law in the United States and offered
advice during a lively discussion of this subject.  But uncertainty
remains concerning the price of copyright in a digital medium, because a
solution remains to be worked out concerning management and synthesis of
copyrighted and outofcopyright pieces of a database.

As moderator of the final session of the Workshop, Prosser GIFFORD directed
discussion to future courses of action and the potential role of LC in
advancing them.  Among the recommendations that emerged were the following:

      Workshop participants should 1 begin to think about working
     with image material, but structure and digitize it in such a
     way that at a later stage it can be interpreted into text, and
     2 find a common way to build text and images together so that
     they can be used jointly at some stage in the future, with
     appropriate network support, because that is how users will want
     to access these materials.  The Library might encourage attempts
     to bring together people who are working on texts and images.

      A network version of American Memory should be developed or
     consideration should be given to making the data in it
     available to people interested in doing network multimedia.
     Given the current dearth of digital data that is appealing and
     unencumbered by extremely complex rights problems, developing a
     network version of American Memory could do much to help make
     network multimedia a reality.

      Concerning the thorny issue of electronic deposit, LC should
     initiate a catalytic process in terms of distributed
     responsibility, that is, bring together the distributed
     organizations and set up a study group to look at all the
     issues related to electronic deposit and see where we as a
     nation should move.  For example, LC might attempt to persuade
     one major library in each state to deal with its state
     equivalent publisher, which might produce a cooperative project
     that would be equitably distributed around the country, and one
     in which LC would be dealing with a minimal number of publishers
     and minimal copyright problems.  LC must also deal with the
     concept of online publishing, determining, among other things,
     how serials such as OJCCT might be deposited for copyright.

      Since a number of projects are planning to carry out
     preservation by creating digital images that will end up in
     online or nearline storage at some institution, LC might play
     a helpful role, at least in the near term, by accelerating how
     to catalog that information into the Research Library Information
     Network RLIN and then into OCLC, so that it would be accessible.
     This would reduce the possibility of multiple institutions digitizing
     the same work.


CONCLUSION

The Workshop was valuable because it brought together partisans from
various groups and provided an occasion to compare goals and methods.
The more committed partisans frequently communicate with others in their
groups, but less often across group boundaries.  The Workshop was also
valuable to attendeesincluding those involved with American Memorywho
came less committed to particular approaches or concepts.  These
attendees learned a great deal, and plan to select and employ elements of
imaging, textcoding, and networked distribution that suit their
respective projects and purposes.

Still, reality rears its ugly head:  no breakthrough has been achieved.
On the imaging side, one confronts a proliferation of competing
datainterchange standards and a lack of consensus on the role of digital
facsimiles in preservation.  In the realm of machinereadable texts, one
encounters a reasonably mature standard but methodological difficulties
and high costs.  These latter problems, of course, represent a special
impediment to the desire, as it is sometimes expressed in the popular
press, "to put the contents of the Library of Congress on line."  In
the words of one participant, there was "no solution to the economic
problemsthe projects that are out there are surviving, but it is going
to be a lot of work to transform the information industry, and so far the
investment to do that is not forthcoming" LESK, per litteras.


                                 


                               PROCEEDINGS


WELCOME


GIFFORD  Origin of Workshop in current Librarians desire to make LCs
collections more widely available  Desiderata arising from the prospect
of greater interconnectedness 


After welcoming participants on behalf of the Library of Congress,
American Memory AM, and the National Demonstration Lab, Prosser
GIFFORD, director for scholarly programs, Library of Congress, located
the origin of the Workshop on Electronic Texts in a conversation he had
had considerably more than a year ago with Carl FLEISCHHAUER concerning
some of the issues faced by AM.  On the assumption that numerous other
people were asking the same questions, the decision was made to bring
together as many of these people as possible to ask the same questions
together.  In a deeper sense, GIFFORD said, the origin of the Workshop
lay in the desire of the current Librarian of Congress, James H.
Billington, to make the collections of the Library, especially those
offering unique or unusual testimony on aspects of the American
experience, available to a much wider circle of users than those few
people who can come to Washington to use them.  This meant that the
emphasis of AM, from the outset, has been on archival collections of the
basic material, and on making these collections themselves available,
rather than selected or heavily edited products.

From AMs emphasis followed the questions with which the Workshop began:
who will use these materials, and in what form will they wish to use
them.  But an even larger issue deserving mention, in GIFFORDs view, was
the phenomenal growth in Internet connectivity.  He expressed the hope
that the prospect of greater interconnectedness than ever before would
lead to:  1 much more cooperative and mutually supportive endeavors 2
development of systems of shared and distributed responsibilities to
avoid duplication and to ensure accuracy and preservation of unique
materials and 3 agreement on the necessary standards and development of
the appropriate directories and indices to make navigation
straightforward among the varied resources that are, and increasingly
will be, available.  In this connection, GIFFORD requested that
participants reflect from the outset upon the sorts of outcomes they
thought the Workshop might have.  Did those present constitute a group
with sufficient common interests to propose a next step or next steps,
and if so, what might those be?  They would return to these questions the
following afternoon.

                                 


FLEISCHHAUER  Core of Workshop concerns preparation and production of
materials  Special challenge in conversion of textual materials 
Quality versus quantity  Do the several groups represented share common
interests? 


Carl FLEISCHHAUER, coordinator, American Memory, Library of Congress,
emphasized that he would attempt to represent the people who perform some
of the work of converting or preparing  materials and that the core of
the Workshop had to do with preparation and production.  FLEISCHHAUER
then drew a distinction between the long term, when many things would be
available and connected in the ways that GIFFORD described, and the short
term, in which AM not only has wrestled with the issue of what is the
best course to pursue but also has faced a variety of technical
challenges.

FLEISCHHAUER remarked AMs endeavors to deal with a wide range of library
formats, such as motion picture collections, soundrecording collections,
and pictorial collections of various sorts, especially collections of
photographs.  In the course of these efforts, AM kept coming back to
textual materialsmanuscripts or rare printed matter, bound materials,
etc.  Text posed the greatest conversion challenge of all.  Thus, the
genesis of the Workshop, which reflects the problems faced by AM.  These
problems include physical problems.  For example, those in the library
and archive business deal with collections made up of fragile and rare
manuscript items, bound materials, especially the notoriously brittle
bound materials of the late nineteenth century.  These are precious
cultural artifacts, however, as well as interesting sources of
information, and LC desires to retain and conserve them.  AM needs to
handle things without damaging them.  Guillotining a book to run it
through a sheet feeder must be avoided at all costs.

Beyond physical problems, issues pertaining to quality arose.  For
example, the desire to provide users with a searchable text is affected
by the question of acceptable level of accuracy.  One hundred percent
accuracy is tremendously expensive.  On the other hand, the output of
optical character recognition OCR can be tremendously inaccurate.
Although AM has attempted to find a middle ground, uncertainty persists
as to whether or not it has discovered the right solution.

Questions of quality arose concerning images as well.  FLEISCHHAUER
contrasted the extremely high level of quality of the digital images in
the Cornell Xerox Project with AMs efforts to provide a browsequality
or accessquality image, as opposed to an archival or preservation image.
FLEISCHHAUER therefore welcomed the opportunity to compare notes.

FLEISCHHAUER observed in passing that conversations he had had about
networks have begun to signal that for various forms of media a
determination may be made that there is a browsequality item, or a
distributionandaccessquality item that may coexist in some systems
with a higher quality archival item that would be inconvenient to send
through the network because of its size.  FLEISCHHAUER referred, of
course, to images more than to searchable text.

As AM considered those questions, several conceptual issues arose:  ought
AM occasionally to reproduce materials entirely through an image set, at
other times, entirely through a text set, and in some cases, a mix?
There probably would be times when the historical authenticity of an
artifact would require that its image be used.  An image might be
desirable as a recourse for users if one could not provide 100percent
accurate text.  Again, AM wondered, as a practical matter, if a
distinction could be drawn between rare printed matter that might exist
in multiple collectionsthat is, in ten or fifteen libraries.  In such
cases, the need for perfect reproduction would be less than for unique
items.  Implicit in his remarks, FLEISCHHAUER conceded, was the admission
that AM has been tilting strongly towards quantity and drawing back a
little from perfect quality.  That is, it seemed to AM that society would
be better served if more things were distributed by LCeven if they were
not quite perfectthan if fewer things, perfectly represented, were
distributed.  This was stated as a proposition to be tested, with
responses to be gathered from users.

In thinking about issues related to reproduction of materials and seeing
other people engaged in parallel activities, AM deemed it useful to
convene a conference.  Hence, the Workshop.  FLEISCHHAUER thereupon
surveyed the several groups represented:  1 the world of images image
users and image makers 2 the world of text and scholarship and, within
this group, those concerned with languageFLEISCHHAUER confessed to finding
delightful irony in the fact that some of the most advanced thinkers on
computerized texts are those dealing with ancient Greek and Roman materials
3 the network world and 4 the general world of library science, which
includes people interested in preservation and cataloging.

FLEISCHHAUER concluded his remarks with special thanks to the David and
Lucile Packard Foundation for its support of the meeting, the American
Memory group, the Office for Scholarly Programs, the National
Demonstration Lab, and the Office of Special Events.  He expressed the
hope that David Woodley Packard might be able to attend, noting that
Packards work and the work of the foundation had sponsored a number of
projects in the text area.

                                 

SESSION I.  CONTENT IN A NEW FORM:   WHO WILL USE IT AND WHAT WILL THEY DO?


DALY  Acknowledgements  A new Latin authors disk   Effects of the new
technology on previous methods of research 


Serving as moderator, James DALY acknowledged the generosity of all the
presenters for giving of their time, counsel, and patience in planning
the Workshop, as well as of members of the American Memory project and
other Library of Congress staff, and the David and Lucile Packard
Foundation and its executive director, Colburn S. Wilbur.

DALY then recounted his visit in March to the Center for Electronic Texts
in the Humanities CETH and the Department of Classics at Rutgers
University, where an old friend, Lowell Edmunds, introduced him to the
departments IBYCUS scholarly personal computer, and, in particular, the
new Latin CDROM, containing, among other things, almost all classical
Latin literary texts through A.D. 200.  Packard Humanities Institute
PHI, Los Altos, California, released this disk late in 1991, with a
nominal triennial licensing fee.

Playing with the disk for an hour or so at Rutgers brought home to DALY
at once the revolutionizing impact of the new technology on his previous
methods of research.  Had this disk been available two or three years
earlier, DALY contended, when he was engaged in preparing a commentary on
Book 10 of Virgils Aeneid for Cambridge University Press, he would not
have required a fortyeightsquarefoot table on which to spread the
numerous, most frequently consulted items, including some ten or twelve
concordances to key Latin authors, an almost equal number of lexica to
authors who lacked concordances, and where either lexica or concordances
were lacking, numerous editions of authors antedating and postdating Virgil.

Nor, when checking each of the average six to seven words contained in
the Virgilian hexameter for its usage elsewhere in Virgils works or
other Latin authors, would DALY have had to maintain the laborious
mechanical process of flipping through these concordances, lexica, and
editions each time.  Nor would he have had to frequent as often the
Milton S. Eisenhower Library at the Johns Hopkins University to consult
the Thesaurus Linguae Latinae.  Instead of devoting countless hours, or
the bulk of his research time, to gathering data concerning Virgils use
of words, DALYnow freed by PHIs Latin authors disk from the
tyrannical, yet in some ways paradoxically happy scholarly drudgery
would have been able to devote that same bulk of time to analyzing and
interpreting Virgilian verbal usage.

Citing Theodore Brunner, Gregory Crane, Elli MYLONAS, and Avra MICHELSON,
DALY argued that this reversal in his style of work, made possible by the
new technology, would perhaps have resulted in better, more productive
research.  Indeed, even in the course of his browsing the Latin authors
disk at Rutgers, its powerful search, retrieval, and highlighting
capabilities suggested to him several new avenues of research into
Virgils use of sound effects.  This anecdotal account, DALY maintained,
may serve to illustrate in part the sudden and radical transformation
being wrought in the ways scholars work.

                                 


MICHELSON  Elements related to scholarship and technology  Electronic
texts within the context of broader trends within information technology
and scholarly communication  Evaluation of the prospects for the use of
electronic texts  Relationship of electronic texts to processes of
scholarly communication in humanities research  New exchange formats
created by scholars  Projects initiated to increase scholarly access to
converted text  Trend toward making electronic resources available
through research and education networks  Changes taking place in
scholarly communication among humanities scholars  Networkmediated
scholarship transforming traditional scholarly practices  Key
information technology trends affecting the conduct of scholarly
communication over the next decade  The trend toward enduser computing
 The trend toward greater connectivity  Effects of these trends  Key
transformations taking place  Summary of principal arguments 


Avra MICHELSON, Archival Research and Evaluation Staff, National Archives
and Records Administration NARA, argued that establishing who will use
electronic texts and what they will use them for involves a consideration
of both information technology and scholarship trends.  This
consideration includes several elements related to scholarship and
technology:  1 the key trends in information technology that are most
relevant to scholarship 2 the key trends in the use of currently
available technology by scholars in the nonscientific community and 3
the relationship between these two very distinct but interrelated trends.
The investment in understanding this relationship being made by
information providers, technologists, and public policy developers, as
well as by scholars themselves, seems to be pervasive and growing,
MICHELSON contended.  She drew on collaborative work with Jeff Rothenberg
on the scholarly use of technology.

MICHELSON sought to place the phenomenon of electronic texts within the
context of broader trends within information technology and scholarly
communication.  She argued that electronic texts are of most use to
researchers to the extent that the researchers working context i.e.,
their relevant bibliographic sources, collegial feedback, analytic tools,
notes, drafts, etc., along with their fields primary and secondary
sources, also is accessible in electronic form and can be integrated in
ways that are unique to the online environment.

Evaluation of the prospects for the use of electronic texts includes two
elements:  1 an examination of the ways in which researchers currently
are using electronic texts along with other electronic resources, and 2
an analysis of key information technology trends that are affecting the
longterm conduct of scholarly communication.  MICHELSON limited her
discussion of the use of electronic texts to the practices of humanists
and noted that the scientific community was outside the panels overview.

MICHELSON examined the nature of the current relationship of electronic
texts in particular, and electronic resources in general, to what she
maintained were, essentially, five processes of scholarly communication
in humanities research.  Researchers 1 identify sources, 2 communicate
with their colleagues, 3 interpret and analyze data, 4 disseminate
their research findings, and 5 prepare curricula to instruct the next
generation of scholars and students.  This examination would produce a
clearer understanding of the synergy among these five processes that
fuels the tendency of the use of electronic resources for one process to
stimulate its use for other processes of scholarly communication.

For the first process of scholarly communication, the identification of
sources, MICHELSON remarked the opportunity scholars now enjoy to
supplement traditional wordofmouth searches for sources among their
colleagues with new forms of electronic searching.  So, for example,
instead of having to visit the library, researchers are able to explore
descriptions of holdings in their offices.  Furthermore, if their own
institutions holdings prove insufficient, scholars can access more than
200 major American library catalogues over Internet, including the
universities of California, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin.
Direct access to the bibliographic databases offers intellectual
empowerment to scholars by presenting a comprehensive means of browsing
through libraries from their homes and offices at their convenience.

The second process of communication involves communication among
scholars.  Beyond the most common methods of communication, scholars are
using Email and a variety of new electronic communications formats
derived from it for further academic interchange.  Email exchanges are
growing at an astonishing rate, reportedly 15 percent a month.  They
currently constitute approximately half the traffic on research and
education networks.  Moreover, the global spread of Email has been so
rapid that it is now possible for American scholars to use it to
communicate with colleagues in close to 140 other countries.

Other new exchange formats created by scholars and operating on Internet
include more than 700 conferences, with about 80 percent of these devoted
to topics in the social sciences and humanities.  The rate of growth of
these scholarly electronic conferences also is astonishing.  From l990 to
l991, 200 new conferences were identified on Internet.  From October 1991
to June 1992, an additional 150 conferences in the social sciences and
humanities were added to this directory of listings.  Scholars have
established conferences in virtually every field, within every different
discipline.  For example, there are currently close to 600 active social
science and humanities  conferences on topics such as art and
architecture, ethnomusicology, folklore, Japanese culture, medical
education, and gifted and talented education.  The appeal to scholars of
communicating through these conferences is that, unlike any other medium,
electronic conferences today provide a forum for global communication
with peers at the front end of the research process.

Interpretation and analysis of sources constitutes the third process of
scholarly communication that MICHELSON discussed in terms of texts and
textual resources.  The methods used to analyze sources fall somewhere on
a continuum from quantitative analysis to qualitative analysis.
Typically, evidence is culled and evaluated using methods drawn from both
ends of this continuum.  At one end, quantitative analysis involves the
use of mathematical processes such as a count of frequencies and
distributions of occurrences or, on a higher level, regression analysis.
At the other end of the continuum, qualitative analysis typically
involves nonmathematical processes oriented toward language
interpretation or the building of theory.  Aspects of this work involve
the processingeither manual or computationalof large and sometimes
massive amounts of textual sources, although the use of nontextual
sources as evidence, such as photographs, sound recordings, film footage,
and artifacts, is significant as well.

Scholars have discovered that many of the methods of interpretation and
analysis that are related to both quantitative and qualitative methods
are processes that can be performed by computers.  For example, computers
can count.  They can count brush strokes used in a Rembrandt painting or
perform regression analysis for understanding cause and effect.  By means
of advanced technologies, computers can recognize patterns, analyze text,
and model concepts.  Furthermore, computers can complete these processes
faster with more sources and with greater precision than scholars who
must rely on manual interpretation of data.  But if scholars are to use
computers for these processes, source materials must be in a form
amenable to computerassisted analysis.  For this reason many scholars,
once they have identified the sources that are key to their research, are
converting them to machinereadable form.  Thus, a representative example
of the numerous textual conversion projects organized by scholars around
the world in recent years to support computational text analysis is the
TLG, the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae.  This project is devoted to
converting the extant ancient texts of classical Greece.  Editors note:
according to the TLG Newsletter of May l992, TLG was in use in thirtytwo
different countries.  This figure updates MICHELSONs previous count by one.

The scholars performing these conversions have been asked to recognize
that the electronic sources they are converting for one use possess value
for other research purposes as well.  As a result, during the past few
years, humanities scholars have initiated a number of projects to
increase scholarly access to converted text.  So, for example, the Text
Encoding Initiative TEI, about which more is said later in the program,
was established as an effort by scholars to determine standard elements
and methods for encoding machinereadable text for electronic exchange.
In a second effort to facilitate the sharing of converted text, scholars
have created a new institution, the Center for Electronic Texts in the
Humanities CETH.  The center estimates that there are 8,000 series of
source texts in the humanities that have been converted to
machinereadable form worldwide.  CETH is undertaking an international
search for converted text in the humanities, compiling it into an
electronic library, and preparing bibliographic descriptions of the
sources for the Research Libraries Information Networks RLIN
machinereadable data file.  The library profession has begun to initiate
large conversion projects as well, such as American Memory.

While scholars have been making converted text available to one another,
typically on disk or on CDROM, the clear trend is toward making these
resources available through research and education networks.  Thus, the
American and French Research on the Treasury of the French Language
ARTFL and the Dante Project are already available on Internet.
MICHELSON summarized this section on interpretation and analysis by
noting that:  1 increasing numbers of humanities scholars in the library
community are recognizing the importance to the advancement of
scholarship of retrospective conversion of source materials in the arts
and humanities and 2 there is a growing realization that making the
sources available on research and education networks maximizes their
usefulness for the analysis performed by humanities scholars.

The fourth process of scholarly communication is dissemination of
research findings, that is, publication.  Scholars are using existing
research and education networks to engineer a new type of publication:
scholarlycontrolled journals that are electronically produced and
disseminated.  Although such journals are still emerging as a
communication format, their number has grown, from approximately twelve
to thirtysix during the past year July 1991 to June 1992.  Most of
these electronic scholarly journals are devoted to topics in the
humanities.  As with network conferences, scholarly enthusiasm for these
electronic journals stems from the mediums unique ability to advance
scholarship in a way that no other medium can do by supporting global
feedback and interchange, practically in real time, early in the research
process.  Beyond scholarly journals, MICHELSON remarked the delivery of
commercial fulltext products, such as articles in professional journals,
newsletters, magazines, wire services, and reference sources.  These are
being delivered via online local library catalogues, especially through
CDROMs.  Furthermore, according to MICHELSON, there is general optimism
that the copyright and fees issues impeding the delivery of full text on
existing research and education networks soon will be resolved.

The final process of scholarly communication is curriculum development
and instruction, and this involves the use of computer information
technologies in two areas.  The first is the development of
computeroriented instructional tools, which includes simulations,
multimedia applications, and computer tools that are used to assist in
the analysis of sources in the classroom, etc.  The Perseus Project, a
database that provides a multimedia curriculum on classical Greek
civilization, is a good example of the way in which entire curricula are
being recast using information technologies.  It is anticipated that the
current difficulty in exchanging electronically computerbased
instructional software, which in turn makes it difficult for one scholar
to build upon the work of others, will be resolved before too long.
Standalone curricular applications that involve electronic text will be
sharable through networks, reinforcing their significance as intellectual
products as well as instructional tools.

The second aspect of electronic learning involves the use of research and
education networks for distance education programs.  Such programs
interactively link teachers with students in geographically scattered
locations and rely on the availability of electronic instructional
resources.  Distance education programs are gaining wide appeal among
state departments of education because of their demonstrated capacity to
bring advanced specialized course work and an array of experts to many
classrooms.  A recent report found that at least 32 states operated at
least one statewide network for education in 1991, with networks under
development in many of the remaining states.

MICHELSON summarized this section by noting two striking changes taking
place in scholarly communication among humanities scholars.  First is the
extent to which electronic text in particular, and electronic resources
in general, are being infused into each of the five processes described
above.  As mentioned earlier, there is a certain synergy at work here.
The use of electronic resources for one process tends to stimulate its
use for other processes, because the chief course of movement is toward a
comprehensive online working context for humanities scholars that
includes online availability of key bibliographies, scholarly feedback,
sources, analytical tools, and publications.  MICHELSON noted further
that the movement toward a comprehensive online working context for
humanities scholars is not new.  In fact, it has been underway for more
than forty years in the humanities, since Father Roberto Busa began
developing an electronic concordance of the works of Saint Thomas Aquinas
in 1949.  What we are witnessing today, MICHELSON contended, is not the
beginning of this online transition but, for at least some humanities
scholars, the turning point in the transition from a print to an
electronic working context.  Coinciding with the online transition, the
second striking change is the extent to which research and education
networks are becoming the new medium of scholarly communication.  The
existing Internet and the pending National Education and Research Network
NREN represent the new meeting ground where scholars are going for
bibliographic information, scholarly dialogue and feedback, the most
current publications in their field, and highlevel educational
offerings.  Traditional scholarly practices are undergoing tremendous
transformations as a result of the emergence and growing prominence of
what is called networkmediated scholarship.

MICHELSON next turned to the second element of the framework she proposed
at the outset of her talk for evaluating the prospects for electronic
text, namely the key information technology trends affecting the conduct
of scholarly communication over the next decade:  1 enduser computing
and 2 connectivity.

Enduser computing means that the person touching the keyboard, or
performing computations, is the same as the person who initiates or
consumes the computation.  The emergence of personal computers, along
with a host of other forces, such as ubiquitous computing, advances in
interface design, and the online transition, is prompting the consumers
of computation to do their own computing, and is thus rendering obsolete
the traditional distinction between end users and ultimate users.

The trend toward enduser computing is significant to consideration of
the prospects for electronic texts because it means that researchers are
becoming more adept at doing their own computations and, thus, more
competent in the use of electronic media.  By avoiding programmer
intermediaries, computation is becoming central to the researchers
thought process.  This direct involvement in computing is changing the
researchers perspective on the nature of research itself, that is, the
kinds of questions that can be posed, the analytical methodologies that
can be used, the types and amount of sources that are appropriate for
analyses, and the form in which findings are presented.  The trend toward
enduser computing means that, increasingly, electronic media and
computation are being infused into all processes of humanities
scholarship, inspiring remarkable transformations in scholarly
communication.

The trend toward greater connectivity suggests that researchers are using
computation increasingly in network environments.  Connectivity is
important to scholarship because it erases the distance that separates
students from teachers and scholars from their colleagues, while allowing
users to access remote databases, share information in many different
media, connect to their working context wherever they are, and
collaborate in all phases of research.

The combination of the trend toward enduser computing and the trend
toward connectivity suggests that the scholarly use of electronic
resources, already evident among some researchers, will soon become an
established feature of scholarship.  The effects of these trends, along
with ongoing changes in scholarly practices, point to a future in which
humanities researchers will use computation and electronic communication
to help them formulate ideas, access sources, perform research,
collaborate with colleagues, seek peer review, publish and disseminate
results, and engage in many other professional and educational activities.

In summary, MICHELSON emphasized four points:  1 A portion of humanities
scholars already consider electronic texts the preferred format for
analysis and dissemination.  2 Scholars are using these electronic
texts, in conjunction with other electronic resources, in all the
processes of scholarly communication.  3 The humanities scholars
working context is in the process of changing from print technology to
electronic technology, in many ways mirroring transformations that have
occurred or are occurring within the scientific community.  4 These
changes are occurring in conjunction with the development of a new
communication medium:  research and education networks that are
characterized by their capacity to advance scholarship in a wholly unique
way.

MICHELSON also reiterated her three principal arguments:  l Electronic
texts are best understood in terms of the relationship to other
electronic resources and the growing prominence of networkmediated
scholarship.  2 The prospects for electronic texts lie in their capacity
to be integrated into the online network of electronic resources that
comprise the new working context for scholars.  3 Retrospective conversion
of portions of the scholarly record should be a key strategy as information
providers respond to changes in scholarly communication practices.

                                 


VECCIA  AMs evaluation project and public users of electronic resources
 AM and its design  Site selection and evaluating the Macintosh
implementation of AM  Characteristics of the six public libraries
selected  Characteristics of AMs users in these libraries  Principal
ways AM is being used 


Susan VECCIA, team leader, and Joanne FREEMAN, associate coordinator,
American Memory, Library of Congress, gave a joint presentation.  First,
by way of introduction, VECCIA explained her and FREEMANs roles in
American Memory AM.  Serving principally as an observer, VECCIA has
assisted with the evaluation project of AM, placing AM collections in a
variety of different sites around the country and helping to organize and
implement that project.  FREEMAN has been an associate coordinator of AM
and has been involved principally with the interpretative materials,
preparing some of the electronic exhibits and printed historical
information that accompanies AM and that is requested by users.  VECCIA
and FREEMAN shared anecdotal observations concerning AM with public users
of electronic resources.  Notwithstanding a fairly structured evaluation
in progress, both VECCIA and FREEMAN chose not to report on specifics in
terms of numbers, etc., because they felt it was too early in the
evaluation project to do so.

AM is an electronic archive of primary source materials from the Library
of Congress, selected collections representing a variety of formats
photographs, graphic arts, recorded sound, motion pictures, broadsides,
and soon, pamphlets and books.  In terms of the design of this system,
the interpretative exhibits have been kept separate from the primary
resources, with good reason.  Accompanying this collection are printed
documentation and user guides, as well as guides that FREEMAN prepared for
teachers so that they may begin using the content of the system at once.

VECCIA described the evaluation project before talking about the public
users of AM, limiting her remarks to public libraries, because FREEMAN
would talk more specifically about schools from kindergarten to twelfth
grade K12.   Having started in spring 1991, the evaluation currently
involves testing of the Macintosh implementation of AM.  Since the
primary goal of this evaluation is to determine the most appropriate
audience or audiences for AM, very different sites were selected.  This
makes evaluation difficult because of the varying degrees of technology
literacy among the sites.  AM is situated in fortyfour locations, of
which six are public libraries and sixteen are schools.  Represented
among the schools are elementary, junior high, and high schools.
District offices also are involved in the evaluation, which will
conclude in summer 1993.

VECCIA focused the remainder of her talk on the six public libraries, one
of which doubles as a state library.  They represent a range of
geographic areas and a range of demographic characteristics.  For
example, three are located in urban settings, two in rural settings, and
one in a suburban setting.  A range of technical expertise is to be found
among these facilities as well.  For example, one is an "Apple library of
the future," while two others are rural oneroom librariesin one, AM
sits at the front desk next to a tractor manual.

All public libraries have been extremely enthusiastic, supportive, and
appreciative of the work that AM has been doing.  VECCIA characterized
various users:  Most users in public libraries describe themselves as
general readers of the students who use AM in the public libraries,
those in fourth grade and above seem most interested.  Public libraries
in rural sites tend to attract retired people, who have been highly
receptive to AM.  Users tend to fall into two additional categories:
people interested in the content and historical connotations of these
primary resources, and those fascinated by the technology.  The format
receiving the most comments has been motion pictures.  The adult users in
public libraries are more comfortable with IBM computers, whereas young
people seem comfortable with either IBM or Macintosh, although most of
them seem to come from a Macintosh background.  This same tendency is
found in the schools.

What kinds of things do users do with AM?  In a public library there are
two main goals or ways that AM is being used:  as an individual learning
tool, and as a leisure activity.  Adult learning was one area that VECCIA
would highlight as a possible application for a tool such as AM.  She
described a patron of a rural public library who comes in every day on
his lunch hour and literally reads AM, methodically going through the
collection image by image.  At the end of his hour he makes an electronic
bookmark, puts it in his pocket, and returns to work.  The next day he
comes in and resumes where he left off.  Interestingly, this man had
never been in the library before he used AM.  In another small, rural
library, the coordinator reports that AM is a popular activity for some
of the older, retired people in the community, who ordinarily would not
use "those things,"computers.  Another example of adult learning in
public libraries is book groups, one of which, in particular, is using AM
as part of its reading on industrialization, integration, and urbanization
in the early 1900s.

One library reports that a family is using AM to help educate their
children.  In another instance, individuals from a local museum came in
to use AM to prepare an exhibit on toys of the past.  These two examples
emphasize the mission of the public library as a cultural institution,
reaching out to people who do not have the same resources available to
those who live in a metropolitan area or have access to a major library.
One rural library reports that junior high school students in large
numbers came in one afternoon to use AM for entertainment.  A number of
public libraries reported great interest among postcard collectors in the
Detroit collection, which was essentially a collection of images used on
postcards around the turn of the century.  Train buffs are similarly
interested because that was a time of great interest in railroading.
People, it was found, relate to things that they know of firsthand.  For
example, in both rural public libraries where AM was made available,
observers reported that the older people with personal remembrances of
the turn of the century were gravitating to the Detroit collection.
These examples served to underscore MICHELSONs observation re the
integration of electronic tools and ideasthat people learn best when
the material relates to something they know.

VECCIA made the final point that in many cases AM serves as a
publicrelations tool for the public libraries that are testing it.  In
one case, AM is being used as a vehicle to secure additional funding for
the library.  In another case, AM has served as an inspiration to the
staff of a major local public library in the South to think about ways to
make its own collection of photographs more accessible to the public.

                                  


FREEMAN  AM and archival electronic resources in a school environment 
Questions concerning context  Questions concerning the electronic format
itself  Computer anxiety  Access and availability of the system 
Hardware  Strengths gained through the use of archival resources in
schools 


Reiterating an observation made by VECCIA, that AM is an archival
resource made up of primary materials with very little interpretation,
FREEMAN stated that the project has attempted to bridge the gap between
these bare primary materials and a school environment, and in that cause
has created guided introductions to AM collections.  Loud demand from the
educational community,  chiefly from teachers working with the upper
grades of elementary school through high school, greeted the announcement
that AM would be tested around the country.

FREEMAN reported not only on what was learned about AM in a school
environment, but also on several universal questions that were raised
concerning archival electronic resources in schools.  She discussed
several strengths of this type of material in a school environment as
opposed to a highly structured resource that offers a limited number of
paths to follow.

FREEMAN first raised several questions about using AM in a school
environment.  There is often some difficulty in developing a sense of
what the system contains.  Many students sit down at a computer resource
and assume that, because AM comes from the Library of Congress, all of
American history is now at their fingertips.  As a result of that sort of
mistaken judgment, some students are known to conclude that AM contains
nothing of use to them when they look for one or two things and do not
find them.  It is difficult to discover that middle ground where one has
a sense of what the system contains.  Some students grope toward the idea
of an archive, a new idea to them, since they have not previously
experienced what it means to have access to a vast body of somewhat
random information.

Other questions raised by FREEMAN concerned the electronic format itself.
For instance, in a school environment it is often difficult both for
teachers and students to gain a sense of what it is they are viewing.
They understand that it is a visual image, but they do not necessarily
know that it is a postcard from the turn of the century, a panoramic
photograph, or even machinereadable text of an eighteenthcentury
broadside, a twentiethcentury printed book, or a nineteenthcentury
diary.  That distinction is often difficult for people in a school
environment to grasp.  Because of that, it occasionally becomes difficult
to draw conclusions from what one is viewing.

FREEMAN also noted the obvious fear of the computer, which constitutes a
difficulty in using an electronic resource.  Though students in general
did not suffer from this anxiety, several older students feared that they
were computerilliterate, an assumption that became selffulfilling when
they searched for something but failed to find it.  FREEMAN said she
believed that some teachers also fear computer resources, because they
believe they lack complete control.  FREEMAN related the example of
teachers shooing away students because it was not their time to use the
system.  This was a case in which the situation had to be extremely
structured so that the teachers would not feel that they had lost their
grasp on what the system contained.

A final question raised by FREEMAN concerned access and availability of
the system.  She noted the occasional existence of a gap in communication
between school librarians and teachers.  Often AM sits in a school
library and the librarian is the person responsible for monitoring the
system.  Teachers do not always take into their world new library
resources about which the librarian is excited.  Indeed, at the sites
where AM had been used most effectively within a library, the librarian
was required to go to specific teachers and instruct them in its use.  As
a result, several AM sites will have inservice sessions over a summer,
in the hope that perhaps, with a more individualized link, teachers will
be more likely to use the resource.

A related issue in the school context concerned the number of
workstations available at any one location.  Centralization of equipment
at the district level, with teachers invited to download things and walk
away with them, proved unsuccessful because the hours these offices were
open were also school hours.

Another issue was hardware.  As VECCIA observed, a range of sites exists,
some technologically advanced and others essentially acquiring their
first computer for the primary purpose of using it in conjunction with
AMs testing.  Users at technologically sophisticated sites want even
more sophisticated hardware, so that they can perform even more
sophisticated tasks with the materials in AM.  But once they acquire a
newer piece of hardware, they must learn how to use that also at an
unsophisticated site it takes an extremely long time simply to become
accustomed to the computer, not to mention the program offered with the
computer.  All of these small issues raise one large question, namely,
are systems like AM truly rewarding in a school environment, or do they
simply act as innovative toys that do little more than spark interest?

FREEMAN contended that the evaluation project has revealed several strengths
that were gained through the use of archival resources in schools, including:

      Psychic rewards from using AM as a vast, rich database, with
     teachers assigning various projects to studentsoral presentations,
     written reports, a documentary, a turnofthecentury newspaper
     projects that start with the materials in AM but are completed using
     other resources AM thus is used as a research tool in conjunction
     with other electronic resources, as well as with books and items in
     the library where the system is set up.

      Students are acquiring computer literacy in a humanities context.

      This sort of system is overcoming the isolation between disciplines
     that often exists in schools.  For example, many English teachers are
     requiring their students to write papers on historical topics
     represented in AM.  Numerous teachers have reported that their
     students are learning critical thinking skills using the system.

      On a broader level, AM is introducing primary materials, not only
     to students but also to teachers, in an environment where often
     simply none existan exciting thing for the students because it
     helps them learn to conduct research, to interpret, and to draw
     their own conclusions.  In learning to conduct research and what it
     means, students are motivated to seek knowledge.  That relates to
     another positive outcomea high level of personal involvement of
     students with the materials in this system and greater motivation to
     conduct their own research and draw their own conclusions.

      Perhaps the most ironic strength of these kinds of archival
     electronic resources is that many of the teachers AM interviewed
     were desperate, it is no exaggeration to say, not only for primary
     materials but for unstructured primary materials.  These would, they
     thought, foster personally motivated research, exploration, and
     excitement in their students.  Indeed, these materials have done
     just that.  Ironically, however, this lack of structure produces
     some of the confusion to which the newness of these kinds of
     resources may also contribute.  The key to effective use of archival
     products in a school environment is a clear, effective introduction
     to the system and to what it contains.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Nothing known, quantitatively, about the number of
humanities scholars who must see the original versus those who would
settle for an edited transcript, or about the ways in which humanities
scholars are using information technology  Firm conclusions concerning
the manner and extent of the use of supporting materials in print
provided by AM to await completion of evaluative study  A listeners
reflections on additional applications of electronic texts  Role of
electronic resources in teaching elementary research skills to students 


During the discussion that followed the presentations by MICHELSON,
VECCIA, and FREEMAN, additional points emerged.

LESK asked if MICHELSON could give any quantitative estimate of the
number of humanities scholars who must see or want to see the original,
or the best possible version of the material, versus those who typically
would settle for an edited transcript.  While unable to provide a figure,
she offered her impressions as an archivist who has done some reference
work and has discussed this issue with other archivists who perform
reference, that those who use archives and those who use primary sources
for what would be considered very highlevel scholarly research, as
opposed to, say, undergraduate papers, were few in number, especially
given the public interest in using primary sources to conduct
genealogical or avocational research and the kind of professional
research done by people in private industry or the federal government.
More important in MICHELSONs view was that, quantitatively, nothing is
known about the ways in which, for example, humanities scholars are using
information technology.  No studies exist to offer guidance in creating
strategies.  The most recent study was conducted in 1985 by the American
Council of Learned Societies ACLS, and what it showed was that 50
percent of humanities scholars at that time were using computers.  That
constitutes the extent of our knowledge.

Concerning AMs strategy for orienting people toward the scope of
electronic resources, FREEMAN could offer no hard conclusions at this
point, because she and her colleagues were still waiting to see,
particularly in the schools, what has been made of their efforts.  Within
the system, however, AM has provided what are called electronic exhibits
such as introductions to time periods and materialsand these are
intended to offer a student user a sense of what a broadside is  and what
it might tell her or him.  But FREEMAN conceded that the project staff
would have to talk with students next year, after teachers have had a
summer to use the materials, and attempt to discover what the students
were learning from the materials.  In addition, FREEMAN described
supporting materials in print provided by AM at the request of local
teachers during a meeting held at LC.  These included time lines,
bibliographies, and other materials that could be reproduced on a
photocopier in a classroom.  Teachers could walk away with and use these,
and in this way gain a better understanding of the contents.  But again,
reaching firm conclusions concerning the manner and extent of their use
would have to wait until next year.

As to the changes she saw occurring at the National Archives and Records
Administration NARA as a result of the increasing emphasis on
technology in scholarly research, MICHELSON stated that NARA at this
point was absorbing the report by her and Jeff Rothenberg addressing
strategies for the archival profession in general, although not for the
National Archives specifically.  NARA is just beginning to establish its
role and what it can do.  In terms of changes and initiatives that NARA
can take, no clear response could be given at this time.

GREENFIELD remarked two trends mentioned in the session.  Reflecting on
DALYs opening comments on how he could have used a Latin collection of
text in an electronic form, he said that at first he thought most scholars
would be unwilling to do that.  But as he thought of that in terms of the
original meaning of researchthat is, having already mastered these texts,
researching them for critical and comparative purposesfor the first time,
the electronic format made a lot of sense.  GREENFIELD could envision
growing numbers of scholars learning the new technologies for that very
aspect of their scholarship and for conveniences sake.

Listening to VECCIA and FREEMAN, GREENFIELD thought of an additional
application of electronic texts.  He realized that AM could be used as a
guide to lead someone to original sources.  Students cannot be expected
to have mastered these sources, things they have never known about
before.  Thus, AM is leading them, in theory, to a vast body of
information and giving them a superficial overview of it, enabling them
to select parts of it.  GREENFIELD asked if any evidence exists that this
resource will indeed teach the new user, the K12 students, how to do
research.  Scholars already know how to do research and are applying
these new tools.  But he wondered why students would go beyond picking
out things that were most exciting to them.

FREEMAN conceded the correctness of GREENFIELDs observation as applied
to a school environment.  The risk is that a student would sit down at a
system, play with it, find some things of interest, and then walk away.
But in the relatively controlled situation of a school library, much will
depend on the instructions a teacher or a librarian gives a student.  She
viewed the situation not as one of finetuning research skills but of
involving students at a personal level in understanding and researching
things.  Given the guidance one can receive at school, it then becomes
possible to teach elementary research skills to students, which in fact
one particular librarian said she was teaching her fifth graders.
FREEMAN concluded that introducing the idea of following ones own path
of inquiry, which is essentially what research entails, involves more
than teaching specific skills.  To these comments VECCIA added the
observation that the individual teacher and the use of a creative
resource, rather than AM itself, seemed to make the key difference.
Some schools and some teachers are making excellent use of the nature
of critical thinking and teaching skills, she said.

Concurring with these remarks, DALY closed the session with the thought that
the more that producers produced for teachers and for scholars to use with
their students, the more successful their electronic products would prove.

                                 

SESSION II.  SHOW AND TELL

Jacqueline HESS, director, National Demonstration Laboratory, served as
moderator of the "showandtell" session.  She noted that a
questionandanswer period would follow each presentation.


MYLONAS  Overview and content of Perseus  Perseus primary materials
exist in a systemindependent, archival form  A concession  Textual
aspects of Perseus  Tools to use with the Greek text  Prepared indices
and fulltext searches in Perseus  EnglishGreek word search leads to
close study of words and concepts  Navigating Perseus by tracing down
indices  Using the iconography to perform research 


Elli MYLONAS, managing editor, Perseus Project, Harvard University, first
gave an overview of Perseus, a large, collaborative effort based at
Harvard University but with contributors and collaborators located at
numerous universities and colleges in the United States e.g., Bowdoin,
Maryland, Pomona, Chicago, Virginia.  Funded primarily by the
AnnenbergCPB Project, with additional funding from Apple, Harvard, and
the Packard Humanities Institute, among others, Perseus is a multimedia,
hypertextual database for teaching and research on classical Greek
civilization, which was released in February 1992 in version 1.0 and
distributed by Yale University Press.

Consisting entirely of primary materials, Perseus includes ancient Greek
texts and translations of those texts catalog entriesthat is, museum
catalog entries, not library catalog entrieson vases, sites, coins,
sculpture, and archaeological objects maps and a dictionary, among
other sources.  The number of objects and the objects for which catalog
entries exist are accompanied by thousands of color images, which
constitute a major feature of the database.  Perseus contains
approximately 30 megabytes of text, an amount that will double in
subsequent versions.  In addition to these primary materials, the Perseus
Project has been building tools for using them, making access and
navigation easier, the goal being to build part of the electronic
environment discussed earlier in the morning in which students or
scholars can work with their sources.

The demonstration of Perseus will show only a fraction of the real work
that has gone into it, because the project had to face the dilemma of
what to enter when putting something into machinereadable form:  should
one aim for very high quality or make concessions in order to get the
material in?  Since Perseus decided to opt for very high quality, all of
its primary materials exist in a systemindependentinsofar as it is
possible to be systemindependentarchival form.  Deciding what that
archival form would be and attaining it required much work and thought.
For example, all the texts are marked up in SGML, which will be made
compatible with the guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative TEI when
they are issued.

Drawings are postscript files, not meeting international standards, but
at least designed to go across platforms.  Images, or rather the real
archival forms, consist of the best available slides, which are being
digitized.  Much of the catalog material exists in database forma form
that the average user could use, manipulate, and display on a personal
computer, but only at great cost.  Thus, this is where the concession
comes in:  All of this rich, wellmarkedup information is stripped of
much of its content the images are converted into bitmaps and the text
into small formatted chunks.  All this information can then be imported
into HyperCard and run on a midrange Macintosh, which is what Perseus
users have.  This fact has made it possible for Perseus to attain wide
use fairly rapidly.  Without those archival forms the HyperCard version
being demonstrated could not be made easily, and the project could not
have the potential to move to other forms and machines and software as
they appear, none of which information is in Perseus on the CD.

Of the numerous multimedia aspects of Perseus, MYLONAS focused on the
textual.  Part of what makes Perseus such a pleasure to use, MYLONAS
said, is this effort at seamless integration and the ability to move
around both visual and textual material.  Perseus also made the decision
not to attempt to interpret its material any more than one interprets by
selecting.  But, MYLONAS emphasized, Perseus is not courseware:  No
syllabus exists.  There is no effort to define how one teaches a topic
using Perseus, although the project may eventually collect papers by
people who have used it to teach.  Rather, Perseus aims to provide
primary material in a kind of electronic library, an electronic sandbox,
so to say, in which students and scholars who are working on this
material can explore by themselves.  With that, MYLONAS demonstrated
Perseus, beginning with the Perseus gateway, the first thing one sees
upon opening Perseusan effort in part to solve the contextualizing
problemwhich tells the user what the system contains.

MYLONAS demonstrated only a very small portion, beginning with primary
texts and running off the CDROM.  Having selected Aeschylus Prometheus
Bound, which was viewable in Greek and English pretty much in the same
segments together, MYLONAS demonstrated tools to use with the Greek text,
something not possible with a book:  looking up the dictionary entry form
of an unfamiliar word in Greek after subjecting it to Perseus
morphological analysis for all the texts.  After finding out about a
word, a user may then decide to see if it is used anywhere else in Greek.
Because vast amounts of indexing support all of the primary material, one
can find out where else all forms of a particular Greek word appear
often not a trivial matter because Greek is highly inflected.  Further,
since the story of Prometheus has to do with the origins of sacrifice, a
user may wish to study and explore sacrifice in Greek literature by
typing sacrifice into a small window, a user goes to the EnglishGreek
word listsomething one cannot do without the computer Perseus has
indexed the definitions of its dictionarythe string sacrifice appears
in the definitions of these sixtyfive words.  One may then find out
where any of those words is used in the works of a particular author.
The English definitions are not lemmatized.

All of the indices driving this kind of usage were originally devised for
speed, MYLONAS observed in other words, all that kind of information
all forms of all words, where they exist, the dictionary form they belong
towere collected into databases, which will expedite searching.  Then
it was discovered that one can do things searching in these databases
that could not be done searching in the full texts.  Thus, although there
are fulltext searches in Perseus, much of the work is done behind the
scenes, using prepared indices.  Re the indexing that is done behind the
scenes, MYLONAS pointed out that without the SGML forms of the text, it
could not be done effectively.  Much of this indexing is based on the
structures that are made explicit by the SGML tagging.

It was found that one of the things many of Perseus nonGreekreading
users do is start from the dictionary and then move into the close study
of words and concepts via this kind of EnglishGreek word search, by which
means they might select a concept.  This exercise has been assigned to
students in core courses at Harvardto study a concept by looking for the
English word in the dictionary, finding the Greek words, and then finding
the words in the Greek but, of course, reading across in the English.
That tells them a great deal about what a translation means as well.

Should one also wish to see images that have to do with sacrifice, that
person would go to the object key word search, which allows one to
perform a similar kind of index retrieval on the database of
archaeological objects.  Without words, pictures are useless Perseus has
not reached the point where it can do much with images that are not
cataloged.  Thus, although it is possible in Perseus with text and images
to navigate by knowing where one wants to end upfor example, a
redfigure vase from the Boston Museum of Fine Artsone can perform this
kind of navigation very easily by tracing down indices.  MYLONAS
illustrated several generic scenes of sacrifice on vases.  The features
demonstrated derived from Perseus 1.0 version 2.0 will implement even
better means of retrieval.

MYLONAS closed by looking at one of the pictures and noting again that
one can do a great deal of research using the iconography as well as the
texts.  For instance, students in a core course at Harvard this year were
highly interested in Greek concepts of foreigners and representations of
nonGreeks.  So they performed a great deal of research, both with texts
e.g., Herodotus and with iconography on vases and coins, on how the
Greeks portrayed nonGreeks.  At the same time, art historians who study
iconography were also interested, and were able to use this material.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Indexing and searchability of all English words in Perseus 
Several features of Perseus 1.0  Several levels of customization
possible  Perseus used for general education  Perseus effects on
education  Contextual information in Perseus  Main challenge and
emphasis of Perseus 


Several points emerged in the discussion that followed MYLONASs presentation.

Although MYLONAS had not demonstrated Perseus ability to crosssearch
documents, she confirmed that all English words in Perseus are indexed
and can be searched.  So, for example, sacrifice could have been searched
in all texts, the historical essay, and all the catalogue entries with
their descriptionsin short, in all of Perseus.

Boolean logic is not in Perseus 1.0 but will be added to the next
version, although an effort is being made not to restrict Perseus to a
database in which one just performs searching, Boolean or otherwise.  It
is possible to move laterally through the documents by selecting a word
one is interested in and selecting an area of information one is
interested in and trying to look that word up in that area.

Since Perseus was developed in HyperCard, several levels of customization
are possible.  Simple authoring tools exist that allow one to create
annotated paths through the information, which are useful for notetaking
and for guided tours for teaching purposes and for expository writing.
With a little more ingenuity it is possible to begin to add or substitute
material in Perseus.

Perseus has not been used so much for classics education as for general
education, where it seemed to have an impact on the students in the core
course at Harvard a general required course that students must take in
certain areas.  Students were able to use primary material much more.

The Perseus Project has an evaluation team at the University of Maryland
that has been documenting Perseus effects on education.  Perseus is very
popular, and anecdotal evidence indicates that it is having an effect at
places other than Harvard, for example, test sites at Ball State
University, Drury College, and numerous small places where opportunities
to use vast amounts of primary data may not exist.  One documented effect
is that archaeological, anthropological, and philological research is
being done by the same person instead of by three different people.

The contextual information in Perseus includes an overview essay, a
fairly linear historical essay on the fifth century B.C. that provides
links into the primary material e.g., Herodotus, Thucydides, and
Plutarch, via small gray underscoring on the screen of linked
passages.  These are handmade links into other material.

To different extents, most of the production work was done at Harvard,
where the people and the equipment are located.  Much of the
collaborative activity involved data collection and structuring, because
the main challenge and the emphasis of Perseus is the gathering of
primary material, that is, building a useful environment for studying
classical Greece, collecting data, and making it useful.
Systemsbuilding is definitely not the main concern.  Thus, much of the
work has involved writing essays, collecting information, rewriting it,
and tagging it.  That can be done off site.  The creative link for the
overview essay as well as for both systems and data was collaborative,
and was forged via Email and paper mail with professors at Pomona and
Bowdoin.

                                 


CALALUCA  PLDs principal focus and contribution to scholarship 
Various questions preparatory to beginning the project  Basis for
project  Basic rule in converting PLD  Concerning the images in PLD 
Running PLD under a variety of retrieval softwares  Encoding the
database a hardfought issue  Various features demonstrated  Importance
of user documentation  Limitations of the CDROM version 


Eric CALALUCA, vice president, ChadwyckHealey, Inc., demonstrated a
software interpretation of the Patrologia Latina Database PLD.  PLDs
principal focus from the beginning of the project about threeandahalf
years ago was on converting Mignes Latin series, and in the end,
CALALUCA suggested, conversion of the text will be the major contribution
to scholarship.  CALALUCA stressed that, as possibly the only private
publishing organization at the Workshop, ChadwyckHealey had sought no
federal funds or national foundation support before embarking upon the
project, but instead had relied upon a great deal of homework and
marketing to accomplish the task of conversion.

Ever since the possibilities of computersearching have emerged, scholars
in the field of late ancient and early medieval studies philosophers,
theologians, classicists, and those studying the history of natural law
and the history of the legal development of Western civilization have
been longing for a fully searchable version of Western literature, for
example, all the texts of Augustine and Bernard of Clairvaux and
Boethius, not to mention all the secondary and tertiary authors.

Various questions arose, CALALUCA said.  Should one convert Migne?
Should the database be encoded?  Is it necessary to do that?  How should
it be delivered?  What about CDROM?  Since this is a transitional
medium, why even bother to create software to run on a CDROM?  Since
everybody knows people will be networking information, why go to the
troublewhich is far greater with CDROM than with the production of
magnetic data?  Finally, how does one make the data available?  Can many
of the hurdles to using electronic information that some publishers have
imposed upon databases be eliminated?

The PLD project was based on the principle that computersearching of
texts is most effective when it is done with a large database.  Because
PLD represented a collection that serves so many disciplines across so
many periods, it was irresistible.

The basic rule in converting PLD was to do no harm, to avoid the sins of
intrusion in such a database:  no introduction of newer editions, no
onthespot changes, no eradicating of all possible falsehoods from an
edition.  Thus, PLD is not the final act in electronic publishing for
this discipline, but simply the beginning.  The conversion of PLD has
evoked numerous unanticipated questions:  How will information be used?
What about networking?  Can the rights of a database be protected?
Should one protect the rights of a database?  How can it be made
available?

Those converting PLD also tried to avoid the sins of omission, that is,
excluding portions of the collections or whole sections.  What about the
images?  PLD is full of images, some are extremely pious
nineteenthcentury representations of the Fathers, while others contain
highly interesting elements.  The goal was to cover all the text of Migne
including notes, in Greek and in Hebrew, the latter of which, in
particular, causes problems in creating a search structure, all the
indices, and even the images, which are being scanned in separately
searchable files.

Several North American institutions that have placed acquisition requests
for the PLD database have requested it in magnetic form without software,
which means they are already running it without software, without
anything demonstrated at the Workshop.

What cannot practically be done is go back and reconvert and reencode
data, a timeconsuming and extremely costly enterprise.  CALALUCA sees
PLD as a database that can, and should, be run under a variety of
retrieval softwares.  This will permit the widest possible searches.
Consequently, the need to produce a CDROM of PLD, as well as to develop
software that could handle some 1.3 gigabyte of heavily encoded text,
developed out of conversations with collection development and reference
librarians who wanted software both compassionate enough for the
pedestrian but also capable of incorporating the most detailed
lexicographical studies that a user desires to conduct.  In the end, the
encoding and conversion of the data will prove the most enduring
testament to the value of the project.

The encoding of the database was also a hardfought issue:  Did the
database need to be encoded? Were there normative structures for encoding
humanist texts?  Should it be SGML?  What about the TEIwill it last,
will it prove useful?  CALALUCA expressed some minor doubts as to whether
a data bank can be fully TEIconformant.  Every effort can be made, but
in the end to be TEIconformant means to accept the need to make some
firm encoding decisions that can, indeed, be disputed.  The TEI points
the publisher in a proper direction but does not presume to make all the
decisions for him or her.  Essentially, the goal of encoding was to
eliminate, as much as possible, the hindrances to informationnetworking,
so that if an institution acquires a database, everybody associated with
the institution can have access to it.

CALALUCA demonstrated a portion of Volume 160, because it had the most
anomalies in it.  The software was created by Electronic Book
Technologies of Providence, RI, and is called Dynatext.  The software
works only with SGMLcoded data.

Viewing a table of contents on the screen, the audience saw how Dynatext
treats each element as a book and attempts to simplify movement through a
volume.  Familiarity with the Patrologia in print i.e., the text, its
source, and the editions will make the machinereadable versions highly
useful.  Software with a Windows application was sought for PLD,
CALALUCA said, because this was the main trend for scholarly use.

CALALUCA also demonstrated how a user can perform a variety of searches
and quickly move to any part of a volume the lookup screen provides
some basic, simple wordsearching.

CALALUCA argued that one of the major difficulties is not the software.
Rather, in creating a product that will be used by scholars representing
a broad spectrum of computer sophistication,  user documentation proves
to be the most important service one can provide.

CALALUCA next illustrated a truncated search under mysterium within ten
words of virtus and how one would be able to find its contents throughout
the entire database.  He said that the exciting thing about PLD is that
many of the applications in the retrieval software being written for it
will exceed the capabilities of the software employed now for the CDROM
version.  The CDROM faces genuine limitations, in terms of speed and
comprehensiveness, in the creation of a retrieval software to run it.
CALALUCA said he hoped that individual scholars will download the data,
if they wish, to their personal computers, and have ready access to
important texts on a constant basis, which they will be able to use in
their research and from which they might even be able to publish.

CALALUCA explained that the blue numbers represented Mignes column numbers,
which are the standard scholarly references.  Pulling up a note, he stated
that these texts were heavily edited and the image files would appear simply
as a note as well, so that one could quickly access an image.

                                 


FLEISCHHAUERERWAY  Several problems with which AM is still wrestling 
Various search and retrieval capabilities  Illustration of automatic
stemming and a truncated search  AMs attempt to find ways to connect
cataloging to the texts  AMs gravitation towards SGML  Striking a
balance between quantity and quality  How AM furnishes users recourse to
images  Conducting a search in a fulltext environment  Macintosh and
IBM prototypes of AM  Multimedia aspects of AM 


A demonstration of American Memory by its coordinator, Carl FLEISCHHAUER,
and Ricky ERWAY, associate coordinator, Library of Congress, concluded
the morning session.  Beginning with a collection of broadsides from the
Continental Congress and the Constitutional Convention, the only text
collection in a presentable form at the time of the Workshop, FLEISCHHAUER
highlighted several of the problems with which AM is still wrestling.
In its final form, the disk will contain two collections, not only the
broadsides but also the full text with illustrations of a set of
approximately 300 AfricanAmerican pamphlets from the period 1870 to 1910.

As FREEMAN had explained earlier, AM has attempted to use a small amount
of interpretation to introduce collections.  In the present case, the
contractor, a company named Quick Source, in Silver Spring, MD., used
software called Toolbook and put together a modestly interactive
introduction to the collection.  Like the two preceding speakers,
FLEISCHHAUER argued that the real asset was the underlying collection.

FLEISCHHAUER proceeded to describe various search and retrieval
capabilities while ERWAY worked the computer.  In this particular package
the "go to" pulldown allowed the user in effect to jump out of Toolbook,
where the interactive program was located, and enter the thirdparty
software used by AM for this text collection, which is called Personal
Librarian.  This was the Windows version of Personal Librarian, a
software application put together by a company in Rockville, Md.

Since the broadsides came from the Revolutionary War period, a search was
conducted using the words British or war, with the default operator reset
as or.  FLEISCHHAUER demonstrated both automatic stemming which finds
other forms of the same root and a truncated search.  One of Personal
Librarians strongest features, the relevance ranking, was represented by
a chart that indicated how often words being sought appeared in
documents, with the one receiving the most "hits" obtaining the highest
score.  The "hit list" that is supplied takes the relevance ranking into
account, making the first hit, in effect, the one the software has
selected as the most relevant example.

While in the text of one of the broadside documents, FLEISCHHAUER
remarked AMs attempt to find ways to connect cataloging to the texts,
which it does in different ways in different manifestations.  In the case
shown, the cataloging was pasted on:  AM took MARC records that were
written as online records right into one of the Librarys mainframe
retrieval programs, pulled them out, and handed them off to the contractor,
who massaged them somewhat to display them in the manner shown.  One of
AMs questions is, Does the cataloguing normally performed in the mainframe
work in this context, or had AM ought to think through adjustments?

FLEISCHHAUER made the additional point that, as far as the text goes, AM
has gravitated towards SGML he pointed to the boldface in the upper part
of the screen.  Although extremely limited in its ability to translate
or interpret SGML, Personal Librarian will furnish both bold and italics
on screen a fairly easy thing to do, but it is one of the ways in which
SGML is useful.

Striking a balance between quantity and quality has been a major concern
of AM, with accuracy being one of the places where project staff have
felt that less than 100percent accuracy was not unacceptable.
FLEISCHHAUER cited the example of the standard of the rekeying industry,
namely 99.95 percent as one service bureau informed him, to go from
99.95 to 100 percent would double the cost.

FLEISCHHAUER next demonstrated how AM furnishes users recourse to images,
and at the same time recalled LESKs pointed question concerning the
number of people who would look at those images and the number who would
work only with the text.  If the implication of LESKs question was
sound, FLEISCHHAUER said, it raised the stakes for text accuracy and
reduced the value of the strategy for images.

Contending that preservation is always a bugaboo, FLEISCHHAUER
demonstrated several images derived from a scan of a preservation
microfilm that AM had made.  He awarded a grade of C at best, perhaps a
C minus or a C plus, for how well it worked out.  Indeed, the matter of
learning if other people had better ideas about scanning in general, and,
in particular, scanning from microfilm, was one of the factors that drove
AM to attempt to think through the agenda for the Workshop.  Skew, for
example, was one of the issues that AM in its ignorance had not reckoned
would prove so difficult.

Further, the handling of images of the sort shown, in a desktop computer
environment, involved a considerable amount of zooming and scrolling.
Ultimately, AM staff feel that perhaps the paper copy that is printed out
might be the most useful one, but they remain uncertain as to how much
onscreen reading users will do.

Returning to the text, FLEISCHHAUER asked viewers to imagine a person who
might be conducting a search in a fulltext environment.  With this
scenario, he proceeded to illustrate other features of Personal Librarian
that he considered helpful for example, it provides the ability to
notice words as one reads.  Clicking the "include" button on the bottom
of the search window pops the words that have been highlighted into the
search.  Thus, a user can refine the search as he or she reads,
reexecuting the search and continuing to find things in the quest for
materials.  This software not only contains relevance ranking, Boolean
operators, and truncation, it also permits one to perform word algebra,
so to say, where one puts two or three words in parentheses and links
them with one Boolean operator and then a couple of words in another set
of parentheses and asks for things within so many words of others.

Until they became acquainted recently with some of the work being done in
classics, the AM staff had not realized that a large number of the
projects that involve electronic texts were being done by people with a
profound interest in language and linguistics.  Their search strategies
and thinking are oriented to those fields, as is shown in particular by
the Perseus example.  As amateur historians, the AM staff were thinking
more of searching for concepts and ideas than for particular words.
Obviously, FLEISCHHAUER conceded, searching for concepts and ideas and
searching for words may be two rather closely related things.

While displaying several images, FLEISCHHAUER observed that the Macintosh
prototype built by AM contains a greater diversity of formats.  Echoing a
previous speaker, he said that it was easier to stitch things together in
the Macintosh, though it tended to be a little more anemic in search and
retrieval.  AM, therefore, increasingly has been investigating
sophisticated retrieval engines in the IBM format.

FLEISCHHAUER demonstrated several additional examples of the prototype
interfaces:  One was AMs metaphor for the network future, in which a
kind of readingroom graphic suggests how one would be able to go around
to different materials.  AM contains a large number of photographs in
analog video form worked up from a videodisc, which enable users to make
copies to print or incorporate in digital documents.  A framegrabber is
built into the system, making it possible to bring an image into a window
and digitize or print it out.

FLEISCHHAUER next demonstrated sound recording, which included texts.
Recycled from a previous project, the collection included sixty 78rpm
phonograph records of political speeches that were made during and
immediately after World War I.  These constituted approximately three
hours of audio, as AM has digitized it, which occupy 150 megabytes on a
CD.  Thus, they are considerably compressed.  From the catalogue card,
FLEISCHHAUER proceeded to a transcript of a speech with the audio
available and with highlighted text following it as it played.
A photograph has been added and a transcription made.

Considerable value has been added beyond what the Library of Congress
normally would do in cataloguing a sound recording, which raises several
questions for AM concerning where to draw lines about how much value it can
afford to add and at what point, perhaps, this becomes more than AM could
reasonably do or reasonably wish to do.  FLEISCHHAUER also demonstrated
a motion picture.  As FREEMAN had reported earlier, the motion picture
materials have proved the most popular, not surprisingly.  This says more
about the medium, he thought, than about AMs presentation of it.

Because AMs goal was to bring together things that could be used by
historians or by people who were curious about history,
turnofthecentury footage seemed to represent the most appropriate
collections from the Library of Congress in motion pictures. These were
the very first films made by Thomas Edisons company and some others at
that time.  The particular example illustrated was a Biograph film,
brought in with a framegrabber into a window.  A single videodisc
contains about fifty titles and pieces of film from that period, all of
New York City.  Taken together, AM believes, they provide an interesting
documentary resource.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Using the framegrabber in AM  Volume of material processed
and to be processed  Purpose of AM within LC  Cataloguing and the
nature of AMs material  SGML coding and the question of quality versus
quantity 


During the questionandanswer period that followed FLEISCHHAUERs
presentation, several clarifications were made.

AM is bringing in motion pictures from a videodisc.  The framegrabber
devices create a window on a computer screen, which permits users to
digitize a single frame of the movie or one of the photographs.  It
produces a crude, roughandready image that high school students can
incorporate into papers, and that has worked very nicely in this way.

Commenting on FLEISCHHAUERs assertion that AM was looking more at
searching ideas than words, MYLONAS argued that without words an idea
does not exist.  FLEISCHHAUER conceded that he ought to have articulated
his point more clearly.  MYLONAS stated that they were in fact both
talking about the same thing.  By searching for words and by forcing
people to focus on the word, the Perseus Project felt that they would get
them to the idea.  The way one reviews results is tailored more to one
kind of user than another.

Concerning the total volume of material that has been processed in this
way, AM at this point has in retrievable form seven or eight collections,
all of them photographic.  In the Macintosh environment, for example,
there probably are 35,00040,000 photographs.  The sound recordings
number sixty items.  The broadsides number about 300 items.  There are
500 political cartoons in the form of drawings.  The motion pictures, as
individual items, number sixty to seventy.

AM also has a manuscript collection, the life history portion of one of
the federal project series, which will contain 2,900 individual
documents, all firstperson narratives.  AM has in process about 350
AfricanAmerican pamphlets, or about 12,000 printed pages for the period
18701910.  Also in the works are some 4,000 panoramic photographs.  AM
has recycled a fair amount of the work done by LCs Prints and
Photographs Division during the Librarys optical disk pilot project in
the 1980s.  For example, a special division of LC has tooled up and
thought through all the ramifications of electronic presentation of
photographs.  Indeed, they are wheeling them out in great barrel loads.
The purpose of AM within the Library, it is hoped, is to catalyze several
of the other special collection divisions which have no particular
experience with, in some cases, mixed feelings about, an activity such as
AM.  Moreover, in many cases the divisions may be characterized as not
only lacking experience in "electronifying" things but also in automated
cataloguing.  MARC cataloguing as practiced in the United States is
heavily weighted toward the description of monograph and serial
materials, but is much thinner when one enters the world of manuscripts
and things that are held in the Librarys music collection and other
units.  In response to a comment by LESK, that AMs material is very
heavily photographic, and is so primarily because individual records have
been made for each photograph, FLEISCHHAUER observed that an itemlevel
catalog record exists, for example, for each photograph in the Detroit
Publishing collection of 25,000 pictures.  In the case of the Federal
Writers Project, for which nearly 3,000 documents exist, representing
information from twentysix different states, AM with the assistance of
Karen STUART of the Manuscript Division will attempt to find some way not
only to have a collectionlevel record but perhaps a MARC record for each
state, which will then serve as an umbrella for the 100200 documents
that come under it.  But that drama remains to be enacted.  The AM staff
is conservative and clings to cataloguing, though of course visitors tout
artificial intelligence and neural networks in a manner that suggests that
perhaps one need not have cataloguing or that much of it could be put aside.

The matter of SGML coding, FLEISCHHAUER conceded, returned the discussion
to the earlier treated question of quality versus quantity in the Library
of Congress.  Of course, text conversion can be done with 100percent
accuracy, but it means that when ones holdings are as vast as LCs only
a tiny amount will be exposed, whereas permitting lower levels of
accuracy can lead to exposing or sharing larger amounts, but with the
quality correspondingly impaired.

                                 


TWOHIG  A contrary experience concerning electronic options  Volume of
material in the Washington papers and a suggestion of David Packard 
Implications of Packards suggestion  Transcribing the documents for the
CDROM  Accuracy of transcriptions  The CDROM edition of the Founding
Fathers documents 


Finding encouragement in a comment of MICHELSONs from the morning
sessionthat numerous people in the humanities were choosing electronic
options to do their workDorothy TWOHIG, editor, The Papers of George
Washington, opened her illustrated talk by noting that her experience
with literary scholars and numerous people in editing was contrary to
MICHELSONs.  TWOHIG emphasized literary scholars complete ignorance of
the technological options available to them or their reluctance or, in
some cases, their downright hostility toward these options.

After providing an overview of the five Founding Fathers projects
Jefferson at Princeton, Franklin at Yale, John Adams at the
Massachusetts Historical Society, and Madison down the hall from her at
the University of Virginia, TWOHIG observed that the Washington papers,
like all of the projects, include both sides of the Washington
correspondence and deal with some 135,000 documents to be published with
extensive annotation in eighty to eightyfive volumes, a project that
will not be completed until well into the next century.  Thus, it was
with considerable enthusiasm several years ago that the Washington Papers
Project WPP greeted David Packards suggestion that the papers of the
Founding Fathers could be published easily and inexpensively, and to the
great benefit of American scholarship, via CDROM.

In pragmatic terms, funding from the Packard Foundation would expedite
the transcription of thousands of documents waiting to be put on disk in
the WPP offices.  Further, since the costs of collecting, editing, and
converting the Founding Fathers documents into letterpress editions were
running into the millions of dollars, and the considerable staffs
involved in all of these projects were devoting their careers to
producing the work, the Packard Foundations suggestion had a
revolutionary aspect:  Transcriptions of the entire corpus of the
Founding Fathers papers would be available on CDROM to public and
college libraries, even high schools, at a fraction of the cost
100150 for the annual license feeto produce a limited university
press run of 1,000 of each volume of the published papers at 45150 per
printed volume.  Given the current budget crunch in educational systems
and the corresponding constraints on librarians in smaller institutions
who wish to add these volumes to their collections, producing the
documents on CDROM would likely open a greatly expanded audience for the
papers.  TWOHIG stressed, however, that development of the Founding
Fathers CDROM is still in its infancy.  Serious software problems remain
to be resolved before the material can be put into readable form.

Funding from the Packard Foundation resulted in a major push to
transcribe the 75,000 or so documents of the Washington papers remaining
to be transcribed onto computer disks.  Slides illustrated several of the
problems encountered, for example, the present inability of CDROM to
indicate the crossouts deleted material in eighteenth century
documents.  TWOHIG next described documents from various periods in the
eighteenth century that have been transcribed in chronological order and
delivered to the Packard offices in California, where they are converted
to the CDROM, a process that is expected to consume five years to
complete that is, reckoning from David Packards suggestion made several
years ago, until about July 1994.  TWOHIG found an encouraging
indication of the projects benefits in the ongoing use made by scholars
of the search functions of the CDROM, particularly in reducing the time
spent in manually turning the pages of the Washington papers.

TWOHIG next furnished details concerning the accuracy of transcriptions.
For instance, the insertion of thousands of documents on the CDROM
currently does not permit each document to be verified against the
original manuscript several times as in the case of documents that appear
in the published edition.  However, the transcriptions receive a cursory
check for obvious typos, the misspellings of proper names, and other
errors from the WPP CDROM editor.  Eventually, all documents that appear
in the electronic version will be checked by project editors.  Although
this process has met with opposition from some of the editors on the
grounds that imperfect work may leave their offices, the advantages in
making this material available as a research tool outweigh  fears about the
misspelling of proper names and other relatively minor editorial matters.

Completion of all five Founding Fathers projects i.e., retrievability
and searchability of all of the documents by proper names, alternate
spellings, or varieties of subjects will provide one of the richest
sources of this size for the history of the United States in the latter
part of the eighteenth century.  Further, publication on CDROM will
allow editors to include even minutiae, such as laundry lists, not
included in the printed volumes.

It seems possible that the extensive annotation provided in the printed
volumes eventually will be added to the CDROM edition, pending
negotiations with the publishers of the papers.  At the moment, the
Founding Fathers CDROM is accessible only on the IBYCUS, a computer
developed out of the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae project and designed for
the use of classical scholars.  There are perhaps 400 IBYCUS computers in
the country, most of which are in university classics departments.
Ultimately, it is anticipated that the CDROM edition of the Founding
Fathers documents will run on any IBMcompatible or Macintosh computer
with a CDROM drive.  Numerous changes in the software will also occur
before the project is completed.  Editors note: an IBYCUS was
unavailable to demonstrate the CDROM.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Several additional features of WPP clarified 


Discussion following TWOHIGs presentation served to clarify several
additional features, including 1 that the projects primary
intellectual product consists in the electronic transcription of the
material 2 that the text transmitted to the CDROM people is not
marked up 3 that cataloging and subjectindexing of the material
remain to be worked out though at this point material can be retrieved
by name and 4 that because all the searching is done in the hardware,
the IBYCUS is designed to read a CDROM which contains only sequential
text files.  Technically, it then becomes very easy to read the material
off and put it on another device.

                                 


LEBRON  Overview of the history of the joint project between AAAS and
OCLC  Several practices the online environment shares with traditional
publishing on hard copy  Several technical and behavioral barriers to
electronic publishing  How AAAS and OCLC arrived at the subject of
clinical trials  Advantages of the electronic format and other features
of OJCCT  An illustrated tour of the journal 


Maria LEBRON, managing editor, The Online Journal of Current Clinical
Trials OJCCT, presented an illustrated overview of the history of the
joint project between the American Association for the Advancement of
Science AAAS and the Online Computer Library Center, Inc. OCLC.  The
joint venture between AAAS and OCLC owes its beginning to a
reorganization launched by the new chief executive officer at OCLC about
three years ago and combines the strengths of these two disparate
organizations.  In short, OJCCT represents the process of scholarly
publishing on line.

LEBRON next discussed several practices the online environment shares
with traditional publishing on hard copyfor example, peer review of
manuscriptsthat are highly important in the academic world.  LEBRON
noted in particular the implications of citation counts for tenure
committees and grants committees.  In the traditional hardcopy
environment, citation counts are readily demonstrable, whereas the
online environment represents an ethereal medium to most academics.

LEBRON remarked several technical and behavioral barriers to electronic
publishing, for instance, the problems in transmission created by special
characters or by complex graphics and halftones.  In addition, she noted
economic limitations such as the storage costs of maintaining back issues
and market or audience education.

Manuscripts cannot be uploaded to OJCCT, LEBRON explained, because it is
not a bulletin board or Email, forms of electronic transmission of
information that have created an ambience clouding peoples understanding
of what the journal is attempting to do.  OJCCT, which publishes
peerreviewed medical articles dealing with the subject of clinical
trials, includes text, tabular material, and graphics, although at this
time it can transmit only line illustrations.

Next, LEBRON described how AAAS and OCLC arrived at the subject of
clinical trials:  It is 1 a highly statistical discipline that 2 does
not require halftones but can satisfy the needs of its audience with line
illustrations and graphic material, and 3 there is a need for the speedy
dissemination of highquality research results.  Clinical trials are
research activities that involve the administration of a test treatment
to some experimental unit in order to test its usefulness before it is
made available to the general population.  LEBRON proceeded to give
additional information on OJCCT concerning its editorinchief, editorial
board, editorial content, and the types of articles it publishes
including peerreviewed research reports and reviews, as well as
features shared by other traditional hardcopy journals.

Among the advantages of the electronic format are faster dissemination of
information, including raw data, and the absence of space constraints
because pages do not exist.  This latter fact creates an interesting
situation when it comes to citations.  Nor are there any issues.  AAASs
capacity to download materials directly from the journal to a
subscribers printer, hard drive, or floppy disk helps ensure highly
accurate transcription.  Other features of OJCCT include onscreen alerts
that allow linkage of subsequently published documents to the original
documents online searching by subject, author, title, etc. indexing of
every single word that appears in an article viewing access to an
article by component abstract, full text, or graphs numbered
paragraphs to replace page counts publication in Science every thirty
days of indexing of all articles published in the journal
typesetquality screens and Hypertext links that enable subscribers to
bring up Medline abstracts directly without leaving the journal.

After detailing the two primary ways to gain access to the journal,
through the OCLC network and Compuserv if one desires graphics or through
the Internet if just an ASCII file is desired, LEBRON illustrated the
speedy editorial process and the coding of the document using SGML tags
after it has been accepted for publication.  She also gave an illustrated
tour of the journal, its searchandretrieval capabilities in particular,
but also including problems associated with scanning in illustrations,
and the importance of onscreen alerts to the medical profession re
retractions or corrections, or more frequently, editorials, letters to
the editors, or followup reports.  She closed by inviting the audience
to join AAAS on 1 July, when OJCCT was scheduled to go online.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Additional features of OJCCT 


In the lengthy discussion that followed LEBRONs presentation, these
points emerged:

      The SGML text can be tailored as users wish.

      All these articles have a fairly simple document definition.

      Documenttype definitions DTDs were developed and given to OJCCT
     for coding.

      No articles will be removed from the journal.  Because there are
     no back issues, there are no lost issues either.  Once a subscriber
     logs onto the journal he or she has access not only to the currently
     published materials, but retrospectively to everything that has been
     published in it.  Thus the table of contents grows bigger.  The date
     of publication serves to distinguish between currently published
     materials and older materials.

      The pricing system for the journal resembles that for most medical
     journals:  for 1992, 95 for a year, plus telecommunications charges
     there are no connect time charges    for 1993, 110 for the
     entire year for single users, though the journal can be put on a
     local area network LAN.  However, only one person can access the
     journal at a time.  Site licenses may come in the future.

      AAAS is working closely with colleagues at OCLC to display
     mathematical equations on screen.

      Without compromising any steps in the editorial process, the
     technology has reduced the time lag between when a manuscript is
     originally submitted and the time it is accepted the review process
     does not differ greatly from the standard sixtoeight weeks
     employed by many of the hardcopy journals.  The process still
     depends on people.

      As far as a preservation copy is concerned, articles will be
     maintained on the computer permanently and subscribers, as part of
     their subscription, will receive a microfichequality archival copy
     of everything published during that year in addition, reprints can
     be purchased in much the same way as in a hardcopy environment.
     Hard copies are prepared but are not the primary medium for the
     dissemination of the information.

      Because OJCCT is not yet on line, it is difficult to know how many
     people would simply browse through the journal on the screen as
     opposed to downloading the whole thing and printing it out a mix of
     both types of users likely will result.

                                 


PERSONIUS  Developments in technology over the past decade  The CLASS
Project  Advantages for technology and for the CLASS Project 
Developing a network application an underlying assumption of the project
 Details of the scanning process  Printondemand copies of books 
Future plans include development of a browsing tool 


Lynne PERSONIUS, assistant director, Cornell Information Technologies for
Scholarly Information Services, Cornell University, first commented on
the tremendous impact that developments in technology over the past ten
yearsnetworking, in particularhave had on the way information is
handled, and how, in her own case, these developments have counterbalanced
Cornells relative geographical isolation.  Other significant technologies
include scanners, which are much more sophisticated than they were ten years
ago mass storage and the dramatic savings that result from it in terms of
both space and money relative to twenty or thirty years ago new and
improved printing technologies, which have greatly affected the distribution
of information and, of course, digital technologies, whose applicability to
library preservation remains at issue.

Given that context, PERSONIUS described the College Library Access and
Storage System CLASS Project, a library preservation project,
primarily, and what has been accomplished.  Directly funded by the
Commission on Preservation and Access and by the Xerox Corporation, which
has provided a significant amount of hardware, the CLASS Project has been
working with a development team at Xerox to develop a software
application tailored to library preservation requirements.  Within
Cornell, participants in the project have been working jointly with both
library and information technologies.  The focus of the project has been
on reformatting and saving books that are in brittle condition.
PERSONIUS showed Workshop participants a brittle book, and described how
such books were the result of developments in papermaking around the
beginning of the Industrial Revolution.  The papermaking process was
changed so that a significant amount of acid was introduced into the
actual paper itself, which deteriorates as it sits on library shelves.

One of the advantages for technology and for the CLASS Project is that
the information in brittle books is mostly out of copyright and thus
offers an opportunity to work with material that requires library
preservation, and to create and work on an infrastructure to save the
material.  Acknowledging the familiarity of those working in preservation
with this information, PERSONIUS noted that several things are being
done:  the primary preservation technology used today is photocopying of
brittle material.  Saving the intellectual content of the material is the
main goal.  With microfilm copy, the intellectual content is preserved on
the assumption that in the future the image can be reformatted in any
other way that then exists.

An underlying assumption of the CLASS Project from the beginning was
that it would develop a network application.  Project staff scan books
at a workstation located in the library, near the brittle material.
An imageserver filing system is located at a distance from that
workstation, and a printer is located in another building.  All of the
materials digitized and stored on the imagefiling system are cataloged
in the online catalogue.  In fact, a record for each of these electronic
books is stored in the RLIN database so that a record exists of what is
in the digital library throughout standard catalogue procedures.  In the
future, researchers working from their own workstations in their offices,
or their networks, will have accesswherever they might bethrough a
request server being built into the new digital library.  A second
assumption is that the preferred means of finding the material will be by
looking through a catalogue.  PERSONIUS described the scanning process,
which uses a prototype scanner being developed by Xerox and which scans a
very high resolution image at great speed.  Another significant feature,
because this is a preservation application, is the placing of the pages
that fall apart one for one on the platen.  Ordinarily, a scanner could
be used with some sort of a document feeder, but because of this
application that is not feasible.  Further, because CLASS is a
preservation application, after the paper replacement is made there, a
very careful quality control check is performed.  An original book is
compared to the printed copy and verification is made, before proceeding,
that all of the image, all of the information, has been captured.  Then,
a new library book is produced:  The printed images are rebound by a
commercial binder and a new book is returned to the shelf.
Significantly, the books returned to the library shelves are beautiful
and useful replacements on acidfree paper that should last a long time,
in effect, the equivalent of preservation photocopies.  Thus, the project
has a library of digital books.  In essence, CLASS is scanning and
storing books as 600 dotperinch bitmapped images, compressed using
Group 4 CCITT i.e., the French acronym for International Consultative
Committee for Telegraph and Telephone compression.  They are stored as
TIFF files on an optical filing system that is composed of a database
used for searching and locating the books and an optical jukebox that
stores 64 twelveinch platters.  A veryhighresolution printed copy of
these books at 600 dots per inch is created, using a Xerox DocuTech
printer to make the paper replacements on acidfree paper.

PERSONIUS maintained that the CLASS Project presents an opportunity to
introduce people to books as digital images by using a paper medium.
Books are returned to the shelves while people are also given the ability
to print on demandto make their own copies of books.  PERSONIUS
distributed copies of an engineering journal published by engineering
students at Cornell around 1900 as an example of what a printondemand
copy of material might be like.  This very cheap copy would be available
to people to use for their own research purposes and would bridge the gap
between an electronic work and the paper that readers like to have.
PERSONIUS then attempted to illustrate a very early prototype of
networked access to this digital library.  Xerox Corporation has
developed a prototype of a view station that can send images across the
network to be viewed.

The particular library brought down for demonstration contained two
mathematics books.  CLASS is developing and will spend the next year
developing an application that allows people at workstations to browse
the books.  Thus, CLASS is developing a browsing tool, on the assumption
that users do not want to read an entire book from a workstation, but
would prefer to be able to look through and decide if they would like to
have a printed copy of it.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Re retrieval software  "Digital file copyright"  Scanning
rate during production  Autosegmentation  Criteria employed in
selecting books for scanning  Compression and decompression of images 
OCR not precluded 


During the questionandanswer period that followed her presentation,
PERSONIUS made these additional points:

      Re retrieval software, Cornell is developing a Unixbased server
     as well as clients for the server that support multiple platforms
     Macintosh, IBM and Sun workstations, in the hope that people from
     any of those platforms will retrieve books a further operating
     assumption is that standard interfaces will be used as much as
     possible, where standards can be put in place, because CLASS
     considers this retrieval software a library application and would
     like to be able to look at material not only at Cornell but at other
     institutions.

      The phrase "digital file copyright by Cornell University" was
     added at the advice of Cornells legal staff with the caveat that it
     probably would not hold up in court.  Cornell does not want people
     to copy its books and sell them but would like to keep them
     available for use in a library environment for library purposes.

      In production the scanner can scan about 300 pages per hour,
     capturing 600 dots per inch.

      The Xerox software has filters to scan halftone material and avoid
     the moire patterns that occur when halftone material is scanned.
     Xerox has been working on hardware and software that would enable
     the scanner itself to recognize this situation and deal with it
     appropriatelya kind of autosegmentation that would enable the
     scanner to handle halftone material as well as text on a single page.

      The books subjected to the elaborate process described above were
     selected because CLASS is a preservation project, with the first 500
     books selected coming from Cornells mathematics collection, because
     they were still being heavily used and because, although they were
     in need of preservation, the mathematics library and the mathematics
     faculty were uncomfortable having them microfilmed.  They wanted a
     printed copy.  Thus, these books became a logical choice for this
     project.  Other books were chosen by the projects selection committees
     for experiments with the technology, as well as to meet a demand or need.

      Images will be decompressed before they are sent over the line at
     this time they are compressed and sent to the image filing system
     and then sent to the printer as compressed images they are returned
     to the workstation as compressed 600dpi images and the workstation
     decompresses and scales them for displayan inefficient way to
     access the material though it works quite well for printing and
     other purposes.

      CLASS is also decompressing on Macintosh and IBM, a slow process
     right now.  Eventually, compression and decompression will take
     place on an image conversion server.  Tradeoffs will be made, based
     on future performance testing, concerning where the file is
     compressed and what resolution image is sent.

      OCR has not been precluded images are being stored that have been
     scanned at a high resolution, which presumably would suit them well
     to an OCR process.  Because the material being scanned is about 100
     years old and was printed with lessthanideal technologies, very
     early and preliminary tests have not produced good results.  But the
     project is capturing an image that is of sufficient resolution to be
     subjected to OCR in the future.  Moreover, the system architecture
     and the system plan have a logical place to store an OCR image if it
     has been captured.  But that is not being done now.

                                 

SESSION III.  DISTRIBUTION, NETWORKS, AND NETWORKING:  OPTIONS FOR
DISSEMINATION


ZICH  Issues pertaining to CDROMs  Options for publishing in CDROM 


Robert ZICH, special assistant to the associate librarian for special
projects, Library of Congress, and moderator of this session, first noted
the blessed but somewhat awkward circumstance of having four very
distinguished people representing networks and networking or at least
leaning in that direction, while lacking anyone to speak from the
strongest possible background in CDROMs.  ZICH expressed the hope that
members of the audience would join the discussion.  He stressed the
subtitle of this particular session, "Options for Dissemination," and,
concerning CDROMs, the importance of determining when it would be wise
to consider dissemination in CDROM versus networks.  A shopping list of
issues pertaining to CDROMs included:  the grounds for selecting
commercial publishers, and inhouse publication where possible versus
nonprofit or government publication.  A similar list for networks
included:  determining when one should consider dissemination through a
network, identifying the mechanisms or entities that exist to place items
on networks, identifying the pool of existing networks, determining how a
producer  would choose between networks, and identifying the elements of
a business arrangement in a network.

Options for publishing in CDROM:  an outside publisher versus
selfpublication.  If an outside publisher is used, it can be nonprofit,
such as the Government Printing Office GPO or the National Technical
Information Service NTIS, in the case of government.  The pros and cons
associated with employing an outside publisher are obvious.  Among the
pros, there is no trouble getting accepted.  One pays the bill and, in
effect, goes ones way.  Among the cons, when one pays an outside
publisher to perform the work, that publisher will perform the work it is
obliged to do, but perhaps without the production expertise and skill in
marketing and dissemination that some would seek.  There is the body of
commercial publishers that do possess that kind of expertise in
distribution and marketing but that obviously are selective.  In
selfpublication, one exercises full control, but then one must handle
matters such as distribution and marketing.  Such are some of the options
for publishing in the case of CDROM.

In the case of technical and design issues, which are also important,
there are many matters which many at the Workshop already knew a good
deal about:  retrieval system requirements and costs, what to do about
images, the various capabilities and platforms, the tradeoffs between
cost and performance, concerns about localarea networkability,
interoperability, etc.

                                 


LYNCH  Creating networked information is different from using networks
as an access or dissemination vehicle  Networked multimedia on a large
scale does not yet work  Typical CDROM publication model a twoedged
sword  Publishing information on a CDROM in the present world of
immature standards  Contrast between CDROM and network pricing 
Examples demonstrated earlier in the day as a set of insular information
gems  Paramount need to link databases  Layering to become increasingly
necessary  Project NEEDS and the issues of information reuse and active
versus passive use  XWindows as a way of differentiating between
network access and networked information  Barriers to the distribution
of networked multimedia information  Need for good, realtime delivery
protocols  The question of presentation integrity in clientserver
computing in the academic world  Recommendations for producing multimedia


Clifford LYNCH, director, Library Automation, University of California,
opened his talk with the general observation that networked information
constituted a difficult and elusive topic because it is something just
starting to develop and not yet fully understood.  LYNCH contended that
creating genuinely networked information was different from using
networks as an access or dissemination vehicle and was more sophisticated
and more subtle.  He invited the members of the audience to extrapolate,
from what they heard about the preceding demonstration projects, to what
sort of a world of electronics informationscholarly, archival,
cultural, etc.they wished to end up with ten or fifteen years from now.
LYNCH suggested that to extrapolate directly from these projects would
produce unpleasant results.

Putting the issue of CDROM in perspective before getting into
generalities on networked information, LYNCH observed that those engaged
in multimedia today who wish to ship a product, so to say, probably do
not have much choice except to use CDROM:  networked multimedia on a
large scale basically does not yet work because the technology does not
exist.  For example, anybody who has tried moving images around over the
Internet knows that this is an exciting touchandgo process, a
fascinating and fertile area for experimentation, research, and
development, but not something that one can become deeply enthusiastic
about committing to production systems at this time.

This situation will change, LYNCH said.  He differentiated CDROM from
the practices that have been followed up to now in distributing data on
CDROM.  For LYNCH the problem with CDROM is not its portability or its
slowness but the twoedged sword of having the retrieval application and
the user interface inextricably bound up with the data, which is the
typical CDROM publication model.  It is not a case of publishing data
but of distributing a typically standalone, typically closed system,
allsoftware, user interface, and dataon a little disk.  Hence, all
the betweendisk navigational issues as well as the impossibility in most
cases of integrating data on one disk with that on another.  Most CDROM
retrieval software does not network very gracefully at present.  However,
in the present world of immature standards and lack of understanding of
what network information is or what the ground rules are for creating or
using it, publishing information on a CDROM does add value in a very
real sense.

LYNCH drew a contrast between CDROM and network pricing and in doing so
highlighted something bizarre in information pricing.  A large
institution such as the University of California has vendors who will
offer to sell information on CDROM for a price per year in four digits,
but for the same data e.g., an abstracting and indexing database on
magnetic tape, regardless of how many people may use it concurrently,
will quote a price in six digits.

What is packaged with the CDROM in one sense adds valuea complete
access system, not just raw, unrefined informationalthough it is not
generally perceived that way.  This is because the access software,
although it adds value, is viewed by some people, particularly in the
university environment where there is a very heavy commitment to
networking, as being developed in the wrong direction.

Given that context, LYNCH described the examples demonstrated as a set of
insular information gemsPerseus, for example, offers nicely linked
information, but would be very difficult to integrate with other
databases, that is, to link together seamlessly with other source files
from other sources.  It resembles an island, and in this respect is
similar to numerous standalone projects that are based on videodiscs,
that is, on the singleworkstation concept.

As scholarship evolves in a network environment, the paramount need will
be to link databases.  We must link personal databases to public
databases, to group databases, in fairly seamless wayswhich is
extremely difficult in the environments under discussion with copies of
databases proliferating all over the place.

The notion of layering also struck LYNCH as lurking in several of the
projects demonstrated.  Several databases in a sense constitute
information archives without a significant amount of navigation built in.
Educators, critics, and others will want a layered structureone that
defines or links paths through the layers to allow users to reach
specific points.  In LYNCHs view, layering will become increasingly
necessary, and not just within a single resource but across resources
e.g., tracing mythology and cultural themes across several classics
databases as well as a database of Renaissance culture.  This ability to
organize resources, to build things out of multiple other things on the
network or select pieces of it, represented for LYNCH one of the key
aspects of network information.

Contending that information reuse constituted another significant issue,
LYNCH commended to the audiences attention Project NEEDS i.e., National
Engineering Education Delivery System.  This projects objective is to
produce a database of engineering courseware as well as the components
that can be used to develop new courseware.  In a number of the existing
applications, LYNCH said, the issue of reuse how much one can take apart
and reuse in other applications was not being well considered.  He also
raised the issue of active versus passive use, one aspect of which  is
how much information will be manipulated locally by users.  Most people,
he argued, may do a little browsing and then will wish to print.  LYNCH
was uncertain how these resources would be used by the vast majority of
users in the network environment.

LYNCH next said a few words about XWindows as a way of differentiating
between network access and networked information.  A number of the
applications demonstrated at the Workshop could be rewritten to use X
across the network, so that one could run them from any Xcapable device
a workstation, an X terminaland transact with a database across the
network.  Although this opens up access a little, assuming one has enough
network to handle it, it does not provide an interface to develop a
program that conveniently integrates information from multiple databases.
X is a viewing technology that has limits.  In a real sense, it is just a
graphical version of remote login across the network.  Xtype applications
represent only one step in the progression towards real access.

LYNCH next discussed barriers to the distribution of networked multimedia
information.  The heart of the problem is a lack of standards to provide
the ability for computers to talk to each other, retrieve information,
and shuffle it around fairly casually.  At the moment, little progress is
being made on standards for networked information for example, present
standards do not cover images, digital voice, and digital video.  A
useful tool kit of exchange formats for basic texts is only now being
assembled.  The synchronization of content streams i.e., synchronizing a
voice track to a video track, establishing temporal relations between
different components in a multimedia object constitutes another issue
for networked multimedia that is just beginning to receive attention.

Underlying network protocols also need some work good, realtime
delivery protocols on the Internet do not yet exist.  In LYNCHs view,
highly important in this context is the notion of networked digital
object IDs, the ability of one object on the network to point to another
object or component thereof on the network.  Serious bandwidth issues
also exist.  LYNCH was uncertain if billionbitpersecond networks would
prove sufficient if numerous people ran video in parallel.

LYNCH concluded by offering an issue for database creators to consider,
as well as several comments about what might constitute good trial
multimedia experiments.  In a networked information world the database
builder or service builder publisher does not exercise the same
extensive control over the integrity of the presentation strange
programs "munge" with ones data before the user sees it.  Serious
thought must be given to what guarantees integrity of presentation.  Part
of that is related to where one draws the boundaries around a networked
information service.  This question of presentation integrity in
clientserver computing has not been stressed enough in the academic
world, LYNCH argued, though commercial service providers deal with it
regularly.

Concerning multimedia, LYNCH observed that good multimedia at the moment
is hideously expensive to produce.  He recommended producing multimedia
with either very high sale value, or multimedia with a very long life
span, or multimedia that will have a very broad usage base and whose
costs therefore can be amortized among large numbers of users.  In this
connection, historical and humanistically oriented material may be a good
place to start, because it tends to have a longer life span than much of
the scientific material, as well as a wider user base.  LYNCH noted, for
example, that American Memory fits many of the criteria outlined.  He
remarked the extensive discussion about bringing the Internet or the
National Research and Education Network NREN into the K12 environment
as a way of helping the American educational system.

LYNCH closed by noting that the kinds of applications demonstrated struck
him as excellent justifications of broadscale networking for K12, but
that at this time no "killer" application exists to mobilize the K12
community to obtain connectivity.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Dearth of genuinely interesting applications on the network
a slowchanging situation  The issue of the integrity of presentation in
a networked environment  Several reasons why CDROM software does not
network 


During the discussion period that followed LYNCHs presentation, several
additional points were made.

LYNCH reiterated even more strongly his contention that, historically,
once one goes outside highend science and the group of those who need
access to supercomputers, there is a great dearth of genuinely
interesting applications on the network.  He saw this situation changing
slowly, with some of the scientific databases and scholarly discussion
groups and electronic journals coming on as well as with the availability
of Wide Area Information Servers WAIS and some of the databases that
are being mounted there.  However, many of those things do not seem to
have piqued great popular interest.  For instance, most high school
students of LYNCHs acquaintance would not qualify as devotees of serious
molecular biology.

Concerning the issue of the integrity of presentation, LYNCH believed
that a couple of information providers have laid down the law at least on
certain things.  For example, his recollection was that the National
Library of Medicine feels strongly that one needs to employ the
identifier field if he or she is to mount a database commercially.  The
problem with a real networked environment is that one does not know who
is reformatting and reprocessing ones data when one enters a client
server mode.  It becomes anybodys guess, for example, if the network
uses a Z39.50 server, or what clients are doing with ones data.  A data
provider can say that his contract will only permit clients to have
access to his data after he vets them and their presentation and makes
certain it suits him.  But LYNCH held out little expectation that the
network marketplace would evolve in that way, because it required too
much prior negotiation.

CDROM software does not network for a variety of reasons, LYNCH said.
He speculated that CDROM publishers are not eager to have their products
really hook into wide area networks, because they fear it will make their
data suppliers nervous.  Moreover, until relatively recently, one had to
be rather adroit to run a full TCPIP stack plus applications on a
PCsize machine, whereas nowadays it is becoming easier as PCs grow
bigger and faster.  LYNCH also speculated that software providers had not
heard from their customers until the last year or so, or had not heard
from enough of their customers.

                                 


BESSER  Implications of disseminating images on the network planning
the distribution of multimedia documents poses two critical
implementation problems  Layered approach represents the way to deal
with users capabilities  Problems in platform design file size and its
implications for networking  Transmission of megabyte size images
impractical  Compression and decompression at the users end  Promising
trends for compression  A disadvantage of using XWindows  A project at
the Smithsonian that mounts images on several networks 


Howard BESSER, School of Library and Information Science, University of
Pittsburgh, spoke primarily about multimedia, focusing on images and the
broad implications of disseminating them on the network.  He argued that
planning the distribution of multimedia documents posed two critical
implementation problems, which he framed in the form of two questions:
1 What platform will one use and what hardware and software will users
have for viewing of the material?  and 2 How can one deliver a
sufficiently robust set of information in an accessible format in a
reasonable amount of time?  Depending on whether network or CDROM is the
medium used, this question raises different issues of storage,
compression, and transmission.

Concerning the design of platforms e.g., sound, gray scale, simple
color, etc. and the various capabilities users may have, BESSER
maintained that a layered approach was the way to deal with users
capabilities.  A result would be that users with less powerful
workstations would simply have less functionality.  He urged members of
the audience to advocate standards and accompanying software that handle
layered functionality across a wide variety of platforms.

BESSER also addressed problems in platform design, namely, deciding how
large a machine to design for situations when the largest number of users
have the lowest level of the machine, and one desires higher
functionality.  BESSER then proceeded to the question of file size and
its implications for networking.  He discussed still images in the main.
For example, a digital color image that fills the screen of a standard
megapel workstation Sun or Next will require one megabyte of storage
for an eightbit image or three megabytes of storage for a true color or
twentyfourbit image.  Lossless compression algorithms that is,
computational procedures in which no data is lost in the process of
compressing and decompressing an imagethe exact bitrepresentation is
maintained might bring storage down to a third of a megabyte per image,
but not much further than that.  The question of size makes it difficult
to fit an appropriately sized set of these images on a single disk or to
transmit them quickly enough on a network.

With these full screen megapel images that constitute a third of a
megabyte, one gets 1,0003,000 fullscreen images on a onegigabyte disk
a standard CDROM represents approximately 60 percent of that.  Storing
images the size of a PC screen just 8 bit color increases storage
capacity to 4,00012,000 images per gigabyte 60 percent of that gives
one the size of a CDROM, which in turn creates a major problem.  One
cannot have fullscreen, fullcolor images with lossless compression one
must compress them or use a lower resolution.  For megabytesize images,
anything slower than a T1 speed is impractical.  For example, on a
fiftysixkilobaud line, it takes three minutes to transfer a
onemegabyte file, if it is not compressed and this speed assumes ideal
circumstances no other user contending for network bandwidth.  Thus,
questions of disk access, remote display, and current telephone
connection speed make transmission of megabytesize images impractical.

BESSER then discussed ways to deal with these large images, for example,
compression and decompression at the users end.  In this connection, the
issues of how much one is willing to lose in the compression process and
what image quality one needs in the first place are unknown.  But what is
known is that compression entails some loss of data.  BESSER urged that
more studies be conducted on image quality in different situations, for
example, what kind of images are needed for what kind of disciplines, and
what kind of image quality is needed for a browsing tool, an intermediate
viewing tool, and archiving.

BESSER remarked two promising trends for compression:  from a technical
perspective, algorithms that use what is called subjective redundancy
employ principles from visual psychophysics to identify and remove
information from the image that the human eye cannot perceive from an
interchange and interoperability perspective, the JPEG i.e., Joint
Photographic Experts Group, an ISO standard compression algorithms also
offer promise.  These issues of compression and decompression, BESSER
argued, resembled those raised earlier concerning the design of different
platforms.  Gauging the capabilities of potential users constitutes a
primary goal.  BESSER advocated layering or separating the images from
the applications that retrieve and display them, to avoid tying them to
particular software.

BESSER detailed several lessons learned from his work at Berkeley with
Imagequery, especially the advantages and disadvantages of using
XWindows.  In the latter category, for example, retrieval is tied
directly to ones data, an intolerable situation in the long run on a
networked system.  Finally, BESSER described a project of Jim Wallace at
the Smithsonian Institution, who is mounting images in a extremely
rudimentary way on the Compuserv and Genie networks and is preparing to
mount them on America On Line.  Although the average user takes over
thirty minutes to download these images assuming a fairly fast modem,
nevertheless, images have been downloaded 25,000 times.

BESSER concluded his talk with several comments on the business
arrangement between the Smithsonian and Compuserv.  He contended that not
enough is known concerning the value of images.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Creating digitized photographic collections nearly
impossible except with large organizations like museums  Need for study
to determine quality of images users will tolerate 


During the brief exchange between LESK and BESSER that followed, several
clarifications emerged.

LESK argued that the photographers were far ahead of BESSER:  It is
almost impossible to create such digitized photographic collections
except with large organizations like museums, because all the
photographic agencies have been going crazy about this and will not sign
licensing agreements on any sort of reasonable terms.  LESK had heard
that National Geographic, for example, had tried to buy the right to use
some image in some kind of educational production for 100 per image, but
the photographers will not touch it.  They want accounting and payment
for each use, which cannot be accomplished within the system.  BESSER
responded that a consortium of photographers, headed by a former National
Geographic photographer, had started assembling its own collection of
electronic reproductions of images, with the money going back to the
cooperative.

LESK contended that BESSER was unnecessarily pessimistic about multimedia
images, because people are accustomed to lowquality images, particularly
from video.  BESSER urged the launching of a study to determine what
users would tolerate, what they would feel comfortable with, and what
absolutely is the highest quality they would ever need.  Conceding that
he had adopted a dire tone in order to arouse people about the issue,
BESSER closed on a sanguine note by saying that he would not be in this
business if he did not think that things could be accomplished.

                                 


LARSEN  Issues of scalability and modularity  Geometric growth of the
Internet and the role played by layering  Basic functions sustaining
this growth  A librarys roles and functions in a network environment 
Effects of implementation of the Z39.50 protocol for information
retrieval on the library system  The tradeoff between volumes of data
and its potential usage  A snapshot of current trends 


Ronald LARSEN, associate director for information technology, University
of Maryland at College Park, first addressed the issues of scalability
and modularity.  He noted the difficulty of anticipating the effects of
ordersofmagnitude growth, reflecting on the twenty years of experience
with the Arpanet and Internet.  Recalling the days demonstrations of
CDROM and optical disk material, he went on to ask if the field has yet
learned how to scale new systems to enable delivery and dissemination
across largescale networks.

LARSEN focused on the geometric growth of the Internet from its inception
circa 1969 to the present, and the adjustments required to respond to
that rapid growth.  To illustrate the issue of scalability, LARSEN
considered computer networks as including three generic components:
computers, network communication nodes, and communication media.  Each
component scales e.g., computers range from PCs to supercomputers
network nodes scale from interface cards in a PC through sophisticated
routers and gateways and communication media range from 2,400baud
dialup facilities through 4.5Mbps backbone links, and eventually to
multigigabitpersecond communication lines, and architecturally, the
components are organized to scale hierarchically from local area networks
to internationalscale networks.  Such growth is made possible by
building layers of communication protocols, as BESSER pointed out.
By layering both physically and logically, a sense of scalability is
maintained from local area networks in offices, across campuses, through
bridges, routers, campus backbones, fiberoptic links, etc., up into
regional networks and ultimately into national and international
networks.

LARSEN then illustrated the geometric growth over a twoyear period
through September 1991of the number of networks that comprise the
Internet.  This growth has been sustained largely by the availability of
three basic functions:  electronic mail, file transfer ftp, and remote
logon telnet.  LARSEN also reviewed the growth in the kind of traffic
that occurs on the network.  Network traffic reflects the joint contributions
of a larger population of users and increasing use per user.  Today one sees
serious applications involving moving images across the networka rarity
ten years ago.  LARSEN recalled and concurred with BESSERs main point
that the interesting problems occur at the application level.

LARSEN then illustrated a model of a librarys roles and functions in a
network environment.  He noted, in particular, the placement of online
catalogues onto the network and patrons obtaining access to the library
increasingly through local networks, campus networks, and the Internet.
LARSEN supported LYNCHs earlier suggestion that we need to address
fundamental questions of networked information in order to build
environments that scale in the information sense as well as in the
physical sense.

LARSEN supported the role of the library system as the access point into
the nations electronic collections.  Implementation of the Z39.50
protocol for information retrieval would make such access practical and
feasible.  For example, this would enable patrons in Maryland to search
California libraries, or other libraries around the world that are
conformant with Z39.50 in a manner that is familiar to University of
Maryland patrons.  This clientserver model also supports moving beyond
secondary content into primary content.  The notion of how one links
from secondary content to primary content, LARSEN said, represents a
fundamental problem that requires rigorous thought.  After noting
numerous network experiments in accessing fulltext materials, including
projects supporting the ordering of materials across the network, LARSEN
revisited the issue of transmitting highdensity, highresolution color
images across the network and the large amounts of bandwidth they
require.  He went on to address the bandwidth and synchronization
problems inherent in sending fullmotion video across the network.

LARSEN illustrated the tradeoff between volumes of data in bytes or
orders of magnitude and the potential usage of that data.  He discussed
transmission rates particularly, the time it takes to move various forms
of information, and what one could do with a network supporting
multigigabitpersecond transmission.  At the moment, the network
environment includes a composite of datatransmission requirements,
volumes and forms, going from steady to bursty highvolume and from
very slow to very fast.  This aggregate must be considered in the design,
construction, and operation of multigigabyte networks.

LARSENs objective is to use the networks and library systems now being
constructed to increase access to resources wherever they exist, and
thus, to evolve toward an online electronic virtual library.

LARSEN concluded by offering a snapshot of current trends:  continuing
geometric growth in network capacity and number of users slower
development of applications and glacial development and adoption of
standards.  The challenge is to design and develop each new application
system with network access and scalability in mind.

                                 


BROWNRIGG  Access to the Internet cannot be taken for granted  Packet
radio and the development of MELVYL in 198081 in the Division of Library
Automation at the University of California    Design criteria for packet
radio  A demonstration project in San Diego and future plans  Spread
spectrum  Frequencies at which the radios will run and plans to
reimplement the WAIS server software in the public domain  Need for an
infrastructure of radios that do not move around 


Edwin BROWNRIGG, executive director, Memex Research Institute, first
polled the audience in order to seek out regular users of the Internet as
well as those planning to use it some time in the future.  With nearly
everybody in the room falling into one category or the other, BROWNRIGG
made a point re access, namely that numerous individuals, especially those
who use the Internet every day, take for granted their access to it, the
speeds with which they are connected, and how well it all works.
However, as BROWNRIGG discovered between 1987 and 1989 in Australia,
if one wants access to the Internet but cannot afford it or has some
physical boundary that prevents her or him from gaining access, it can
be extremely frustrating.  He suggested that because of economics and
physical barriers we were beginning to create a world of haves and havenots
in the process of scholarly communication, even in the United States.

BROWNRIGG detailed the development of MELVYL in academic year 198081 in
the Division of Library Automation at the University of California, in
order to underscore the issue of access to the system, which at the
outset was extremely limited.  In short, the project needed to build a
network, which at that time entailed use of satellite technology, that is,
putting earth stations on campus and also acquiring some terrestrial links
from the State of Californias microwave system.  The installation of
satellite links, however, did not solve the problem which actually
formed part of a larger problem involving politics and financial resources.
For while the project team could get a signal onto a campus, it had no means
of distributing the signal throughout the campus.  The solution involved
adopting a recent development in wireless communication called packet radio,
which combined the basic notion of packetswitching with radio.  The project
used this technology to get the signal from a point on campus where it
came down, an earth station for example, into the libraries, because it
found that wiring the libraries, especially the older marble buildings,
would cost 2,0005,000 per terminal.

BROWNRIGG noted that, ten years ago, the project had neither the public
policy nor the technology that would have allowed it to use packet radio
in any meaningful way.  Since then much had changed.  He proceeded to
detail research and development of the technology, how it is being
deployed in California, and what direction he thought it would take.
The design criteria are to produce a highspeed, onetime, lowcost,
highquality, secure, licensefree device packet radio that one can
plug in and play today, forget about it, and have access to the Internet.
By high speed, BROWNRIGG meant 1 megabyte and 1.5 megabytes.  Those units
have been built, he continued, and are in the process of being
typecertified by an independent underwriting laboratory so that they can
be typelicensed by the Federal Communications Commission.  As is the
case with citizens band, one will be able to purchase a unit and not have
to worry about applying for a license.

The basic idea, BROWNRIGG elaborated, is to take highspeed radio data
transmission and create a backbone network that at certain strategic
points in the network will "gateway" into a mediumspeed packet radio
i.e., one that runs at 38.4 kilobytes, so that perhaps by 19941995
people, like those in the audience for the price of a VCR could purchase
a mediumspeed radio for the office or home, have full network connectivity
to the Internet, and partake of all its services, with no need for an FCC
license and no regular bill from the local common carrier.  BROWNRIGG
presented several details of a demonstration project currently taking
place in San Diego and described plans, pending funding, to install a
fullbore network in the San Francisco area.  This network will have 600
nodes running at backbone speeds, and 100 of these nodes will be libraries,
which in turn will be the gateway ports to the 38.4 kilobyte radios that
will give coverage for the neighborhoods surrounding the libraries.

BROWNRIGG next explained Part 15.247, a new rule within Title 47 of the
Code of Federal Regulations enacted by the FCC in 1985.  This rule
challenged the industry, which has only now risen to the occasion, to
build a radio that would run at no more than one watt of output power and
use a fairly exotic method of modulating the radio wave called spread
spectrum.  Spread spectrum in fact permits the building of networks so
that numerous data communications can occur simultaneously, without
interfering with each other, within the same wide radio channel.

BROWNRIGG explained that the frequencies at which the radios would run
are very short wave signals.  They are well above standard microwave and
radar.  With a radio wave that small, one watt becomes a tremendous punch
per bit and thus makes transmission at reasonable speed possible.  In
order to minimize the potential for congestion, the project is
undertaking to reimplement software which has been available in the
networking business and is taken for granted now, for example, TCPIP,
routing algorithms, bridges, and gateways.  In addition, the project
plans to take the WAIS server software in the public domain and
reimplement it so that one can have a WAIS server on a Mac instead of a
Unix machine.  The Memex Research Institute believes that libraries, in
particular, will want to use the WAIS servers with packet radio.  This
project, which has a team of about twelve people, will run through 1993
and will include the 100 libraries already mentioned as well as other
professionals such as those in the medical profession, engineering, and
law.  Thus, the need is to create an infrastructure of radios that do not
move around, which, BROWNRIGG hopes, will solve a problem not only for
libraries but for individuals who, by and large today, do not have access
to the Internet from their homes and offices.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Project operating frequencies 


During a brief discussion period, which also concluded the days
proceedings, BROWNRIGG stated that the project was operating in four
frequencies.  The slow speed is operating at 435 megahertz, and it would
later go up to 920 megahertz.  With the highspeed frequency, the
onemegabyte radios will run at 2.4 gigabits, and 1.5 will run at 5.7.
At 5.7, rain can be a factor, but it would have to be tropical rain,
unlike what falls in most parts of the United States.

                                 

SESSION IV.  IMAGE CAPTURE, TEXT CAPTURE, OVERVIEW OF TEXT AND
             IMAGE STORAGE FORMATS

William HOOTON, vice president of operations, INET, moderated this session.


KENNEY  Factors influencing development of CXP  Advantages of using
digital technology versus photocopy and microfilm  A primary goal of
CXP publishing challenges  Characteristics of copies printed  Quality
of samples achieved in image capture  Several factors to be considered
in choosing scanning  Emphasis of CXP on timely and costeffective
production of blackandwhite printed facsimiles  Results of producing
microfilm from digital files  Advantages of creating microfilm  Details
concerning production  Costs  Role of digital technology in library
preservation 


Anne KENNEY, associate director, Department of Preservation and
Conservation, Cornell University, opened her talk by observing that the
Cornell Xerox Project CXP has been guided by the assumption that the
ability to produce printed facsimiles or to replace paper with paper
would be important, at least for the present generation of users and
equipment.  She described three factors that influenced development of
the project:  1 Because the project has emphasized the preservation of
deteriorating brittle books, the quality of what was produced had to be
sufficiently high to return a paper replacement to the shelf.  CXP was
only interested in using:  2 a system that was costeffective, which
meant that it had to be costcompetitive with the processes currently
available, principally photocopy and microfilm, and 3 new or currently
available product hardware and software.

KENNEY described the advantages that using digital technology offers over
both photocopy and microfilm:  1 The potential exists to create a higher
quality reproduction of a deteriorating original than conventional
lightlens technology.  2 Because a digital image is an encoded
representation, it can be reproduced again and again with no resulting
loss of quality, as opposed to the situation with lightlens processes,
in which there is discernible difference between a second and a
subsequent generation of an image.  3 A digital image can be manipulated
in a number of ways to improve image capture for example, Xerox has
developed a windowing application that enables one to capture a page
containing both text and illustrations in a manner that optimizes the
reproduction of both.  With lightlens technology, one must choose which
to optimize, text or the illustration in preservation microfilming, the
current practice is to shoot an illustrated page twice, once to highlight
the text and the second time to provide the best capture for the
illustration.  4 A digital image can also be edited, density levels
adjusted to remove underlining and stains, and to increase legibility for
faint documents.  5 Onscreen inspection can take place at the time of
initial setup and adjustments made prior to scanning, factors that
substantially reduce the number of retakes required in quality control.

A primary goal of CXP has been to evaluate the paper output printed on
the Xerox DocuTech, a highspeed printer that produces 600dpi pages from
scanned images at a rate of 135 pages a minute.  KENNEY recounted several
publishing challenges to represent faithful and legible reproductions of
the originals that the 600dpi copy for the most part successfully
captured.  For example, many of the deteriorating volumes in the project
were heavily illustrated with fine line drawings or halftones or came in
languages such as Japanese, in which the buildup of characters comprised
of varying strokes is difficult to reproduce at lower resolutions a
surprising number of them came with annotations and mathematical
formulas, which it was critical to be able to duplicate exactly.

KENNEY noted that 1 the copies are being printed on paper that meets the
ANSI standards for performance, 2 the DocuTech printer meets the machine
and toner requirements for proper adhesion of print to page, as described
by the National Archives, and thus 3 paper product is considered to be
the archival equivalent of preservation photocopy.

KENNEY then discussed several samples of the quality achieved in the
project that had been distributed in a handout, for example, a copy of a
printondemand version of the 1911 Reed lecture on the steam turbine,
which contains halftones, line drawings, and illustrations embedded in
text the first four loose pages in the volume compared the capture
capabilities of scanning to photocopy for a standard test target, the
IEEE standard 167A 1987 test chart.  In all instances scanning proved
superior to photocopy, though only slightly more so in one.

Conceding the simplistic nature of her review of the quality of scanning
to photocopy, KENNEY described it as one representation of the kinds of
settings that could be used with scanning capabilities on the equipment
CXP uses.  KENNEY also pointed out that CXP investigated the quality
achieved with binary scanning only, and noted the great promise in gray
scale and color scanning, whose advantages and disadvantages need to be
examined.  She argued further that scanning resolutions and file formats
can represent a complex tradeoff between the time it takes to capture
material, file size, fidelity to the original, and onscreen display and
printing and equipment availability.  All these factors must be taken
into consideration.

CXP placed primary emphasis on the production in a timely and
costeffective manner of printed facsimiles that consisted largely of
blackandwhite text.  With binary scanning, large files may be
compressed efficiently and in a lossless manner i.e., no data is lost in
the process of compressing and decompressing an imagethe exact
bitrepresentation is maintained using Group 4 CCITT i.e., the French
acronym for International Consultative Committee for Telegraph and
