boots every Christmas.

  And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it.
They must go by the carrier, she thought and how funny itll
seem, sending presents to ones own feet!  And how odd the
directions will look!

            ALICES RIGHT FOOT, ESQ.
                HEARTHRUG,
                    NEAR THE FENDER,
                        WITH ALICES LOVE.

Oh dear, what nonsense Im talking!

  Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall:  in
fact she was now more than nine feet high, and she at once took
up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.

  Poor Alice!  It was as much as she could do, lying down on one
side, to look through into the garden with one eye but to get
through was more hopeless than ever:  she sat down and began to
cry again.

  You ought to be ashamed of yourself, said Alice, a great
girl like you, she might well say this, to go on crying in
this way!  Stop this moment, I tell you!  But she went on all
the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool
all round her, about four inches deep and reaching half down the
hall.

  After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the
distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming.
It was the White Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a
pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the
other:  he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to
himself as he came, Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess! Oh! wont she
be savage if Ive kept her waiting!  Alice felt so desperate
that she was ready to ask help of any one so, when the Rabbit
came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, If you please,
sir  The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid
gloves and the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard
as he could go.

  Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very
hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking:
Dear, dear!  How queer everything is today!  And yesterday
things went on just as usual.  I wonder if Ive been changed in
the night?  Let me think:  was I the same when I got up this
morning?  I almost think I can remember feeling a little
different.  But if Im not the same, the next question is, Who in
the world am I?  Ah, THATS the great puzzle!  And she began
thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age
as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of
them.

  Im sure Im not Ada, she said, for her hair goes in such
long ringlets, and mine doesnt go in ringlets at all and Im
sure I cant be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she,
oh! she knows such a very little!  Besides, SHES she, and Im I,
andoh dear, how puzzling it all is!  Ill try if I know all the
things I used to know.  Let me see:  four times five is twelve,
and four times six is thirteen, and four times seven isoh dear!
I shall never get to twenty at that rate!  However, the
