	That in civility thou seemst so empty?

ORLANDO	You touchd my vein at first: the thorny point
	Of bare distress hath taen from me the show
	Of smooth civility: yet am I inland bred
	And know some nurture. But forbear, I say:
	He dies that touches any of this fruit
	Till I and my affairs are answered.

JAQUES	An you will not be answered with reason, I must die.

DUKE SENIOR	What would you have? Your gentleness shall force
	More than your force move us to gentleness.

ORLANDO	I almost die for food and let me have it.

DUKE SENIOR	Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.

ORLANDO	Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you:
	I thought that all things had been savage here
	And therefore put I on the countenance
	Of stern commandment. But whateer you are
	That in this desert inaccessible,
	Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
	Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time
	If ever you have lookd on better days,
	If ever been where bells have knolld to church,
	If ever sat at any good mans feast,
	If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear
	And know what tis to pity and be pitied,
	Let gentleness my strong enforcement be:
	In the which hope I blush, and hide my sword.

DUKE SENIOR	True is it that we have seen better days,
	And have with holy bell been knolld to church
	And sat at good mens feasts and wiped our eyes
	Of drops that sacred pity hath engenderd:
	And therefore sit you down in gentleness
	And take upon command what help we have
	That to your wanting may be ministerd.

ORLANDO	Then but forbear your food a little while,
	Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn
	And give it food. There is an old poor man,
	Who after me hath many a weary step
	Limpd in pure love: till he be first sufficed,
	Oppressd with two weak evils, age and hunger,
	I will not touch a bit.

DUKE SENIOR	Go find him out,
	And we will nothing waste till you return.

ORLANDO	I thank ye and be blest for your good comfort!

	Exit

DUKE SENIOR	Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy:
	This wide and universal theatre
	Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
	Wherein we play in.

JAQUES	All the worlds a stage,
	And all the men and women merely players:
	They have their exits and their entrances
	And one man in his time plays many parts,
	His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
