  Right, as usual, said the Duchess:  what a clear way you
have of putting things!

  Its a mineral, I THINK, said Alice.

  Of course it is, said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree
to everything that Alice said theres a large mustardmine near
here.  And the moral of that is"The more there is of mine, the
less there is of yours."

  Oh, I know! exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this
last remark, its a vegetable.  It doesnt look like one, but it
is.

  I quite agree with you, said the Duchess and the moral of
that is"Be what you would seem to be"or if youd like it put
more simply"Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than
what it might appear to others that what you were or might have
been was not otherwise than what you had been would have appeared
to them to be otherwise."

  I think I should understand that better, Alice said very
politely, if I had it written down:  but I cant quite follow it
as you say it.

  Thats nothing to what I could say if I chose, the Duchess
replied, in a pleased tone.

  Pray dont trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,
said Alice.

  Oh, dont talk about trouble! said the Duchess.  I make you
a present of everything Ive said as yet.

  A cheap sort of present! thought Alice.  Im glad they dont
give birthday presents like that!  But she did not venture to
say it out loud.

  Thinking again? the Duchess asked, with another dig of her
sharp little chin.

  Ive a right to think, said Alice sharply, for she was
beginning to feel a little worried.

  Just about as much right, said the Duchess, as pigs have to
fly and the m

  But here, to Alices great surprise, the Duchesss voice died
away, even in the middle of her favourite word moral, and the
arm that was linked into hers began to tremble.  Alice looked up,
and there stood the Queen in front of them, with her arms folded,
frowning like a thunderstorm.

  A fine day, your Majesty! the Duchess began in a low, weak
voice.

  Now, I give you fair warning, shouted the Queen, stamping on
the ground as she spoke either you or your head must be off,
and that in about half no time!  Take your choice!

