	Treason is not inherited, my lord
	Or, if we did derive it from our friends,
	Whats that to me? my father was no traitor:
	Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much
	To think my poverty is treacherous.

CELIA	Dear sovereign, hear me speak.

DUKE FREDERICK	Ay, Celia we stayd her for your sake,
	Else had she with her father ranged along.

CELIA	I did not then entreat to have her stay
	It was your pleasure and your own remorse:
	I was too young that time to value her
	But now I know her: if she be a traitor,
	Why so am I we still have slept together,
	Rose at an instant, learnd, playd, eat together,
	And wheresoever we went, like Junos swans,
	Still we went coupled and inseparable.

DUKE FREDERICK	She is too subtle for thee and her smoothness,
	Her very silence and her patience
	Speak to the people, and they pity her.
	Thou art a fool: she robs thee of thy name
	And thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous
	When she is gone. Then open not thy lips:
	Firm and irrevocable is my doom
	Which I have passd upon her she is banishd.

CELIA	Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege:
	I cannot live out of her company.

DUKE FREDERICK	You are a fool. You, niece, provide yourself:
	If you outstay the time, upon mine honour,
	And in the greatness of my word, you die.

	Exeunt DUKE FREDERICK and Lords

CELIA	O my poor Rosalind, whither wilt thou go?
	Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.
	I charge thee, be not thou more grieved than I am.

ROSALIND	I have more cause.

CELIA	                  Thou hast not, cousin
	Prithee be cheerful: knowst thou not, the duke
	Hath banishd me, his daughter?

ROSALIND	That he hath not.

CELIA	No, hath not? Rosalind lacks then the love
	Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one:
	Shall we be sunderd? shall we part, sweet girl?
	No: let my father seek another heir.
	Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
	Whither to go and what to bear with us
	And do not seek to take your change upon you,
	To bear your griefs yourself and leave me out
	For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
	Say what thou canst, Ill go along with thee.

ROSALIND	Why, whither shall we go?

CELIA	To seek my uncle in the forest of Arden.

ROSALIND	Alas, what danger will it be to us,
	Maids as we are, to travel forth so far!
	Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.

CELIA	Ill put myself in poor and mean attire
	And with a kind of umber smirch my face
	The like do you: so shall we pass along
	And never stir assailants.

ROSALIND	Were it not better,
	Because that I am more than common tall,
	That I did suit me all points like a man?
	A gallant curtleaxe upon my thigh,
	A boarspear in my hand andin my heart
	Lie there what hidden womans fear there will
	Well have a swashing and a martial outside,
	As many other mannish cowards have
	That do outface it with their semblances.

CELIA	What shall I call thee when thou art a man?

ROSALIND	Ill have no worse a name than Joves own page
	And therefore look you call me Ganymede.
	But what will you be calld?

CELIA	Something that hath a reference to my state
	No longer Celia, but Aliena.

ROSALIND	But, cousin, what if we assayd to steal
	The clownish fool out of your fathers court?
	Would he not be a comfort to our travel?

CELIA	Hell go along oer the wide world with me
	Leave me alone to woo him. Lets away,
	And get our jewels and our wealth together,
	Devise the fittest time and safest way
	To hide us from pursuit that will be made
	After my flight. Now go we in content
	To liberty and not to banishment.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT II



SCENE I	The Forest of Arden.


	Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, and two or three Lords,
	like foresters

DUKE SENIOR	Now, my comates and brothers in exile,
	Hath not old custom made this life more sweet
	Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
	More free from peril than the envious court?
	Here feel we but the penalty of Adam,
	The seasons difference, as the icy fang
	And churlish chiding of the winters wind,
	Which, when it bites and blows upon my body,
	Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say
	This is no flattery: these are counsellors
	That feelingly persuade me what I am.
	Sweet are the uses of adversity,
	Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
	Wears yet a precious jewel in his head
	And this our life exempt from public haunt
	Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
	Sermons in stones and good in every thing.
	I would not change it.

AMIENS	Happy is your grace,
	That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
	Into so quiet and so sweet a style.

DUKE SENIOR	Come, shall we go and kill us venison?
	And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,
	Being native burghers of this desert city,
	Should in their own confines with forked heads
	Have their round haunches gored.

First Lord	Indeed, my lord,
	The melancholy Jaques grieves at that,
	And, in that kind, swears you do more usurp
	Than doth your brother that hath banishd you.
	Today my Lord of Amiens and myself
	Did steal behind him as he lay along
	Under an oak whose antique root peeps out
	Upon the brook that brawls along this wood:
	To the which place a poor sequesterd stag,
	That from the hunters aim had taen a hurt,
	Did come to languish, and indeed, my lord,
	The wretched animal heaved forth such groans
	That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
	Almost to bursting, and the big round tears
	Coursed one another down his innocent nose
	In piteous chase and thus the hairy fool
	Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,
	Stood on the extremest verge of the swift brook,
	Augmenting it with tears.

DUKE SENIOR	But what said Jaques?
	Did he not moralize this spectacle?

First Lord	O, yes, into a thousand similes.
	First, for his weeping into the needless stream
	Poor deer, quoth he, thou makest a testament
	As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
