to join AAAS on 1 July, when OJCCT was scheduled to go online.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Additional features of OJCCT 


In the lengthy discussion that followed LEBRONs presentation, these
points emerged:

      The SGML text can be tailored as users wish.

      All these articles have a fairly simple document definition.

      Documenttype definitions DTDs were developed and given to OJCCT
     for coding.

      No articles will be removed from the journal.  Because there are
     no back issues, there are no lost issues either.  Once a subscriber
     logs onto the journal he or she has access not only to the currently
     published materials, but retrospectively to everything that has been
     published in it.  Thus the table of contents grows bigger.  The date
     of publication serves to distinguish between currently published
     materials and older materials.

      The pricing system for the journal resembles that for most medical
     journals:  for 1992, 95 for a year, plus telecommunications charges
     there are no connect time charges    for 1993, 110 for the
     entire year for single users, though the journal can be put on a
     local area network LAN.  However, only one person can access the
     journal at a time.  Site licenses may come in the future.

      AAAS is working closely with colleagues at OCLC to display
     mathematical equations on screen.

      Without compromising any steps in the editorial process, the
     technology has reduced the time lag between when a manuscript is
     originally submitted and the time it is accepted the review process
     does not differ greatly from the standard sixtoeight weeks
     employed by many of the hardcopy journals.  The process still
     depends on people.

      As far as a preservation copy is concerned, articles will be
     maintained on the computer permanently and subscribers, as part of
     their subscription, will receive a microfichequality archival copy
     of everything published during that year in addition, reprints can
     be purchased in much the same way as in a hardcopy environment.
     Hard copies are prepared but are not the primary medium for the
     dissemination of the information.

      Because OJCCT is not yet on line, it is difficult to know how many
     people would simply browse through the journal on the screen as
     opposed to downloading the whole thing and printing it out a mix of
     both types of users likely will result.

                                 


PERSONIUS  Developments in technology over the past decade  The CLASS
Project  Advantages for technology and for the CLASS Project 
Developing a network application an underlying assumption of the project
 Details of the scanning process  Printondemand copies of books 
Future plans include development of a browsing tool 


Lynne PERSONIUS, assistant director, Cornell Information Technologies for
Scholarly Information Services, Cornell University, first commented on
the tremendous impact that developments in technology over the past ten
yearsnetworking, in particularhave had on the way information is
handled, and how, in her own case, these developments have counterbalanced
Cornells relative geographical isolation.  Other significant technologies
include scanners, which are much more sophisticated than they were ten years
ago mass storage and the dramatic savings that result from it in terms of
both space and money relative to twenty or thirty years ago new and
improved printing technologies, which have greatly affected the distribution
of information and, of course, digital technologies, whose applicability to
library preservation remains at issue.

Given that context, PERSONIUS described the College Library Access and
Storage System CLASS Project, a library preservation project,
primarily, and what has been accomplished.  Directly funded by the
Commission on Preservation and Access and by the Xerox Corporation, which
has provided a significant amount of hardware, the CLASS Project has been
working with a development team at Xerox to develop a software
application tailored to library preservation requirements.  Within
Cornell, participants in the project have been working jointly with both
library and information technologies.  The focus of the project has been
on reformatting and saving books that are in brittle condition.
PERSONIUS showed Workshop participants a brittle book, and described how
such books were the result of developments in papermaking around the
beginning of the Industrial Revolution.  The papermaking process was
changed so that a significant amount of acid was introduced into the
actual paper itself, which deteriorates as it sits on library shelves.

One of the advantages for technology and for the CLASS Project is that
the information in brittle books is mostly out of copyright and thus
offers an opportunity to work with material that requires library
preservation, and to create and work on an infrastructure to save the
material.  Acknowledging the familiarity of those working in preservation
with this information, PERSONIUS noted that several things are being
done:  the primary preservation technology used today is photocopying of
brittle material.  Saving the intellectual content of the material is the
main goal.  With microfilm copy, the intellectual content is preserved on
the assumption that in the future the image can be reformatted in any
other way that then exists.

An underlying assumption of the CLASS Project from the beginning was
that it would develop a network application.  Project staff scan books
at a workstation located in the library, near the brittle material.
An imageserver filing system is located at a distance from that
