had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made her draw back in a
hurry:  a large pigeon had flown into her face, and was beating
her violently with its wings.

  Serpent! screamed the Pigeon.

  Im NOT a serpent! said Alice indignantly.  Let me alone!

  Serpent, I say again! repeated the Pigeon, but in a more
subdued tone, and added with a kind of sob, Ive tried every
way, and nothing seems to suit them!

  I havent the least idea what youre talking about, said
Alice.

  Ive tried the roots of trees, and Ive tried banks, and Ive
tried hedges, the Pigeon went on, without attending to her but
those serpents!  Theres no pleasing them!

  Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no
use in saying anything more till the Pigeon had finished.

  As if it wasnt trouble enough hatching the eggs, said the
Pigeon but I must be on the lookout for serpents night and
day!  Why, I havent had a wink of sleep these three weeks!

  Im very sorry youve been annoyed, said Alice, who was
beginning to see its meaning.

  And just as Id taken the highest tree in the wood, continued
the Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, and just as I was
thinking I should be free of them at last, they must needs come
wriggling down from the sky!  Ugh, Serpent!

  But Im NOT a serpent, I tell you! said Alice.  Im aIm
a

  Well!  WHAT are you? said the Pigeon.  I can see youre
trying to invent something!

  IIm a little girl, said Alice, rather doubtfully, as she
remembered the number of changes she had gone through that day.

  A likely story indeed! said the Pigeon in a tone of the
deepest contempt.  Ive seen a good many little girls in my
time, but never ONE with such a neck as that!  No, no!  Youre a
serpent and theres no use denying it.  I suppose youll be
telling me next that you never tasted an egg!

  I HAVE tasted eggs, certainly, said Alice, who was a very
truthful child but little girls eat eggs quite as much as
serpents do, you know.

  I dont believe it, said the Pigeon but if they do, why
then theyre a kind of serpent, thats all I can say.

  This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent
for a minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the opportunity of
adding, Youre looking for eggs, I know THAT well enough and
what does it matter to me whether youre a little girl or a
serpent?

  It matters a good deal to ME, said Alice hastily but Im
not looking for eggs, as it happens and if I was, I shouldnt
want YOURS:  I dont like them raw.

