BROWNRIGG  Access to the Internet cannot be taken for granted  Packet
radio and the development of MELVYL in 198081 in the Division of Library
Automation at the University of California    Design criteria for packet
radio  A demonstration project in San Diego and future plans  Spread
spectrum  Frequencies at which the radios will run and plans to
reimplement the WAIS server software in the public domain  Need for an
infrastructure of radios that do not move around 


Edwin BROWNRIGG, executive director, Memex Research Institute, first
polled the audience in order to seek out regular users of the Internet as
well as those planning to use it some time in the future.  With nearly
everybody in the room falling into one category or the other, BROWNRIGG
made a point re access, namely that numerous individuals, especially those
who use the Internet every day, take for granted their access to it, the
speeds with which they are connected, and how well it all works.
However, as BROWNRIGG discovered between 1987 and 1989 in Australia,
if one wants access to the Internet but cannot afford it or has some
physical boundary that prevents her or him from gaining access, it can
be extremely frustrating.  He suggested that because of economics and
physical barriers we were beginning to create a world of haves and havenots
in the process of scholarly communication, even in the United States.

BROWNRIGG detailed the development of MELVYL in academic year 198081 in
the Division of Library Automation at the University of California, in
order to underscore the issue of access to the system, which at the
outset was extremely limited.  In short, the project needed to build a
network, which at that time entailed use of satellite technology, that is,
putting earth stations on campus and also acquiring some terrestrial links
from the State of Californias microwave system.  The installation of
satellite links, however, did not solve the problem which actually
formed part of a larger problem involving politics and financial resources.
For while the project team could get a signal onto a campus, it had no means
of distributing the signal throughout the campus.  The solution involved
adopting a recent development in wireless communication called packet radio,
which combined the basic notion of packetswitching with radio.  The project
used this technology to get the signal from a point on campus where it
came down, an earth station for example, into the libraries, because it
found that wiring the libraries, especially the older marble buildings,
would cost 2,0005,000 per terminal.

BROWNRIGG noted that, ten years ago, the project had neither the public
policy nor the technology that would have allowed it to use packet radio
in any meaningful way.  Since then much had changed.  He proceeded to
detail research and development of the technology, how it is being
deployed in California, and what direction he thought it would take.
The design criteria are to produce a highspeed, onetime, lowcost,
highquality, secure, licensefree device packet radio that one can
plug in and play today, forget about it, and have access to the Internet.
By high speed, BROWNRIGG meant 1 megabyte and 1.5 megabytes.  Those units
have been built, he continued, and are in the process of being
typecertified by an independent underwriting laboratory so that they can
be typelicensed by the Federal Communications Commission.  As is the
case with citizens band, one will be able to purchase a unit and not have
to worry about applying for a license.

The basic idea, BROWNRIGG elaborated, is to take highspeed radio data
transmission and create a backbone network that at certain strategic
points in the network will "gateway" into a mediumspeed packet radio
i.e., one that runs at 38.4 kilobytes, so that perhaps by 19941995
people, like those in the audience for the price of a VCR could purchase
a mediumspeed radio for the office or home, have full network connectivity
to the Internet, and partake of all its services, with no need for an FCC
license and no regular bill from the local common carrier.  BROWNRIGG
presented several details of a demonstration project currently taking
place in San Diego and described plans, pending funding, to install a
fullbore network in the San Francisco area.  This network will have 600
nodes running at backbone speeds, and 100 of these nodes will be libraries,
which in turn will be the gateway ports to the 38.4 kilobyte radios that
will give coverage for the neighborhoods surrounding the libraries.

BROWNRIGG next explained Part 15.247, a new rule within Title 47 of the
Code of Federal Regulations enacted by the FCC in 1985.  This rule
challenged the industry, which has only now risen to the occasion, to
build a radio that would run at no more than one watt of output power and
use a fairly exotic method of modulating the radio wave called spread
spectrum.  Spread spectrum in fact permits the building of networks so
that numerous data communications can occur simultaneously, without
interfering with each other, within the same wide radio channel.

BROWNRIGG explained that the frequencies at which the radios would run
are very short wave signals.  They are well above standard microwave and
radar.  With a radio wave that small, one watt becomes a tremendous punch
per bit and thus makes transmission at reasonable speed possible.  In
order to minimize the potential for congestion, the project is
undertaking to reimplement software which has been available in the
networking business and is taken for granted now, for example, TCPIP,
routing algorithms, bridges, and gateways.  In addition, the project
plans to take the WAIS server software in the public domain and
reimplement it so that one can have a WAIS server on a Mac instead of a
Unix machine.  The Memex Research Institute believes that libraries, in
particular, will want to use the WAIS servers with packet radio.  This
project, which has a team of about twelve people, will run through 1993
and will include the 100 libraries already mentioned as well as other
professionals such as those in the medical profession, engineering, and
law.  Thus, the need is to create an infrastructure of radios that do not
move around, which, BROWNRIGG hopes, will solve a problem not only for
libraries but for individuals who, by and large today, do not have access
to the Internet from their homes and offices.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Project operating frequencies 


During a brief discussion period, which also concluded the days
proceedings, BROWNRIGG stated that the project was operating in four
frequencies.  The slow speed is operating at 435 megahertz, and it would
later go up to 920 megahertz.  With the highspeed frequency, the
onemegabyte radios will run at 2.4 gigabits, and 1.5 will run at 5.7.
At 5.7, rain can be a factor, but it would have to be tropical rain,
unlike what falls in most parts of the United States.

                                 

SESSION IV.  IMAGE CAPTURE, TEXT CAPTURE, OVERVIEW OF TEXT AND
             IMAGE STORAGE FORMATS

William HOOTON, vice president of operations, INET, moderated this session.


KENNEY  Factors influencing development of CXP  Advantages of using
digital technology versus photocopy and microfilm  A primary goal of
CXP publishing challenges  Characteristics of copies printed  Quality
of samples achieved in image capture  Several factors to be considered
in choosing scanning  Emphasis of CXP on timely and costeffective
production of blackandwhite printed facsimiles  Results of producing
microfilm from digital files  Advantages of creating microfilm  Details
concerning production  Costs  Role of digital technology in library
preservation 


Anne KENNEY, associate director, Department of Preservation and
Conservation, Cornell University, opened her talk by observing that the
Cornell Xerox Project CXP has been guided by the assumption that the
ability to produce printed facsimiles or to replace paper with paper
would be important, at least for the present generation of users and
equipment.  She described three factors that influenced development of
the project:  1 Because the project has emphasized the preservation of
deteriorating brittle books, the quality of what was produced had to be
sufficiently high to return a paper replacement to the shelf.  CXP was
only interested in using:  2 a system that was costeffective, which
meant that it had to be costcompetitive with the processes currently
available, principally photocopy and microfilm, and 3 new or currently
available product hardware and software.

KENNEY described the advantages that using digital technology offers over
both photocopy and microfilm:  1 The potential exists to create a higher
quality reproduction of a deteriorating original than conventional
lightlens technology.  2 Because a digital image is an encoded
representation, it can be reproduced again and again with no resulting
loss of quality, as opposed to the situation with lightlens processes,
in which there is discernible difference between a second and a
subsequent generation of an image.  3 A digital image can be manipulated
in a number of ways to improve image capture for example, Xerox has
developed a windowing application that enables one to capture a page
containing both text and illustrations in a manner that optimizes the
reproduction of both.  With lightlens technology, one must choose which
to optimize, text or the illustration in preservation microfilming, the
current practice is to shoot an illustrated page twice, once to highlight
