developed out of the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae project and designed for
the use of classical scholars.  There are perhaps 400 IBYCUS computers in
the country, most of which are in university classics departments.
Ultimately, it is anticipated that the CDROM edition of the Founding
Fathers documents will run on any IBMcompatible or Macintosh computer
with a CDROM drive.  Numerous changes in the software will also occur
before the project is completed.  Editors note: an IBYCUS was
unavailable to demonstrate the CDROM.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Several additional features of WPP clarified 


Discussion following TWOHIGs presentation served to clarify several
additional features, including 1 that the projects primary
intellectual product consists in the electronic transcription of the
material 2 that the text transmitted to the CDROM people is not
marked up 3 that cataloging and subjectindexing of the material
remain to be worked out though at this point material can be retrieved
by name and 4 that because all the searching is done in the hardware,
the IBYCUS is designed to read a CDROM which contains only sequential
text files.  Technically, it then becomes very easy to read the material
off and put it on another device.

                                 


LEBRON  Overview of the history of the joint project between AAAS and
OCLC  Several practices the online environment shares with traditional
publishing on hard copy  Several technical and behavioral barriers to
electronic publishing  How AAAS and OCLC arrived at the subject of
clinical trials  Advantages of the electronic format and other features
of OJCCT  An illustrated tour of the journal 


Maria LEBRON, managing editor, The Online Journal of Current Clinical
Trials OJCCT, presented an illustrated overview of the history of the
joint project between the American Association for the Advancement of
Science AAAS and the Online Computer Library Center, Inc. OCLC.  The
joint venture between AAAS and OCLC owes its beginning to a
reorganization launched by the new chief executive officer at OCLC about
three years ago and combines the strengths of these two disparate
organizations.  In short, OJCCT represents the process of scholarly
publishing on line.

LEBRON next discussed several practices the online environment shares
with traditional publishing on hard copyfor example, peer review of
manuscriptsthat are highly important in the academic world.  LEBRON
noted in particular the implications of citation counts for tenure
committees and grants committees.  In the traditional hardcopy
environment, citation counts are readily demonstrable, whereas the
online environment represents an ethereal medium to most academics.

LEBRON remarked several technical and behavioral barriers to electronic
publishing, for instance, the problems in transmission created by special
characters or by complex graphics and halftones.  In addition, she noted
economic limitations such as the storage costs of maintaining back issues
and market or audience education.

Manuscripts cannot be uploaded to OJCCT, LEBRON explained, because it is
not a bulletin board or Email, forms of electronic transmission of
information that have created an ambience clouding peoples understanding
of what the journal is attempting to do.  OJCCT, which publishes
peerreviewed medical articles dealing with the subject of clinical
trials, includes text, tabular material, and graphics, although at this
time it can transmit only line illustrations.

