To thee and to thy race I give as lords
Possess it, and all things that therein live,
Or live in sea, or air beast, fish, and fowl.
In sign whereof, each bird and beast behold
After their kinds I bring them to receive
From thee their names, and pay thee fealty
With low subjection understand the same
Of fish within their watery residence,
Not hither summoned, since they cannot change
Their element, to draw the thinner air.
As thus he spake, each bird and beast behold
Approaching two and two these cowering low
With blandishment each bird stooped on his wing.
I named them, as they passed, and understood
Their nature, with such knowledge God endued
My sudden apprehension:  But in these
I found not what methought I wanted still
And to the heavenly Vision thus presumed.
O, by what name, for thou above all these,
Above mankind, or aught than mankind higher,
Surpassest far my naming how may I
Adore thee, Author of this universe,
And all this good to man? for whose well being
So amply, and with hands so liberal,
Thou hast provided all things:  But with me
I see not who partakes.  In solitude
What happiness, who can enjoy alone,
Or, all enjoying, what contentment find?
Thus I presumptuous and the Vision bright,
As with a smile more brightened, thus replied.
What callest thou solitude?  Is not the Earth
With various living creatures, and the air
Replenished, and all these at thy command
To come and play before thee?  Knowest thou not
Their language and their ways?  They also know,
And reason not contemptibly:  With these
Find pastime, and bear rule thy realm is large.
So spake the Universal Lord, and seemed
So ordering:  I, with leave of speech implored,
And humble deprecation, thus replied.
Let not my words offend thee, Heavenly Power
My Maker, be propitious while I speak.
Hast thou not made me here thy substitute,
And these inferiour far beneath me set?
Among unequals what society
Can sort, what harmony, or true delight?
Which must be mutual, in proportion due
Given and received but, in disparity
The one intense, the other still remiss,
Cannot well suit with either, but soon prove
Tedious alike:  Of fellowship I speak
Such as I seek, fit to participate
All rational delight: wherein the brute
Cannot be human consort:  They rejoice
Each with their kind, lion with lioness
So fitly them in pairs thou hast combined:
Much less can bird with beast, or fish with fowl
So well converse, nor with the ox the ape
Worse then can man with beast, and least of all.
Whereto the Almighty answered, not displeased.
A nice and subtle happiness, I see,
Thou to thyself proposest, in the choice
