The organs of her fancy, and with them forge
Illusions, as he list, phantasms and dreams
Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint
The animal spirits, that from pure blood arise
Like gentle breaths from rivers pure, thence raise
At least distempered, discontented thoughts,
Vain hopes, vain aims, inordinate desires,
Blown up with high conceits ingendering pride.
Him thus intent Ithuriel with his spear
Touched lightly for no falshood can endure
Touch of celestial temper, but returns
Of force to its own likeness:  Up he starts
Discovered and surprised.  As when a spark
Lights on a heap of nitrous powder, laid
Fit for the tun some magazine to store
Against a rumoured war, the smutty grain,
With sudden blaze diffused, inflames the air
So started up in his own shape the Fiend.
Back stept those two fair Angels, half amazed
So sudden to behold the grisly king
Yet thus, unmoved with fear, accost him soon.
Which of those rebel Spirits adjudged to Hell
Comest thou, escaped thy prison? and, transformed,
Why satst thou like an enemy in wait,
Here watching at the head of these that sleep?
Know ye not then said Satan, filled with scorn,
Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate
For you, there sitting where ye durst not soar:
Not to know me argues yourselves unknown,
The lowest of your throng or, if ye know,
Why ask ye, and superfluous begin
Your message, like to end as much in vain?
To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn.
Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same,
Or undiminished brightness to be known,
As when thou stoodest in Heaven upright and pure
That glory then, when thou no more wast good,
Departed from thee and thou resemblest now
Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foul.
But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give account
To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep
This place inviolable, and these from harm.
So spake the Cherub and his grave rebuke,
Severe in youthful beauty, added grace
Invincible:  Abashed the Devil stood,
And felt how awful goodness is, and saw
Virtue in her shape how lovely saw, and pined
His loss but chiefly to find here observed
His lustre visibly impaired yet seemed
Undaunted.  If I must contend, said he,
Best with the best, the sender, not the sent,
Or all at once more glory will be won,
Or less be lost.  Thy fear, said Zephon bold,
Will save us trial what the least can do
Single against thee wicked, and thence weak.
The Fiend replied not, overcome with rage
But, like a proud steed reined, went haughty on,
Champing his iron curb:  To strive or fly
He held it vain awe from above had quelled
His heart, not else dismayed.  Now drew they nigh
The western point, where those halfrounding guards
Just met, and closing stood in squadron joined,
A waiting next command.  To whom their Chief,
Gabriel, from the front thus called aloud.
