
DUKE SENIOR	I do remember in this shepherd boy
	Some lively touches of my daughters favour.

ORLANDO	My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
	Methought he was a brother to your daughter:
	But, my good lord, this boy is forestborn,
	And hath been tutord in the rudiments
	Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
	Whom he reports to be a great magician,
	Obscured in the circle of this forest.

	Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

JAQUES	There is, sure, another flood toward, and these
	couples are coming to the ark. Here comes a pair of
	very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called fools.

TOUCHSTONE	Salutation and greeting to you all!

JAQUES	Good my lord, bid him welcome: this is the
	motleyminded gentleman that I have so often met in
	the forest: he hath been a courtier, he swears.

TOUCHSTONE	If any man doubt that, let him put me to my
	purgation. I have trod a measure I have flattered
	a lady I have been politic with my friend, smooth
	with mine enemy I have undone three tailors I have
	had four quarrels, and like to have fought one.

JAQUES	And how was that taen up?

TOUCHSTONE	Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the
	seventh cause.

JAQUES	How seventh cause? Good my lord, like this fellow.

DUKE SENIOR	I like him very well.

TOUCHSTONE	God ild you, sir I desire you of the like. I
	press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country
	copulatives, to swear and to forswear: according as
	marriage binds and blood breaks: a poor virgin,
	sir, an illfavoured thing, sir, but mine own a poor
	humour of mine, sir, to take that that no man else
	will: rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a
	poor house as your pearl in your foul oyster.

DUKE SENIOR	By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.

TOUCHSTONE	According to the fools bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.

JAQUES	But, for the seventh cause how did you find the
	quarrel on the seventh cause?

TOUCHSTONE	Upon a lie seven times removed:bear your body more
	seeming, Audrey:as thus, sir. I did dislike the
	cut of a certain courtiers beard: he sent me word,
	if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the
	mind it was: this is called the Retort Courteous.
	If I sent him word again it was not well cut, he
