reusability and longevity of data  TEI conformance explicitly allows
extension or modification of the TEI tag set  Administrative background
of the TEI  Several design goals for the TEI tag set  An absolutely
fixed requirement of the TEI Guidelines  Challenges the TEI has
attempted to face  Good texts not beyond economic feasibility  The
issue of reproducibility or processability  The issue of mages as
simulacra for the text redux  Ones model of text determines what ones
software can do with a text and has economic consequences 


Prior to speaking about SGML and markup, Michael SPERBERGMcQUEEN, editor,
Text Encoding Initiative TEI, University of IllinoisChicago, first drew
a distinction between texts and computers:  Texts are abstract cultural
and linguistic objects while computers are complicated physical devices,
he said.  Abstract objects cannot be placed inside physical devices with
computers one can only represent text and act upon those representations.

The recognition that all representation is encoding, SPERBERGMcQUEEN
argued, leads to the recognition of two things:  1 The topic description
for this session is slightly misleading, because there can be no discussion
of pros and cons of textcoding unless what one means is pros and cons of
working with text with computers.  2 No text can be represented in a
computer without some sort of encoding images are one way of encoding text,
ASCII is another, SGML yet another.  There is no encoding without some
information loss, that is, there is no perfect reproduction of a text that
allows one to do away with the original.  Thus, the question becomes,
What is the most useful representation of text for a serious work?
This depends on what kind of serious work one is talking about.

The projects demonstrated the previous day all involved highly complex
information and fairly complex manipulation of the textual material.
In order to use that complicated information, one has to calculate it
slowly or manually and store the result.  It needs to be stored, therefore,
as part of ones representation of the text.  Thus, one needs to store the
structure in the text.  To deal with complicated representations of text,
one needs somehow to control the complexity of the representation of a text
that means one needs a way of finding out whether a document and an
electronic representation of a document is legal or not and that
means one needs a grammar of documents.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN discussed the variety of forms of formal grammars,
implicit and explicit, as applied to text, and their capabilities.  He
argued that these grammars correspond to different models of text that
different developers have.  For example, one implicit model of the text
is that there is no internal structure, but just one thing after another,
a few characters and then perhaps a starttitle command, and then a few
more characters and an endtitle command.  SPERBERGMcQUEEN also
distinguished several kinds of text that have a sort of hierarchical
structure that is not very well defined, which, typically, corresponds
to grammars that are not very well defined, as well as hierarchies that
are very well defined e.g., the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae and extremely
complicated things such as SGML, which handle strictly hierarchical data
very nicely.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN conceded that one other model not illustrated on his two
displays was the model of text as a bitmapped image, an image of a page,
and confessed to having been converted to a limited extent by the
Workshop to the view that electronic images constitute a promising,
probably superior alternative to microfilming.  But he was not convinced
that electronic images represent a serious attempt to represent text in
electronic form.  Many of their problems stem from the fact that they are
not direct attempts to represent the text but attempts to represent the
page, thus making them representations of representations.

In this situation of increasingly complicated textual information and the
need to control that complexity in a useful way which begs the question
of the need for good textual grammars, one has the introduction of SGML.
With SGML, one can develop specific documenttype declarations
for specific text types or, as with the TEI, attempts to generate
general documenttype declarations that can handle all sorts of text.
The TEI is an attempt to develop formats for text representation that
will ensure the kind of reusability and longevity of data discussed earlier.
It offers a way to stay alive in the state of permanent technological
revolution.

It has been a continuing challenge in the TEI to create document grammars
that do some work in controlling the complexity of the textual object but
also allowing one to represent the real text that one will find.
Fundamental to the notion of the TEI is that TEI conformance allows one
the ability to extend or modify the TEI tag set so that it fits the text
that one is attempting to represent.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN next outlined the administrative background of the TEI.
The TEI is an international project to develop and disseminate guidelines
for the encoding and interchange of machinereadable text.  It is
