In wise deport, spake much of right and wrong,
Of justice, or religion, truth, and peace,
And judgement from above: him old and young
Exploded, and had seized with violent hands,
Had not a cloud descending snatched him thence
Unseen amid the throng: so violence
Proceeded, and oppression, and swordlaw,
Through all the plain, and refuge none was found.
Adam was all in tears, and to his guide
Lamenting turned full sad O!what are these,
Deaths ministers, not men? who thus deal death
Inhumanly to men, and multiply
Ten thousandfold the sin of him who slew
His brother: for of whom such massacre
Make they, but of their brethren men of men
But who was that just man, whom had not Heaven
Rescued, had in his righteousness been lost?
To whom thus Michael.  These are the product
Of those illmated marriages thou sawest
Where good with bad were matched, who of themselves
Abhor to join and, by imprudence mixed,
Produce prodigious births of body or mind.
Such were these giants, men of high renown
For in those days might only shall be admired,
And valour and heroick virtue called
To overcome in battle, and subdue
Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite
Manslaughter, shall be held the highest pitch
Of human glory and for glory done
Of triumph, to be styled great conquerours
Patrons of mankind, Gods, and sons of Gods
Destroyers rightlier called, and plagues of men.
Thus fame shall be achieved, renown on earth
And what most merits fame, in silence hid.
But he, the seventh from thee, whom thou beheldst
The only righteous in a world preverse,
And therefore hated, therefore so beset
With foes, for daring single to be just,
And utter odious truth, that God would come
To judge them with his Saints him the Most High
Rapt in a balmy cloud with winged steeds
Did, as thou sawest, receive, to walk with God
High in salvation and the climes of bliss,
Exempt from death to show thee what reward
Awaits the good the rest what punishment
Which now direct thine eyes and soon behold.
He looked, and saw the face of things quite changed
The brazen throat of war had ceased to roar
All now was turned to jollity and game,
To luxury and riot, feast and dance
Marrying or prostituting, as befel,
Rape or adultery, where passing fair
Allured them thence from cups to civil broils.
At length a reverend sire among them came,
And of their doings great dislike declared,
And testified against their ways he oft
Frequented their assemblies, whereso met,
Triumphs or festivals and to them preached
Conversion and repentance, as to souls
In prison, under judgements imminent:
But all in vain: which when he saw, he ceased
Contending, and removed his tents far off
Then, from the mountain hewing timber tall,
Began to build a vessel of huge bulk
Measured by cubit, length, and breadth, and highth
Smeared round with pitch and in the side a door
Contrived and of provisions laid in large,
For man and beast: when lo, a wonder strange!
Of every beast, and bird, and insect small,
Came sevens, and pairs and entered in as taught
Their order: last the sire and his three sons,
With their four wives and God made fast the door.
Mean while the southwind rose, and, with black wings
Widehovering, all the clouds together drove
From under Heaven the hills to their supply
Vapour, and exhalation dusk and moist,
Sent up amain and now the thickened sky
Like a dark cieling stood down rushed the rain
Impetuous and continued, till the earth
No more was seen: the floating vessel swum
Uplifted, and secure with beaked prow
Rode tilting oer the waves all dwellings else
Flood overwhelmed, and them with all their pomp
Deep under water rolled sea covered sea,
Sea without shore and in their palaces,
Where luxury late reigned, seamonsters whelped
And stabled of mankind, so numerous late,
All left, in one small bottom swum imbarked.
How didst thou grieve then, Adam, to behold
The end of all thy offspring, end so sad,
Depopulation!  Thee another flood,
Of tears and sorrow a flood, thee also drowned,
And sunk thee as thy sons till, gently reared
By the Angel, on thy feet thou stoodest at last,
Though comfortless as when a father mourns
His children, all in view destroyed at once
And scarce to the Angel utterdst thus thy plaint.
O visions ill foreseen!  Better had I
Lived ignorant of future! so had borne
My part of evil only, each days lot
Enough to bear those now, that were dispensed
The burden of many ages, on me light
At once, by my foreknowledge gaining birth
Abortive, to torment me ere their being,
With thought that they must be.  Let no man seek
Henceforth to be foretold, what shall befall
Him or his children evil he may be sure,
Which neither his foreknowing can prevent
And he the future evil shall no less
In apprehension than in substance feel,
Grievous to bear: but that care now is past,
Man is not whom to warn: those few escaped
Famine and anguish will at last consume,
Wandering that watery desart:  I had hope,
When violence was ceased, and war on earth,
All would have then gone well peace would have crowned
With length of happy days the race of Man
But I was far deceived for now I see
Peace to corrupt no less than war to waste.
How comes it thus? unfold, celestial Guide,
And whether here the race of Man will end.
To whom thus Michael.  Those, whom last thou sawest
In triumph and luxurious wealth, are they
First seen in acts of prowess eminent
And great exploits, but of true virtue void
Who, having spilt much blood, and done much wast
Subduing nations, and achieved thereby
Fame in the world, high titles, and rich prey
Shall change their course to pleasure, ease, and sloth,
Surfeit, and lust till wantonness and pride
Raise out of friendship hostile deeds in peace.
The conquered also, and enslaved by war,
Shall, with their freedom lost, all virtue lose
And fear of God from whom their piety feigned
In sharp contest of battle found no aid
Against invaders therefore, cooled in zeal,
Thenceforth shall practice how to live secure,
Worldly or dissolute, on what their lords
Shall leave them to enjoy for the earth shall bear
More than enough, that temperance may be tried:
So all shall turn degenerate, all depraved
Justice and temperance, truth and faith, forgot
One man except, the only son of light
In a dark age, against example good,
Against allurement, custom, and a world
Offended: fearless of reproach and scorn,
The grandchild, with twelve sons encreased, departs
From Canaan, to a land hereafter called
Egypt, divided by the river Nile
See where it flows, disgorging at seven mouths
Into the sea:  To sojourn in that land
He comes, invited by a younger son
In time of dearth a son, whose worthy deeds
Raise him to be the second in that realm
Of Pharaoh:  There he dies, and leaves his race
Growing into a nation, and now grown
Suspected to a sequent king, who seeks
To stop their overgrowth, as inmate guests
Or violence, he of their wicked ways
Shall them admonish and before them set
The paths of righteousness, how much more safe
And full of peace denouncing wrath to come
On their impenitence and shall return
Of them derided, but of God observed
The one just man alive by his command
Shall build a wonderous ark, as thou beheldst,
To save himself, and houshold, from amidst
A world devote to universal wrack.
No sooner he, with them of man and beast
Select for life, shall in the ark be lodged,
And sheltered round but all the cataracts
Of Heaven set open on the Earth shall pour
Rain, day and night all fountains of the deep,
Broke up, shall heave the ocean to usurp
Beyond all bounds till inundation rise
Above the highest hills:  Then shall this mount
Of Paradise by might of waves be moved
Out of his place, pushed by the horned flood,
With all his verdure spoiled, and trees adrift,
Down the great river to the opening gulf,
And there take root an island salt and bare,
The haunt of seals, and orcs, and seamews clang:
To teach thee that God attributes to place
No sanctity, if none be thither brought
By men who there frequent, or therein dwell.
And now, what further shall ensue, behold.
He looked, and saw the ark hull on the flood,
Which now abated for the clouds were fled,
Driven by a keen northwind, that, blowing dry,
Wrinkled the face of deluge, as decayed
And the clear sun on his wide watery glass
Gazed hot, and of the fresh wave largely drew,
As after thirst which made their flowing shrink
From standing lake to tripping ebb, that stole
With soft foot towards the deep who now had stopt
His sluces, as the Heaven his windows shut.
The ark no more now floats, but seems on ground,
Fast on the top of some high mountain fixed.
And now the tops of hills, as rocks, appear
With clamour thence the rapid currents drive,
Towards the retreating sea, their furious tide.
Forthwith from out the ark a raven flies,
And after him, the surer messenger,
A dove sent forth once and again to spy
Green tree or ground, whereon his foot may light:
The second time returning, in his bill
An oliveleaf he brings, pacifick sign:
Anon dry ground appears, and from his ark
The ancient sire descends, with all his train
Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout,
Grateful to Heaven, over his head beholds
A dewy cloud, and in the cloud a bow
Conspicuous with three lifted colours gay,
Betokening peace from God, and covenant new.
Whereat the heart of Adam, erst so sad,
Greatly rejoiced and thus his joy broke forth.
O thou, who future things canst represent
As present, heavenly Instructer!  I revive
At this last sight assured that Man shall live,
With all the creatures, and their seed preserve.
Far less I now lament for one whole world
Of wicked sons destroyed, than I rejoice
For one man found so perfect, and so just,
That God vouchsafes to raise another world
From him, and all his anger to forget.
But say, what mean those coloured streaks in Heaven
Distended, as the brow of God appeased?
Or serve they, as a flowery verge, to bind
The fluid skirts of that same watery cloud,
Lest it again dissolve, and shower the earth?
To whom the ArchAngel.  Dextrously thou aimest
So willingly doth God remit his ire,
Though late repenting him of Man depraved
Grieved at his heart, when looking down he saw
The whole earth filled with violence, and all flesh
Corrupting each their way yet, those removed,
Such grace shall one just man find in his sight,
That he relents, not to blot out mankind
And makes a covenant never to destroy
The earth again by flood nor let the sea
Surpass his bounds nor rain to drown the world,
With man therein or beast but, when he brings
Over the earth a cloud, will therein set
His triplecoloured bow, whereon to look,
And call to mind his covenant: Day and night,
Seedtime and harvest, heat and hoary frost,
Shall hold their course till fire purge all things new,
Both Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell.



Book XII


As one who in his journey bates at noon,
Though bent on speed so here the ArchAngel paused
Betwixt the world destroyed and world restored,
If Adam aught perhaps might interpose
Then, with transition sweet, new speech resumes.
Thus thou hast seen one world begin, and end
And Man, as from a second stock, proceed.
Much thou hast yet to see but I perceive
Thy mortal sight to fail objects divine
Must needs impair and weary human sense:
Henceforth what is to come I will relate
Thou therefore give due audience, and attend.
This second source of Men, while yet but few,
And while the dread of judgement past remains
Fresh in their minds, fearing the Deity,
With some regard to what is just and right
Shall lead their lives, and multiply apace
Labouring the soil, and reaping plenteous crop,
Corn, wine, and oil and, from the herd or flock,
Oft sacrificing bullock, lamb, or kid,
With large wineofferings poured, and sacred feast,
Shall spend their days in joy unblamed and dwell
Long time in peace, by families and tribes,
Under paternal rule: till one shall rise
Of proud ambitious heart who, not content
With fair equality, fraternal state,
Will arrogate dominion undeserved
Over his brethren, and quite dispossess
Concord and law of nature from the earth
Hunting and men not beasts shall be his game
With war, and hostile snare, such as refuse
Subjection to his empire tyrannous:
A mighty hunter thence he shall be styled
Before the Lord as in despite of Heaven,
Or from Heaven, claiming second sovranty
And from rebellion shall derive his name,
Though of rebellion others he accuse.
He with a crew, whom like ambition joins
With him or under him to tyrannize,
Marching from Eden towards the west, shall find
The plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge
Boils out from under ground, the mouth of Hell:
Of brick, and of that stuff, they cast to build
A city and tower, whose top may reach to Heaven
And get themselves a name lest, far dispersed
In foreign lands, their memory be lost
Regardless whether good or evil fame.
But God, who oft descends to visit men
Unseen, and through their habitations walks
To mark their doings, them beholding soon,
Comes down to see their city, ere the tower
Obstruct Heaventowers, and in derision sets
Upon their tongues a various spirit, to rase
Quite out their native language and, instead,
To sow a jangling noise of words unknown:
Forthwith a hideous gabble rises loud,
Among the builders each to other calls
Not understood till hoarse, and all in rage,
As mocked they storm: great laughter was in Heaven,
And looking down, to see the hubbub strange,
And hear the din:  Thus was the building left
Ridiculous, and the work Confusion named.
Whereto thus Adam, fatherly displeased.
O execrable son! so to aspire
Above his brethren to himself assuming
Authority usurped, from God not given:
He gave us only over beast, fish, fowl,
Dominion absolute that right we hold
By his donation but man over men
He made not lord such title to himself
Reserving, human left from human free.
But this usurper his encroachment proud
Stays not on Man to God his tower intends
Siege and defiance:  Wretched man!what food
Will he convey up thither, to sustain
Himself and his rash army where thin air
Above the clouds will pine his entrails gross,
And famish him of breath, if not of bread?
To whom thus Michael.  Justly thou abhorrest
That son, who on the quiet state of men
Such trouble brought, affecting to subdue
Rational liberty yet know withal,
Since thy original lapse, true liberty
Is lost, which always with right reason dwells
Twinned, and from her hath no dividual being:
Reason in man obscured, or not obeyed,
Immediately inordinate desires,
And upstart passions, catch the government
From reason and to servitude reduce
Man, till then free.  Therefore, since he permits
Within himself unworthy powers to reign
Over free reason, God, in judgement just,
Subjects him from without to violent lords
Who oft as undeservedly enthrall
His outward freedom:  Tyranny must be
Though to the tyrant thereby no excuse.
Yet sometimes nations will decline so low
From virtue, which is reason, that no wrong,
But justice, and some fatal curse annexed,
Deprives them of their outward liberty
Their inward lost:  Witness the irreverent son
Of him who built the ark who, for the shame
Done to his father, heard this heavy curse,
Servant of servants, on his vicious race.
Thus will this latter, as the former world,
Still tend from bad to worse till God at last,
Wearied with their iniquities, withdraw
His presence from among them, and avert
His holy eyes resolving from thenceforth
To leave them to their own polluted ways
And one peculiar nation to select
From all the rest, of whom to be invoked,
A nation from one faithful man to spring:
Him on this side Euphrates yet residing,
Bred up in idolworship:  O, that men
Canst thou believe? should be so stupid grown,
While yet the patriarch lived, who scaped the flood,
As to forsake the living God, and fall
To worship their own work in wood and stone
For Gods!  Yet him God the Most High vouchsafes
To call by vision, from his fathers house,
His kindred, and false Gods, into a land
Which he will show him and from him will raise
A mighty nation and upon him shower
His benediction so, that in his seed
All nations shall be blest: he straight obeys
Not knowing to what land, yet firm believes:
I see him, but thou canst not, with what faith
He leaves his Gods, his friends, and native soil,
Ur of Chaldaea, passing now the ford
To Haran after him a cumbrous train
Of herds and flocks, and numerous servitude
Not wandering poor, but trusting all his wealth
With God, who called him, in a land unknown.
Canaan he now attains I see his tents
Pitched about Sechem, and the neighbouring plain
Of Moreh there by promise he receives
Gift to his progeny of all that land,
From Hameth northward to the Desart south
Things by their names I call, though yet unnamed
From Hermon east to the great western Sea
Mount Hermon, yonder sea each place behold
In prospect, as I point them on the shore
Mount Carmel here, the doublefounted stream,
Jordan, true limit eastward but his sons
Shall dwell to Senir, that long ridge of hills.
This ponder, that all nations of the earth
Shall in his seed be blessed:  By that seed
Is meant thy great Deliverer, who shall bruise
The Serpents head whereof to thee anon
Plainlier shall be revealed.  This patriarch blest,
Whom faithful Abraham due time shall call,
A son, and of his son a grandchild, leaves
Like him in faith, in wisdom, and renown:
The grandchild, with twelve sons increased, departs
From Canaan to a land hereafter called
Egypt, divided by the river Nile
See where it flows, disgorging at seven mouths
Into the sea. To sojourn in that land
He comes, invited by a younger son
In time of dearth, a son whose worthy deeds
Raise him to be the second in that realm
Of Pharaoh. There he dies, and leaves his race
Growing into a nation, and now grown
Suspected to a sequent king, who seeks
To stop their overgrowth, as inmate guests
Too numerous whence of guests he makes them slaves
Inhospitably, and kills their infant males:
Till by two brethren these two brethren call
Moses and Aaron sent from God to claim
His people from enthralment, they return,
With glory and spoil, back to their promised land.
But first, the lawless tyrant, who denies
To know their God, or message to regard,
Must be compelled by signs and judgements dire
To blood unshed the rivers must be turned
