than from conversions at official currency exchange rates. The PPP method
normally involves the use of international dollar price weights, which are
applied to the quantities of goods and services produced in a given economy.
In addition to the lack of reliable data from the majority of countries, the
statistician faces a major difficulty in specifying, identifying, and allowing
for the quality of goods and services. The division of a PPP GNPGDP estimate
in dollars by the corresponding estimate in the local currency gives the PPP
conversion rate. One thousand dollars will buy the same market basket of goods
in the US as one thousand dollars  converted to the local currency at the PPP
conversion rate  will buy in the other country. GNPGDP estimates for the
LDCs, on the other hand, are based on the conversion of GNPGDP estimates in
local currencies to dollars at the official currency exchange rates. One
caution: the proportion of, say, defense expenditures as a percent of GNPGDP
in local currency accounts may differ substantially from the proportion when
GNPGDP accounts are expressed in PPP terms, as, for example, when an observer
estimates the dollar level of Russian or Japanese military expenditures
similar problems exist when components are expressed in dollars under currency
exchange rate procedures. Finally, as academic research moves forward on the
PPP method, we hope to convert all GNPGDP estimates to this method in future
editions of The World Factbook.

Growth rate population: The annual percent change in the population,
resulting from a surplus or deficit of births over deaths and the balance
of migrants entering and leaving a country. The rate may be positive or
negative.

Illicit drugs: There are five categories of illicit drugs  narcotics,
stimulants, depressants sedatives, hallucinogens, and cannabis. These
categories include many drugs legally produced and prescribed by doctors as
well as those illegally produced and sold outside medical channels.

Cannabis Cannabis sativa is the common hemp plant, which provides
hallucinogens with some sedative properties, and includes marijuana pot,
Acapulco gold, grass, reefer, tetrahydrocannabinol THC, Marinol, hashish
hash, and hashish oil hash oil.

Coca Erythroxylon coca is a bush, and the leaves contain the stimulant
cocaine. Coca is not to be confused with cocoa, which comes from cacao seeds
and is used in making chocolate, cocoa, and cocoa butter.

Cocaine is a stimulant derived from the leaves of the coca bush.

Depressants sedatives are drugs that reduce tension and anxiety and include
chloral hydrate, barbiturates Amytal, Nembutal, Seconal, phenobarbital,
benzodiazepines Librium, Valium, methaqualone Quaalude, glutethimide
Doriden, and others Equanil, Placidyl, Valmid.

Drugs are any chemical substances that effect a physical, mental, emotional,
or behavioral change in an individual.

Drug abuse is the use of any licit or illicit chemical substance that results
in physical, mental, emotional, or behavioral impairment in an individual.

Hallucinogens are drugs that affect sensation, thinking, selfawareness, and
emotion.

Hallucinogens include LSD acid, microdot, mescaline and peyote mexc,
buttons, cactus, amphetamine variants PMA, STP, DOB, phencyclidine PCP,
angel dust, hog, phencyclidine analogues PCE, PCPy, TCP, and others
psilocybin, psilocyn.

Hashish is the resinous exudate of the cannabis or hemp plant Cannabis
sativa.

Heroin is a semisynthetic derivative of morphine.

Marijuana is the dried leaves of the cannabis or hemp plant Cannabis sativa.

Narcotics are drugs that relieve pain, often induce sleep, and refer to opium,
opium derivatives, and synthetic substitutes. Natural narcotics include opium
paregoric, parepectolin, morphine MSContin, Roxanol, codeine Tylenol
wcodeine, Empirin wcodeine, Robitussan AC, and thebaine. Semisynthetic
narcotics include heroin horse, smack, and hydromorphone Dilaudid.
Synthetic narcotics include meperidine or Pethidine Demerol, Mepergan,
methadone Dolophine, Methadose, and others Darvon, Lomotil.

Opium is the milky exudate of the incised, unripe seedpod of the opium poppy.

Opium poppy Papaver somniferum is the source for many natural and
semisynthetic narcotics.

Poppy straw concentrate is the alkaloid derived from the mature dried opium
poppy.

Qat kat, khat is a stimulant from the buds or leaves of Catha edulis that
is chewed or drunk as tea.

Stimulants are drugs that relieve mild depression, increase energy and
activity, and include cocaine coke, snow, crack, amphetamines Desoxyn,
Dexedrine, phenmetrazine Preludin, methylphenidate Ritalin, and others
Cylert, Sanorex, Tenuate.

Infant mortality rate: The number of deaths to infants under one year old in
a given year per l,000 live births occurring in the same year.

Land use: Human use of the land surface is categorized as arable land  land
cultivated for crops that are replanted after each harvest wheat, maize,
rice permanent crops  land cultivated for crops that are not replanted
after each harvest citrus, coffee, rubber meadows and pastures  land
permanently used for herbaceous forage crops forest and woodland  land
under dense or open stands of trees and other  any land type not specifi
cally mentioned above urban areas, roads, desert. The percentage figure for
irrigated land refers to the portion of the entire amount of land area that
is artificially supplied with water.

Leaders: The chief of state is the titular leader of the country who
represents the state at official and ceremonial funcions but is not involved
with the daytoday activities of the government. The head of government is
the administrative leader who manages the daytoday activities of the
government. In the UK, the monarch is the chief of state, and the Prime
Minister is the head of government. In the US, the President is both the
chief of state and the head of government.

Life expectancy at birth: The average number of years to be lived by a group
of people all born in the same year, if mortality at each age remains
constant in the future.

Literacy: There are no universal definitions and standards of literacy.
Unless otherwise noted, all rates are based on the most common definition 
the ability to read and write at a specified age. Detailing the standards
that individual countries use to assess the ability to read and write is
beyond the scope of this publication.

Maps: All maps will be available only in the printed version for the fore
seeable future.

Maritime claims: The proximity of neighboring states may prevent some
national claims from being fully extended.

Merchant marine: All ships engaged in the carriage of goods. All commercial
vessels as opposed to all nonmilitary ships, which excludes tugs, fishing
vessels, offshore oil rigs, etc. also, a grouping of merchant ships by
nationality or register.

Captive register  A register of ships maintained by a territory, possession,
or colony primarily or exclusively for the use of ships owned in the parent
country also referred to as an offshore register, the offshore equivalent
of an internal register. Ships on a captive register will fly the same flag
as the parent country, or a local variant of it, but will be subject to the
maritime laws and taxation rules of the offshore territory. Although the
nature of a captive register makes it especially desirable for ships owned in
the parent country, just as in the internal register, the ships may also be
owned abroad. The captive register then acts as a flag of convenience
register, except that it is not the register of an independent state.

Flag of convenience register  A national register offering registration to a
merchant ship not owned in the flag state. The major flags of convenience
FOC attract ships to their register by virtue of low fees, low or
nonexistent taxation of profits, and liberal manning requirements. True FOC
registers are characterized by having relatively few of the ships registered
actually owned in the flag state. Thus, while virtually any flag can be used
for ships under a given set of circumstances, an FOC register is one where
the majority of the merchant fleet is owned abroad.
It is also referred to as an open register.

Flag state  The nation in which a ship is registered and which holds legal
jurisdiction over operation of the ship, whether at home or abroad.
Differences in flag state maritime legislation determine how a ship is manned
and taxed and whether a foreignowned ship may be placed on the register.

Internal register  A register of ships maintained as a subset of a national
register. Ships on the internal register fly the national flag and have that
nationality but are subject to a separate set of maritime rules from those on
the main national register. These differences usually include lower taxation
of profits, manning by foreign nationals, and, usually, ownership outside the
flag state when it functions as an FOC register. The Norwegian International
Ship Register and Danish International Ship Register are the most notable
examples of an internal register.
Both have been instrumental in stemming flight from the national flag to
flags of convenience and in attracting foreignowned ships to the Norwegian
and Danish flags.

Merchant ship  A vessel that carries goods against payment of freight
commonly used to denote any nonmilitary ship but accurately restricted to
commercial vessels only.

Register  The record of a ships ownership and nationality as listed with
the maritime authorities of a country also, the compendium of such individual
ships registrations. Registration of a ship provides it with a nationality
and makes it subject to the laws of the country in which registered the flag
state regardless of the nationality of the ships ultimate owner.

Money figures: All are expressed in contemporaneous US dollars unless
otherwise indicated.

Net migration rate: The balance between the number of persons entering and
leaving a country during the year per 1,000 persons based on midyear
population. An excess of persons entering the country is referred to as net
immigration 3.56 migrants1,000 population an excess of persons leaving the
country as net emigration 9.26 migrants1,000 population.
