Fond! were it not in hope of thy reply:
For, while I sit with thee, I seem in Heaven
And sweeter thy discourse is to my ear
Than fruits of palmtree pleasantest to thirst
And hunger both, from labour, at the hour
Of sweet repast they satiate, and soon fill,
Though pleasant but thy words, with grace divine
Imbued, bring to their sweetness no satiety.
To whom thus Raphael answered heavenly meek.
Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of men,
Nor tongue ineloquent for God on thee
Abundantly his gifts hath also poured
Inward and outward both, his image fair:
Speaking, or mute, all comeliness and grace
Attends thee and each word, each motion, forms
Nor less think we in Heaven of thee on Earth
Than of our fellowservant, and inquire
Gladly into the ways of God with Man:
For God, we see, hath honoured thee, and set
On Man his equal love:  Say therefore on
For I that day was absent, as befel,
Bound on a voyage uncouth and obscure,
Far on excursion toward the gates of Hell
Squared in full legion such command we had
To see that none thence issued forth a spy,
Or enemy, while God was in his work
Lest he, incensed at such eruption bold,
Destruction with creation might have mixed.
Not that they durst without his leave attempt
But us he sends upon his high behests
For state, as Sovran King and to inure
Our prompt obedience.  Fast we found, fast shut,
The dismal gates, and barricadoed strong
But long ere our approaching heard within
Noise, other than the sound of dance or song,
Torment, and loud lament, and furious rage.
Glad we returned up to the coasts of light
Ere sabbathevening: so we had in charge.
But thy relation now for I attend,
Pleased with thy words no less than thou with mine.
So spake the Godlike Power, and thus our Sire.
For Man to tell how human life began
Is hard for who himself beginning knew
Desire with thee still longer to converse
Induced me.  As new waked from soundest sleep,
Soft on the flowery herb I found me laid,
In balmy sweat which with his beams the sun
Soon dried, and on the reeking moisture fed.
Straight toward Heaven my wondering eyes I turned,
And gazed a while the ample sky till, raised
By quick instinctive motion, up I sprung,
As thitherward endeavouring, and upright
Stood on my feet: about me round I saw
Hill, dale, and shady woods, and sunny plains,
And liquid lapse of murmuring streams by these,
Creatures that lived and moved, and walked, or flew
Birds on the branches warbling all things smiled
With fragrance and with joy my heart oerflowed.
Myself I then perused, and limb by limb
Surveyed, and sometimes went, and sometimes ran
With supple joints, as lively vigour led:
But who I was, or where, or from what cause,
Knew not to speak I tried, and forthwith spake
My tongue obeyed, and readily could name
Whateer I saw.  Thou Sun, said I, fair light,
And thou enlightened Earth, so fresh and gay,
Ye Hills, and Dales, ye Rivers, Woods, and Plains,
And ye that live and move, fair Creatures, tell,
