
        later editions continued as follows
    The Panther took piecrust, and gravy, and meat,
    While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
    When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon,
    Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon:
    While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,
    And concluded the banquet

  What IS the use of repeating all that stuff, the Mock Turtle
interrupted, if you dont explain it as you go on?  Its by far
the most confusing thing I ever heard!

  Yes, I think youd better leave off, said the Gryphon:  and
Alice was only too glad to do so.

  Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille? the
Gryphon went on.  Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you
a song?

  Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,
Alice replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather
offended tone, Hm! No accounting for tastes!  Sing her "Turtle
Soup," will you, old fellow?

  The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes
choked with sobs, to sing this:


    Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
    Waiting in a hot tureen!
    Who for such dainties would not stoop?
    Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
    Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
        Beauootiful Soooop!
        Beauootiful Soooop!
    Soooop of the eeevening,
        Beautiful, beautiful Soup!

    Beautiful Soup!  Who cares for fish,
    Game, or any other dish?
    Who would not give all else for two p
    ennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
    Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
        Beauootiful Soooop!
        Beauootiful Soooop!
    Soooop of the eeevening,
        Beautiful, beautiFUL SOUP!

  Chorus again! cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had
just begun to repeat it, when a cry of The trials beginning!
was heard in the distance.

  Come on! cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand,
it hurried off, without waiting for the end of the song.

  What trial is it? Alice panted as she ran but the Gryphon
only answered Come on! and ran the faster, while more and more
faintly came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the
melancholy words:

    Soooop of the eeevening,
        Beautiful, beautiful Soup!



                           CHAPTER XI
