No sanctity, if none be thither brought
By men who there frequent, or therein dwell.
And now, what further shall ensue, behold.
He looked, and saw the ark hull on the flood,
Which now abated for the clouds were fled,
Driven by a keen northwind, that, blowing dry,
Wrinkled the face of deluge, as decayed
And the clear sun on his wide watery glass
Gazed hot, and of the fresh wave largely drew,
As after thirst which made their flowing shrink
From standing lake to tripping ebb, that stole
With soft foot towards the deep who now had stopt
His sluces, as the Heaven his windows shut.
The ark no more now floats, but seems on ground,
Fast on the top of some high mountain fixed.
And now the tops of hills, as rocks, appear
With clamour thence the rapid currents drive,
Towards the retreating sea, their furious tide.
Forthwith from out the ark a raven flies,
And after him, the surer messenger,
A dove sent forth once and again to spy
Green tree or ground, whereon his foot may light:
The second time returning, in his bill
An oliveleaf he brings, pacifick sign:
Anon dry ground appears, and from his ark
The ancient sire descends, with all his train
Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout,
Grateful to Heaven, over his head beholds
A dewy cloud, and in the cloud a bow
Conspicuous with three lifted colours gay,
Betokening peace from God, and covenant new.
Whereat the heart of Adam, erst so sad,
Greatly rejoiced and thus his joy broke forth.
O thou, who future things canst represent
As present, heavenly Instructer!  I revive
At this last sight assured that Man shall live,
With all the creatures, and their seed preserve.
Far less I now lament for one whole world
Of wicked sons destroyed, than I rejoice
For one man found so perfect, and so just,
That God vouchsafes to raise another world
From him, and all his anger to forget.
But say, what mean those coloured streaks in Heaven
Distended, as the brow of God appeased?
Or serve they, as a flowery verge, to bind
The fluid skirts of that same watery cloud,
Lest it again dissolve, and shower the earth?
To whom the ArchAngel.  Dextrously thou aimest
So willingly doth God remit his ire,
Though late repenting him of Man depraved
Grieved at his heart, when looking down he saw
The whole earth filled with violence, and all flesh
Corrupting each their way yet, those removed,
Such grace shall one just man find in his sight,
That he relents, not to blot out mankind
And makes a covenant never to destroy
The earth again by flood nor let the sea
Surpass his bounds nor rain to drown the world,
With man therein or beast but, when he brings
Over the earth a cloud, will therein set
His triplecoloured bow, whereon to look,
And call to mind his covenant: Day and night,
Seedtime and harvest, heat and hoary frost,
