optical disc and document scanning applications, and design and
conversion of documents.  She detailed several of the main projects of
each:  1 in the category of image transfer and retrieval, a bilevel
image transfer format, ANSIAIIM MS53, which is a proposed standard that
describes a file header for image transfer between unlike systems when
the images are compressed using G3 and G4 compression 2 the category of
image evaluation, which includes the AIIMproposed TR26 tutorial on image
resolution this technical report will treat the differences and
similarities between classical or photographic and electronic imaging
3 design and conversion, which includes a proposed technical report
called "Forms Design Optimization for EIM" this report considers how
generalpurpose business forms can be best designed so that scanning is
optimized reprographic characteristics such as type, rules, background,
tint, and color will likewise be treated in the technical report 4
disk and document scanning applications includes a project a on planning
platters and disk management, b on generating an application profile for
EIM when images are stored and distributed on CDROM, and c on
evaluating SCSI2, and how a common command set can be generated for SCSI2
so that document scanners are more easily integrated.  ANSIAIIM MS53
will also apply to compressed images.

                                 


BATTIN  The implications of standards for preservation  A major
obstacle to successful cooperation  A hindrance to access in the digital
environment  Standards a doubleedged sword for those concerned with the
preservation of the human record  Nearterm prognosis for reliable
archival standards  Preservation concerns for electronic media  Need
for reconceptualizing our preservation principles  Standards in the real
world and the politics of reproduction  Need to redefine the concept of
archival and to begin to think in terms of life cycles  Cooperation and
the La Guardia Eight  Concerns generated by discussions on the problems
of preserving text and image  General principles to be adopted in a
world without standards 


Patricia BATTIN, president, the Commission on Preservation and Access
CPA, addressed the implications of standards for preservation.  She
listed several areas where the library profession and the analog world of
the printed book had made enormous contributions over the past hundred
yearsfor example, in bibliographic formats, binding standards, and, most
important, in determining what constitutes longevity or archival quality.

Although standards have lightened the preservation burden through the
development of national and international collaborative programs,
nevertheless, a pervasive mistrust of other peoples standards remains a
major obstacle to successful cooperation, BATTIN said.

The zeal to achieve perfection, regardless of the cost, has hindered
rather than facilitated access in some instances, and in the digital
environment, where no real standards exist, has brought an ironically
just reward.

BATTIN argued that standards are a doubleedged sword for those concerned
with the preservation of the human record, that is, the provision of
access to recorded knowledge in a multitude of media as far into the
future as possible.  Standards are essential to facilitate
interconnectivity and access, but, BATTIN said, as LYNCH pointed out
yesterday, if set too soon they can hinder creativity, expansion of
capability, and the broadening of access.  The characteristics of
standards for digital imagery differ radically from those for analog
imagery.  And the nature of digital technology implies continuing
volatility and change.  To reiterate, precipitous standardsetting can
inhibit creativity, but delayed standardsetting results in chaos.

Since in BATTINS opinion the nearterm prognosis for reliable archival
standards, as defined by librarians in the analog world, is poor, two
alternatives remain:  standing pat with the old technology, or
reconceptualizing.

Preservation concerns for electronic media fall into two general domains.
One is the continuing assurance of access to knowledge originally
generated, stored, disseminated, and used in electronic form.  This
domain contains several subdivisions, including 1 the closed,
proprietary systems discussed the previous day, bundled information such
as electronic journals and government agency records, and electronically
produced or captured raw data and 2 the application of digital
technologies to the reformatting of materials originally published on a
deteriorating analog medium such as acid paper or videotape.

The preservation of electronic media requires a reconceptualizing of our
preservation principles during a volatile, standardless transition which
may last far longer than any of us envision today.  BATTIN urged the
necessity of shifting focus from assessing, measuring, and setting
standards for the permanence of the medium to the concept of managing
continuing access to information stored on a variety of media and
requiring a variety of everchanging hardware and software for accessa
fundamental shift for the library profession.

BATTIN offered a primer on how to move forward with reasonable confidence
in a world without standards.  Her comments fell roughly into two sections:
1 standards in the real world and 2 the politics of reproduction.

In regard to realworld standards, BATTIN argued the need to redefine the
concept of archive and to begin to think in terms of life cycles.  In
the past, the naive assumption that paper would last forever produced a
cavalier attitude toward life cycles.  The transient nature of the
electronic media has compelled people to recognize and accept upfront the
concept of life cycles in place of permanency.

Digital standards have to be developed and set in a cooperative context
to ensure efficient exchange of information.  Moreover, during this
transition period, greater flexibility concerning how concepts such as
backup copies and archival copies in the CXP are defined is necessary,
or the opportunity to move forward will be lost.

In terms of cooperation, particularly in the university setting, BATTIN
also argued the need to avoid going off in a hundred different
directions.  The CPA has catalyzed a small group of universities called
the La Guardia Eightbecause La Guardia Airport is where meetings take
placeHarvard, Yale, Cornell, Princeton, Penn State, Tennessee,
Stanford, and USC, to develop a digital preservation consortium to look
at all these issues and develop de facto standards as we move along,
instead of waiting for something that is officially blessed.  Continuing
to apply analog values and definitions of standards to the digital
environment, BATTIN said, will effectively lead to forfeiture of the
benefits of digital technology to research and scholarship.

Under the second rubric, the politics of reproduction, BATTIN reiterated
an oftmade argument concerning the electronic library, namely, that it
is more difficult to transform than to create, and nowhere is that belief
expressed more dramatically than in the conversion of brittle books to
new media.  Preserving information published in electronic media involves
making sure the information remains accessible and that digital
information is not lost through reproduction.  In the analog world of
photocopies and microfilm, the issue of fidelity to the original becomes
paramount, as do issues of "Whose fidelity?" and "Whose original?"

BATTIN elaborated these arguments with a few examples from a recent study
conducted by the CPA on the problems of preserving text and image.
Discussions with scholars, librarians, and curators in a variety of
disciplines dependent on text and image generated a variety of concerns,
for example:  1 Copy what is, not what the technology is capable of.
This is very important for the history of ideas.  Scholars wish to know
what the author saw and worked from.  And make available at the
workstation the opportunity to erase all the defects and enhance the
presentation.  2 The fidelity of reproductionwhat is good enough, what
can we afford, and the difference it makesissues of subjective versus
objective resolution.  3 The differences between primary and secondary
users.  Restricting the definition of primary user to the one in whose
discipline the material has been published runs one headlong into the
reality that these printed books have had a host of other users from a
host of other disciplines, who not only were looking for very different
things, but who also shared values very different from those of the
primary user.  4 The relationship of the standard of reproduction to new
capabilities of scholarshipthe browsing standard versus an archival
standard.  How good must the archival standard be?  Can a distinction be
drawn between potential users in setting standards for reproduction?
Archival storage, use copies, browsing copiesought an attempt to set
standards even be made?  5 Finally, costs.  How much are we prepared to
pay to capture absolute fidelity?  What are the tradeoffs between vastly
enhanced access, degrees of fidelity, and costs?

These standards, BATTIN concluded, serve to complicate further the
reproduction process, and add to the long list of technical standards
that are necessary to ensure widespread access.  Ways to articulate and
analyze the costs that are attached to the different levels of standards
must be found.

Given the chaos concerning standards, which promises to linger for the
foreseeable future, BATTIN urged adoption of the following general
principles:

      Strive to understand the changing information requirements of
     scholarly disciplines as more and more technology is integrated into
     the process of research and scholarly communication in order to meet
     future scholarly needs, not to build for the past.  Capture
     deteriorating information at the highest affordable resolution, even
     though the dissemination and display technologies will lag.

      Develop cooperative mechanisms to foster agreement on protocols
     for document structure and other interchange mechanisms necessary
     for widespread dissemination and use before official standards are
     set.

      Accept that, in a transition period, de facto standards will have
     to be developed.

      Capture information in a way that keeps all options open and
     provides for total convertibility:  OCR, scanning of microfilm,
     producing microfilm from scanned documents, etc.

      Work closely with the generators of information and the builders
     of networks and databases to ensure that continuing accessibility is
     a primary concern from the beginning.

      Piggyback on standards under development for the broad market, and
     avoid libraryspecific standards work with the vendors, in order to
     take advantage of that which is being standardized for the rest of
     the world.

      Concentrate efforts on managing permanence in the digital world,
     rather than perfecting the longevity of a particular medium.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Additional comments on TIFF 


During the brief discussion period that followed BATTINs presentation,
BARONAS explained that TIFF was not developed in collaboration with or
under the auspices of AIIM.  TIFF is a company product, not a standard,
is owned by two corporations, and is always changing.  BARONAS also
observed that ANSIAIIM MS53, a bilevel image file transfer format that
allows unlike systems to exchange images, is compatible with TIFF as well
as with DECs architecture and IBMs MODCAIOCA.

                                 


HOOTON  Several questions to be considered in discussing text conversion



HOOTON introduced the final topic, text conversion, by noting that it is
becoming an increasingly important part of the imaging business.  Many
people now realize that it enhances their system to be able to have more
and more character data as part of their imaging system.  Re the issue of
OCR versus rekeying, HOOTON posed several questions:  How does one get
text into computerreadable form?  Does one use automated processes?
Does one attempt to eliminate the use of operators where possible?
Standards for accuracy, he said, are extremely important:  it makes a
major difference in cost and time whether one sets as a standard 98.5
percent acceptance or 99.5 percent.  He mentioned outsourcing as a
possibility for converting text.  Finally, what one does with the image
