in a digital image form is necessary to further improvements in access.
POB distinguishes between the imaging, digitizing process and OCR,
which at this stage it does not plan to perform.

Currently in its first or organizational phase, POB found that it could
use a vendor selection process to facilitate a good deal of the
organizational work e.g., creating a project team and advisory board,
confirming the validity of the plan, establishing the cost of the project
and a budget, selecting the materials to convert, and then raising the
necessary funds.

POB developed numerous selection criteria, including:  a firm committed
to imagedocument management, the ability to serve as systems integrator
in a largescale project over several years, interest in developing the
requisite software as a standard rather than a custom product, and a
willingness to invest substantial resources in the project itself.

Two vendors, DEC and Xerox, were selected as finalists in October 1991,
and with the support of the Commission on Preservation and Access, each
was commissioned to generate a detailed requirements analysis for the
project and then to submit a formal proposal for the completion of the
project, which included a budget and costs. The terms were that POB would
pay the loser.  The results for Yale of involving a vendor included:
broad involvement of Yale staff across the board at a relatively low
cost, which may have longterm significance in carrying out the project
twentyfive to thirty university people are engaged in POB better
understanding of the factors that affect corporate response to markets
for imaging products a competitive proposal and a more sophisticated
view of the imaging markets.

The most important factor that distinguished the vendors under
consideration was their identification with the customer.  The size and
internal complexity of the company also was an important factor.  POB was
looking at large companies that had substantial resources.  In the end,
the process generated for Yale two competitive proposals, with Xeroxs
the clear winner.  WATERS then described the components of the proposal,
the design principles, and some of the costs estimated for the process.

Components are essentially four:  a conversion subsystem, a
networkaccessible storage subsystem for 10,000 books and POB expects
200 to 600 dpi storage, browsing stations distributed on the campus
network, and network access to the image printers.

Among the design principles, POB wanted conversion at the highest
possible resolution.  Assuming TIFF files, TIFF files with Group 4
compression, TCPIP, and ethernet network on campus, POB wanted a
clientserver approach with image documents distributed to the
workstations and made accessible through native workstation interfaces
such as Windows.  POB also insisted on a phased approach to
implementation:  1 a standalone, singleuser, lowcost entry into the
business with a workstation focused on conversion and allowing POB to
explore user access 2 movement into a highervolume conversion with
networkaccessible storage and multiple access stations and 3 a
