DISCUSSION  Creating digitized photographic collections nearly
impossible except with large organizations like museums  Need for study
to determine quality of images users will tolerate 


During the brief exchange between LESK and BESSER that followed, several
clarifications emerged.

LESK argued that the photographers were far ahead of BESSER:  It is
almost impossible to create such digitized photographic collections
except with large organizations like museums, because all the
photographic agencies have been going crazy about this and will not sign
licensing agreements on any sort of reasonable terms.  LESK had heard
that National Geographic, for example, had tried to buy the right to use
some image in some kind of educational production for 100 per image, but
the photographers will not touch it.  They want accounting and payment
for each use, which cannot be accomplished within the system.  BESSER
responded that a consortium of photographers, headed by a former National
Geographic photographer, had started assembling its own collection of
electronic reproductions of images, with the money going back to the
cooperative.

LESK contended that BESSER was unnecessarily pessimistic about multimedia
images, because people are accustomed to lowquality images, particularly
from video.  BESSER urged the launching of a study to determine what
users would tolerate, what they would feel comfortable with, and what
absolutely is the highest quality they would ever need.  Conceding that
he had adopted a dire tone in order to arouse people about the issue,
BESSER closed on a sanguine note by saying that he would not be in this
business if he did not think that things could be accomplished.

                                 


LARSEN  Issues of scalability and modularity  Geometric growth of the
Internet and the role played by layering  Basic functions sustaining
this growth  A librarys roles and functions in a network environment 
Effects of implementation of the Z39.50 protocol for information
retrieval on the library system  The tradeoff between volumes of data
and its potential usage  A snapshot of current trends 


Ronald LARSEN, associate director for information technology, University
of Maryland at College Park, first addressed the issues of scalability
and modularity.  He noted the difficulty of anticipating the effects of
ordersofmagnitude growth, reflecting on the twenty years of experience
with the Arpanet and Internet.  Recalling the days demonstrations of
CDROM and optical disk material, he went on to ask if the field has yet
learned how to scale new systems to enable delivery and dissemination
across largescale networks.

LARSEN focused on the geometric growth of the Internet from its inception
circa 1969 to the present, and the adjustments required to respond to
that rapid growth.  To illustrate the issue of scalability, LARSEN
considered computer networks as including three generic components:
computers, network communication nodes, and communication media.  Each
component scales e.g., computers range from PCs to supercomputers
network nodes scale from interface cards in a PC through sophisticated
routers and gateways and communication media range from 2,400baud
dialup facilities through 4.5Mbps backbone links, and eventually to
multigigabitpersecond communication lines, and architecturally, the
components are organized to scale hierarchically from local area networks
to internationalscale networks.  Such growth is made possible by
building layers of communication protocols, as BESSER pointed out.
By layering both physically and logically, a sense of scalability is
maintained from local area networks in offices, across campuses, through
bridges, routers, campus backbones, fiberoptic links, etc., up into
regional networks and ultimately into national and international
networks.

LARSEN then illustrated the geometric growth over a twoyear period
through September 1991of the number of networks that comprise the
Internet.  This growth has been sustained largely by the availability of
three basic functions:  electronic mail, file transfer ftp, and remote
logon telnet.  LARSEN also reviewed the growth in the kind of traffic
that occurs on the network.  Network traffic reflects the joint contributions
of a larger population of users and increasing use per user.  Today one sees
serious applications involving moving images across the networka rarity
ten years ago.  LARSEN recalled and concurred with BESSERs main point
that the interesting problems occur at the application level.

LARSEN then illustrated a model of a librarys roles and functions in a
network environment.  He noted, in particular, the placement of online
catalogues onto the network and patrons obtaining access to the library
increasingly through local networks, campus networks, and the Internet.
LARSEN supported LYNCHs earlier suggestion that we need to address
fundamental questions of networked information in order to build
environments that scale in the information sense as well as in the
physical sense.

LARSEN supported the role of the library system as the access point into
the nations electronic collections.  Implementation of the Z39.50
protocol for information retrieval would make such access practical and
feasible.  For example, this would enable patrons in Maryland to search
California libraries, or other libraries around the world that are
