marker.  Application of a fixedthresholding scheme, THOMA argued, might
take care of several deficiencies on the page but not all of them.
Performing the calculation for a dynamic threshold setting, however,
removes most of the deficiencies so that at least the text is legible.

Another problem is representing a gray level with blackandwhite pixels
by a process known as dithering or electronic screening.  But dithering
does not provide good image quality for pure blackandwhite textual
material.  THOMA illustrated this point with examples. Although its
suitability for photoprint is the reason for electronic screening or
dithering, it cannot be used for every compound image.  In the document
that was distributed by CXP, THOMA noticed that the dithered image of the
IEEE test chart evinced some deterioration in the text.  He presented an
extreme example of deterioration in the text in which compounded
documents had to be set right by other techniques.  The technique
illustrated by the present example was an image merge in which the page
is scanned twice and the settings go from fixed threshold to the
dithering matrix the resulting images are merged to give the best
results with each technique.

THOMA illustrated how dithering is also used in nonphotographic or
nonprint materials with an example of a grayish page from a medical text,
which was reproduced to show all of the gray that appeared in the
original.  Dithering provided a reproduction of all the gray in the
original of another example from the same text.

THOMA finally illustrated the problem of bordering, or pageedge,
effects.  Books and bound volumes that are placed on a photocopy machine
or a scanner produce pageedge effects that are undesirable for two
reasons:  1 the aesthetics of the image after all, if the image is to
be preserved, one does not necessarily want to keep all of its
deficiencies 2 compression with the bordering problem THOMA
illustrated, the compression ratio deteriorated tremendously.  One way
to eliminate this more serious problem is to have the operator at the
point of scanning window the part of the image that is desirable and
automatically turn all of the pixels out of that picture to white.

                                 


FLEISCHHAUER  AMs experience with scanning bound materials  Dithering



Carl FLEISCHHAUER, coordinator, American Memory, Library of Congress,
reported AMs experience with scanning bound materials, which he likened
to the problems involved in using photocopying machines.  Very few
devices in the industry offer bookedge scanning, let alone book cradles.
The problem may be unsolvable, FLEISCHHAUER said, because a large enough
market does not exist for a preservationquality scanner.  AM is using a
Kurzweil scanner, which is a bookedge scanner now sold by Xerox.

Devoting the remainder of his brief presentation to dithering,
FLEISCHHAUER related AMs experience with a contractor who was using
unsophisticated equipment and software to reduce moire patterns from
printed halftones.  AM took the same image and used the dithering
algorithm that forms part of the same Kurzweil Xerox scanner it
disguised moire patterns much more effectively.

FLEISCHHAUER also observed that dithering produces a binary file which is
useful for numerous purposes, for example, printing it on a laser printer
without having to "rehalftone" it.  But it tends to defeat efficient
compression, because the very thing that dithers to reduce moire patterns
also tends to work against compression schemes.  AM thought the
