Pure, and in mind prepared, if so befall,
For death, like that which the Redeemer died.
All nations they shall teach for, from that day,
Not only to the sons of Abrahams loins
Salvation shall be preached, but to the sons
Of Abrahams faith wherever through the world
So in his seed all nations shall be blest.
Then to the Heaven of Heavens he shall ascend
With victory, triumphing through the air
Over his foes and thine there shall surprise
The Serpent, prince of air, and drag in chains
Through all his realm, and there confounded leave
Then enter into glory, and resume
His seat at Gods right hand, exalted high
Above all names in Heaven and thence shall come,
When this worlds dissolution shall be ripe,
With glory and power to judge both quick and dead
To judge the unfaithful dead, but to reward
His faithful, and receive them into bliss,
Whether in Heaven or Earth for then the Earth
Shall all be Paradise, far happier place
Than this of Eden, and far happier days.
So spake the ArchAngel Michael then paused,
As at the worlds great period and our sire,
Replete with joy and wonder, thus replied.
O Goodness infinite, Goodness immense!
That all this good of evil shall produce,
And evil turn to good more wonderful
Than that which by creation first brought forth
Light out of darkness!  Full of doubt I stand,
Whether I should repent me now of sin
By me done, and occasioned or rejoice
Much more, that much more good thereof shall spring
To God more glory, more goodwill to Men
From God, and over wrath grace shall abound.
But say, if our Deliverer up to Heaven
Must reascend, what will betide the few
His faithful, left among the unfaithful herd,
The enemies of truth?  Who then shall guide
His people, who defend?  Will they not deal
Worse with his followers than with him they dealt?
Be sure they will, said the Angel but from Heaven
He to his own a Comforter will send,
The promise of the Father, who shall dwell
His Spirit within them and the law of faith,
Working through love, upon their hearts shall write,
To guide them in all truth and also arm
With spiritual armour, able to resist
Satans assaults, and quench his fiery darts
What man can do against them, not afraid,
Though to the death against such cruelties
With inward consolations recompensed,
And oft supported so as shall amaze
Their proudest persecutors:  For the Spirit,
Poured first on his Apostles, whom he sends
To evangelize the nations, then on all
Baptized, shall them with wonderous gifts endue
To speak all tongues, and do all miracles,
As did their Lord before them.  Thus they win
Great numbers of each nation to receive
With joy the tidings brought from Heaven:  At length
Their ministry performed, and race well run,
Their doctrine and their story written left,
They die but in their room, as they forewarn,
