On me, as on their natural center, light
Heavy, though in their place.  O fleeting joys
Of Paradise, dear bought with lasting woes!
Did I request thee, Maker, from my clay
To mould me Man? did I solicit thee
From darkness to promote me, or here place
In this delicious garden?  As my will
Concurred not to my being, it were but right
And equal to reduce me to my dust
Desirous to resign and render back
All I received unable to perform
Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold
The good I sought not.  To the loss of that,
Sufficient penalty, why hast thou added
The sense of endless woes?  Inexplicable
Why am I mocked with death, and lengthened out
To deathless pain?  How gladly would I meet
Mortality my sentence, and be earth
Insensible!  How glad would lay me down
As in my mothers lap!  There I should rest,
And sleep secure his dreadful voice no more
Would thunder in my ears no fear of worse
To me, and to my offspring, would torment me
With cruel expectation.  Yet one doubt
Pursues me still, lest all I cannot die
Lest that pure breath of life, the spirit of Man
Which God inspired, cannot together perish
With this corporeal clod then, in the grave,
Or in some other dismal place, who knows
But I shall die a living death?  O thought
Horrid, if true!  Yet why? It was but breath
Of life that sinned what dies but what had life
And sin?  The body properly had neither,
All of me then shall die: let this appease
The doubt, since human reach no further knows.
For though the Lord of all be infinite,
Is his wrath also?  Be it, Man is not so,
But mortal doomed.  How can he exercise
Wrath without end on Man, whom death must end?
Can he make deathless death?  That were to make
Strange contradiction, which to God himself
Impossible is held as argument
Of weakness, not of power.  Will he draw out,
For angers sake, finite to infinite,
In punished Man, to satisfy his rigour,
Satisfied never?  That were to extend
His sentence beyond dust and Natures law
By which all causes else, according still
To the reception of their matter, act
Not to the extent of their own sphere.  But say
That death be not one stroke, as I supposed,
Bereaving sense, but endless misery
From this day onward which I feel begun
Both in me, and without me and so last
To perpetuityAy me!that fear
Comes thundering back with dreadful revolution
On my defenceless head both Death and I
Am found eternal, and incorporate both
Nor I on my part single in me all
Posterity stands cursed:  Fair patrimony
That I must leave ye, Sons!  O, were I able
To waste it all myself, and leave ye none!
So disinherited, how would you bless
Me, now your curse!  Ah, why should all mankind,
For one mans fault, thus guiltless be condemned,
It guiltless?  But from me what can proceed,
But all corrupt both mind and will depraved
Not to do only, but to will the same
With me?  How can they then acquitted stand
In sight of God?  Him, after all disputes,
Forced I absolve: all my evasions vain,
And reasonings, though through mazes, lead me still
But to my own conviction: first and last
On me, me only, as the source and spring
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due
So might the wrath!  Fond wish!couldst thou support
That burden, heavier than the earth to bear
Than all the world much heavier, though divided
With that bad Woman?  Thus, what thou desirest,
And what thou fearest, alike destroys all hope
Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable
Beyond all past example and future
To Satan only like both crime and doom.
O Conscience! into what abyss of fears
And horrours hast thou driven me out of which
I find no way, from deep to deeper plunged!
Thus Adam to himself lamented loud,
Through the still night not now, as ere Man fell,
Wholesome, and cool, and mild, but with black air
Accompanied with damps, and dreadful gloom
Which to his evil conscience represented
All things with double terrour:  On the ground
Outstretched he lay, on the cold ground and oft
Cursed his creation  Death as oft accused
Of tardy execution, since denounced
The day of his offence.  Why comes not Death,
Said he, with one thriceacceptable stroke
To end me?  Shall Truth fail to keep her word,
Justice Divine not hasten to be just?
But Death comes not at call Justice Divine
Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries,
O woods, O fountains, hillocks, dales, and bowers!
With other echo late I taught your shades
To answer, and resound far other song.
Whom thus afflicted when sad Eve beheld,
Desolate where she sat, approaching nigh,
Soft words to his fierce passion she assayed:
But her with stern regard he thus repelled.
Out of my sight, thou Serpent!  That name best
Befits thee with him leagued, thyself as false
And hateful nothing wants, but that thy shape,
Like his, and colour serpentine, may show
Thy inward fraud to warn all creatures from thee
Henceforth lest that too heavenly form, pretended
To hellish falshood, snare them!  But for thee
I had persisted happy had not thy pride
And wandering vanity, when least was safe,
Rejected my forewarning, and disdained
Not to be trusted longing to be seen,
Though by the Devil himself him overweening
To overreach but, with the serpent meeting,
Fooled and beguiled by him thou, I by thee
To trust thee from my side imagined wise,
Constant, mature, proof against all assaults
And understood not all was but a show,
Rather than solid virtue all but a rib
Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears,
More to the part sinister, from me drawn
Well if thrown out, as supernumerary
To my just number found.  O! why did God,
Creator wise, that peopled highest Heaven
With Spirits masculine, create at last
This novelty on earth, this fair defect
Of nature, and not fill the world at once
With Men, as Angels, without feminine
Or find some other way to generate
Mankind?  This mischief had not been befallen,
And more that shall befall innumerable
Disturbances on earth through female snares,
And strait conjunction with this sex: for either
He never shall find out fit mate, but such
As some misfortune brings him, or mistake
Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain
Through her perverseness, but shall see her gained
By a far worse or, if she love, withheld
By parents or his happiest choice too late
Shall meet, already linked and wedlockbound
To a fell adversary, his hate or shame:
Which infinite calamity shall cause
To human life, and houshold peace confound.
He added not, and from her turned but Eve,
Not so repulsed, with tears that ceased not flowing
And tresses all disordered, at his feet
Fell humble and, embracing them, besought
His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint.
Forsake me not thus, Adam! witness Heaven
What love sincere, and reverence in my heart
I bear thee, and unweeting have offended,
Unhappily deceived!  Thy suppliant
I beg, and clasp thy knees bereave me not,
Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid,
Thy counsel, in this uttermost distress,
My only strength and stay:  Forlorn of thee,
Whither shall I betake me, where subsist?
While yet we live, scarce one short hour perhaps,
Between us two let there be peace both joining,
As joined in injuries, one enmity
Against a foe by doom express assigned us,
That cruel Serpent:  On me exercise not
Thy hatred for this misery befallen
On me already lost, me than thyself
More miserable!  Both have sinnedbut thou
Against God only I against God and thee
And to the place of judgement will return,
There with my cries importune Heaven that all
The sentence, from thy head removed, may light
On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe
Me, me only, just object of his ire!
She ended weeping and her lowly plight,
Immoveable, till peace obtained from fault
Acknowledged and deplored, in Adam wrought
Commiseration:  Soon his heart relented
Towards her, his life so late, and sole delight,
Now at his feet submissive in distress
Creature so fair his reconcilement seeking,
His counsel, whom she had displeased, his aid:
As one disarmed, his anger all he lost,
And thus with peaceful words upraised her soon.
Unwary, and too desirous, as before,
So now of what thou knowest not, who desirest
The punishment all on thyself alas!
Bear thine own first, ill able to sustain
His full wrath, whose thou feelest as yet least part,
And my displeasure bearest so ill.  If prayers
Could alter high decrees, I to that place
Would speed before thee, and be louder heard,
That on my head all might be visited
Thy frailty and infirmer sex forgiven,
To me committed, and by me exposed.
But riselet us no more contend, nor blame
Each other, blamed enough elsewhere but strive
In offices of love, how we may lighten
Each others burden, in our share of woe
Since this days death denounced, if aught I see,
Will prove no sudden, but a slowpaced evil
A long days dying, to augment our pain
And to our seed O hapless seed! derived.
To whom thus Eve, recovering heart, replied.
Adam, by sad experiment I know
How little weight my words with thee can find,
Found so erroneous thence by just event
Found so unfortunate:  Nevertheless,
Restored by thee, vile as I am, to place
Of new acceptance, hopeful to regain
Thy love, the sole contentment of my heart
Living or dying, from thee I will not hide
What thoughts in my unquiet breast are risen,
Tending to some relief of our extremes,
Or end though sharp and sad, yet tolerable,
As in our evils, and of easier choice.
If care of our descent perplex us most,
Which must be born to certain woe, devoured
By Death at last and miserable it is
To be to others cause of misery,
Our own begotten, and of our loins to bring
Into this cursed world a woeful race,
That after wretched life must be at last
Food for so foul a monster in thy power
It lies, yet ere conception to prevent
The race unblest, to being yet unbegot.
Childless thou art, childless remain: so Death
Shall be deceived his glut, and with us two
Be forced to satisfy his ravenous maw.
But if thou judge it hard and difficult,
Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain
From loves due rights, nuptial embraces sweet
And with desire to languish without hope,
Before the present object languishing
With like desire which would be misery
And torment less than none of what we dread
Then, both ourselves and seed at once to free
From what we fear for both, let us make short, 
Let us seek Death  or, he not found, supply
With our own hands his office on ourselves:
Why stand we longer shivering under fears,
That show no end but death, and have the power,
Of many ways to die the shortest choosing,
Destruction with destruction to destroy? 
She ended here, or vehement despair
Broke off the rest: so much of death her thoughts
Had entertained, as dyed her cheeks with pale.
But Adam, with such counsel nothing swayed,
To better hopes his more attentive mind
Labouring had raised and thus to Eve replied.
Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems
To argue in thee something more sublime
And excellent, than what thy mind contemns
But selfdestruction therefore sought, refutes
That excellence thought in thee and implies,
Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret
For loss of life and pleasure overloved.
Or if thou covet death, as utmost end
Of misery, so thinking to evade
The penalty pronounced doubt not but God
Hath wiselier armed his vengeful ire, than so
To be forestalled much more I fear lest death,
