markup through a LaTeX processor and convert it relatively easily to a
printed version of the document.

WEIBEL next illustrated an extremely cluttered screen dump of OCLCs
system, in order to show as much as possible the inherent capability on
the screen.  He noted parenthetically that he had become a supporter of
XWindows as a result of the progress of the CORE Project.  WEIBEL also
illustrated the two major parts of the interface:  l a control box that
allows one to generate lists of items, which resembles a small table of
contents based on key words one wishes to search, and 2 a document
viewer, which is a separate process in and of itself.  He demonstrated
how to follow links through the electronic database simply by selecting
the appropriate button and bringing them up.  He also noted problems that
remain to be accommodated in the interface e.g., as pointed out by LESK,
what happens when users do not click on the icon for the figure.

Given the constraints of time, WEIBEL omitted a large number of ancillary
items in order to say a few words concerning storage requirements and
what will be required to put a lot of things on line.  Since it is
extremely expensive to reconvert all of this data, especially if it is
just in paper form and even if it is in electronic form in typesetting
tapes, he advocated building journals electronically from the start.  In
that case, if one only has text graphics and indexing which is all that
one needs with de novo electronic publishing, because there is no need to
go back and look at bitmaps of pages, one can get 10,000 journals of
full text, or almost 6 million pages per year.  These pages can be put in
approximately 135 gigabytes of storage, which is not all that much,
WEIBEL said.  For twenty years, something less than three terabytes would
be required.  WEIBEL calculated the costs of storing this information as
follows:  If a gigabyte costs approximately 1,000, then a terabyte costs
approximately 1 million to buy in terms of hardware.  One also needs a
building to put it in and a staff like OCLC to handle that information.
So, to support a terabyte, multiply by five, which gives 5 million per
year for a supported terabyte of data.
