Whereon, for different cause, the Tempter set
Our second Adam, in the wilderness
To show him all Earths kingdoms, and their glory.
His eye might there command wherever stood
City of old or modern fame, the seat
Of mightiest empire, from the destined walls
Of Cambalu, seat of Cathaian Can,
And Samarchand by Oxus, Temirs throne,
To Paquin of Sinaean kings and thence
To Agra and Lahor of great Mogul,
Down to the golden Chersonese or where
The Persian in Ecbatan sat, or since
In Hispahan or where the Russian Ksar
In Mosco or the Sultan in Bizance,
Turchestanborn nor could his eye not ken
The empire of Negus to his utmost port
Ercoco, and the less maritim kings
Mombaza, and Quiloa, and Melind,
And Sofala, thought Ophir, to the realm
Of Congo, and Angola farthest south
Or thence from Niger flood to Atlas mount
The kingdoms of Almansor, Fez and Sus,
Morocco, and Algiers, and Tremisen
On Europe thence, and where Rome was to sway
The world: in spirit perhaps he also saw
Rich Mexico, the seat of Montezume,
And Cusco in Peru, the richer seat
Of Atabalipa and yet unspoiled
Guiana, whose great city Geryons sons
Call El Dorado.  But to nobler sights
Michael from Adams eyes the film removed,
Which that false fruit that promised clearer sight
Had bred then purged with euphrasy and rue
The visual nerve, for he had much to see
And from the well of life three drops instilled.
So deep the power of these ingredients pierced,
Even to the inmost seat of mental sight,
That Adam, now enforced to close his eyes,
Sunk down, and all his spirits became entranced
But him the gentle Angel by the hand
Soon raised, and his attention thus recalled.
Adam, now ope thine eyes and first behold
The effects, which thy original crime hath wrought
In some to spring from thee who never touched
The excepted tree nor with the snake conspired
Nor sinned thy sin yet from that sin derive
Corruption, to bring forth more violent deeds.
His eyes he opened, and beheld a field,
Part arable and tilth, whereon were sheaves
New reaped the other part sheepwalks and folds
I the midst an altar as the landmark stood,
Rustick, of grassy sord thither anon
A sweaty reaper from his tillage brought
First fruits, the green ear, and the yellow sheaf,
Unculled, as came to hand a shepherd next,
More meek, came with the firstlings of his flock,
Choicest and best then, sacrificing, laid
The inwards and their fat, with incense strowed,
On the cleft wood, and all due rights performed:
His offering soon propitious fire from Heaven
Consumed with nimble glance, and grateful steam
The others not, for his was not sincere
Whereat he inly raged, and, as they talked,
Smote him into the midriff with a stone
That beat out life he felland, deadly pale,
Groaned out his soul with gushing blood effused.
Much at that sight was Adam in his heart
Dismayed, and thus in haste to the Angel cried.
O Teacher, some great mischief hath befallen
To that meek man, who well had sacrificed
Is piety thus and pure devotion paid?
To whom Michael thus, he also moved, replied.
These two are brethren, Adam, and to come
Out of thy loins the unjust the just hath slain,
For envy that his brothers offering found
From Heaven acceptance but the bloody fact
Will be avenged and the others faith, approved,
Lose no reward though here thou see him die,
Rolling in dust and gore.  To which our sire.
Alas! both for the deed, and for the cause!
But have I now seen Death?  Is this the way
I must return to native dust?  O sight
Of terrour, foul and ugly to behold,
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!
To whom thus Michael.  Death thou hast seen
In his first shape on Man but many shapes
Of Death, and many are the ways that lead
To his grim cave, all dismal yet to sense
More terrible at the entrance, than within.
Some, as thou sawest, by violent stroke shall die
By fire, flood, famine, by intemperance more
In meats and drinks, which on the earth shall bring
Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew
Before thee shall appear that thou mayest know
What misery the inabstinence of Eve
Shall bring on Men.  Immediately a place
Before his eyes appeared, sad, noisome, dark
A lazarhouse it seemed wherein were laid
Numbers of all diseased all maladies
Of ghastly spasm, or racking torture, qualms
Of heartsick agony, all feverous kinds,
Convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs,
Intestine stone and ulcer, colickpangs,
Demoniack phrenzy, moaping melancholy,
And moonstruck madness, pining atrophy,
Marasmus, and widewasting pestilence,
Dropsies, and asthmas, and jointracking rheums.
Dire was the tossing, deep the groans Despair
Tended the sick busiest from couch to couch
And over them triumphant Death his dart
Shook, but delayed to strike, though oft invoked
With vows, as their chief good, and final hope.
Sight so deform what heart of rock could long
Dryeyed behold?  Adam could not, but wept,
Though not of woman born compassion quelled
His best of man, and gave him up to tears
A space, till firmer thoughts restrained excess
And, scarce recovering words, his plaint renewed.
O miserable mankind, to what fall
Degraded, to what wretched state reserved!
Better end here unborn.  Why is life given
To be thus wrested from us? rather, why
Obtruded on us thus? who, if we knew
What we receive, would either no accept
Life offered, or soon beg to lay it down
Glad to be so dismissed in peace.  Can thus
The image of God in Man, created once
So goodly and erect, though faulty since,
To such unsightly sufferings be debased
Under inhuman pains?  Why should not Man,
Retaining still divine similitude
In part, from such deformities be free,
And, for his Makers image sake, exempt?
Their Makers image, answered Michael, then
Forsook them, when themselves they vilified
To serve ungoverned Appetite and took
His image whom they served, a brutish vice,
Inductive mainly to the sin of Eve.
Therefore so abject is their punishment,
Disfiguring not Gods likeness, but their own
Or if his likeness, by themselves defaced
While they pervert pure Natures healthful rules
To loathsome sickness worthily, since they
Gods image did not reverence in themselves.
I yield it just, said Adam, and submit.
But is there yet no other way, besides
These painful passages, how we may come
To death, and mix with our connatural dust?
There is, said Michael, if thou well observe
The rule of Not too much by temperance taught,
In what thou eatest and drinkest seeking from thence
Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight,
