
During the questionandanswer period that followed her presentation,
PERSONIUS made these additional points:

      Re retrieval software, Cornell is developing a Unixbased server
     as well as clients for the server that support multiple platforms
     Macintosh, IBM and Sun workstations, in the hope that people from
     any of those platforms will retrieve books a further operating
     assumption is that standard interfaces will be used as much as
     possible, where standards can be put in place, because CLASS
     considers this retrieval software a library application and would
     like to be able to look at material not only at Cornell but at other
     institutions.

      The phrase "digital file copyright by Cornell University" was
     added at the advice of Cornells legal staff with the caveat that it
     probably would not hold up in court.  Cornell does not want people
     to copy its books and sell them but would like to keep them
     available for use in a library environment for library purposes.

      In production the scanner can scan about 300 pages per hour,
     capturing 600 dots per inch.

      The Xerox software has filters to scan halftone material and avoid
     the moire patterns that occur when halftone material is scanned.
     Xerox has been working on hardware and software that would enable
     the scanner itself to recognize this situation and deal with it
     appropriatelya kind of autosegmentation that would enable the
     scanner to handle halftone material as well as text on a single page.

      The books subjected to the elaborate process described above were
     selected because CLASS is a preservation project, with the first 500
     books selected coming from Cornells mathematics collection, because
     they were still being heavily used and because, although they were
     in need of preservation, the mathematics library and the mathematics
     faculty were uncomfortable having them microfilmed.  They wanted a
     printed copy.  Thus, these books became a logical choice for this
     project.  Other books were chosen by the projects selection committees
     for experiments with the technology, as well as to meet a demand or need.

      Images will be decompressed before they are sent over the line at
     this time they are compressed and sent to the image filing system
     and then sent to the printer as compressed images they are returned
     to the workstation as compressed 600dpi images and the workstation
     decompresses and scales them for displayan inefficient way to
     access the material though it works quite well for printing and
     other purposes.

      CLASS is also decompressing on Macintosh and IBM, a slow process
     right now.  Eventually, compression and decompression will take
     place on an image conversion server.  Tradeoffs will be made, based
     on future performance testing, concerning where the file is
     compressed and what resolution image is sent.

      OCR has not been precluded images are being stored that have been
     scanned at a high resolution, which presumably would suit them well
     to an OCR process.  Because the material being scanned is about 100
     years old and was printed with lessthanideal technologies, very
     early and preliminary tests have not produced good results.  But the
     project is capturing an image that is of sufficient resolution to be
     subjected to OCR in the future.  Moreover, the system architecture
     and the system plan have a logical place to store an OCR image if it
     has been captured.  But that is not being done now.

                                 
