To human life, and houshold peace confound.
He added not, and from her turned but Eve,
Not so repulsed, with tears that ceased not flowing
And tresses all disordered, at his feet
Fell humble and, embracing them, besought
His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint.
Forsake me not thus, Adam! witness Heaven
What love sincere, and reverence in my heart
I bear thee, and unweeting have offended,
Unhappily deceived!  Thy suppliant
I beg, and clasp thy knees bereave me not,
Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid,
Thy counsel, in this uttermost distress,
My only strength and stay:  Forlorn of thee,
Whither shall I betake me, where subsist?
While yet we live, scarce one short hour perhaps,
Between us two let there be peace both joining,
As joined in injuries, one enmity
Against a foe by doom express assigned us,
That cruel Serpent:  On me exercise not
Thy hatred for this misery befallen
On me already lost, me than thyself
More miserable!  Both have sinnedbut thou
Against God only I against God and thee
And to the place of judgement will return,
There with my cries importune Heaven that all
The sentence, from thy head removed, may light
On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe
Me, me only, just object of his ire!
She ended weeping and her lowly plight,
Immoveable, till peace obtained from fault
Acknowledged and deplored, in Adam wrought
Commiseration:  Soon his heart relented
Towards her, his life so late, and sole delight,
Now at his feet submissive in distress
Creature so fair his reconcilement seeking,
His counsel, whom she had displeased, his aid:
As one disarmed, his anger all he lost,
And thus with peaceful words upraised her soon.
Unwary, and too desirous, as before,
So now of what thou knowest not, who desirest
The punishment all on thyself alas!
Bear thine own first, ill able to sustain
His full wrath, whose thou feelest as yet least part,
And my displeasure bearest so ill.  If prayers
Could alter high decrees, I to that place
Would speed before thee, and be louder heard,
That on my head all might be visited
Thy frailty and infirmer sex forgiven,
To me committed, and by me exposed.
But riselet us no more contend, nor blame
Each other, blamed enough elsewhere but strive
In offices of love, how we may lighten
Each others burden, in our share of woe
Since this days death denounced, if aught I see,
Will prove no sudden, but a slowpaced evil
A long days dying, to augment our pain
And to our seed O hapless seed! derived.
To whom thus Eve, recovering heart, replied.
Adam, by sad experiment I know
How little weight my words with thee can find,
Found so erroneous thence by just event
Found so unfortunate:  Nevertheless,
Restored by thee, vile as I am, to place
Of new acceptance, hopeful to regain
Thy love, the sole contentment of my heart
Living or dying, from thee I will not hide
What thoughts in my unquiet breast are risen,
Tending to some relief of our extremes,
Or end though sharp and sad, yet tolerable,
As in our evils, and of easier choice.
If care of our descent perplex us most,
Which must be born to certain woe, devoured
By Death at last and miserable it is
To be to others cause of misery,
Our own begotten, and of our loins to bring
Into this cursed world a woeful race,
That after wretched life must be at last
Food for so foul a monster in thy power
It lies, yet ere conception to prevent
The race unblest, to being yet unbegot.
Childless thou art, childless remain: so Death
Shall be deceived his glut, and with us two
Be forced to satisfy his ravenous maw.
But if thou judge it hard and difficult,
Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain
From loves due rights, nuptial embraces sweet
And with desire to languish without hope,
Before the present object languishing
With like desire which would be misery
And torment less than none of what we dread
Then, both ourselves and seed at once to free
From what we fear for both, let us make short, 
Let us seek Death  or, he not found, supply
With our own hands his office on ourselves:
Why stand we longer shivering under fears,
That show no end but death, and have the power,
Of many ways to die the shortest choosing,
Destruction with destruction to destroy? 
She ended here, or vehement despair
Broke off the rest: so much of death her thoughts
Had entertained, as dyed her cheeks with pale.
But Adam, with such counsel nothing swayed,
To better hopes his more attentive mind
Labouring had raised and thus to Eve replied.
Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems
To argue in thee something more sublime
And excellent, than what thy mind contemns
But selfdestruction therefore sought, refutes
That excellence thought in thee and implies,
Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret
For loss of life and pleasure overloved.
Or if thou covet death, as utmost end
Of misery, so thinking to evade
The penalty pronounced doubt not but God
Hath wiselier armed his vengeful ire, than so
To be forestalled much more I fear lest death,
So snatched, will not exempt us from the pain
We are by doom to pay rather, such acts
Of contumacy will provoke the Highest
To make death in us live:  Then let us seek
Some safer resolution, which methinks
I have in view, calling to mind with heed
Part of our sentence, that thy seed shall bruise
The Serpents head piteous amends! unless
Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand foe,
Satan who, in the serpent, hath contrived
