And from the well of life three drops instilled.
So deep the power of these ingredients pierced,
Even to the inmost seat of mental sight,
That Adam, now enforced to close his eyes,
Sunk down, and all his spirits became entranced
But him the gentle Angel by the hand
Soon raised, and his attention thus recalled.
Adam, now ope thine eyes and first behold
The effects, which thy original crime hath wrought
In some to spring from thee who never touched
The excepted tree nor with the snake conspired
Nor sinned thy sin yet from that sin derive
Corruption, to bring forth more violent deeds.
His eyes he opened, and beheld a field,
Part arable and tilth, whereon were sheaves
New reaped the other part sheepwalks and folds
I the midst an altar as the landmark stood,
Rustick, of grassy sord thither anon
A sweaty reaper from his tillage brought
First fruits, the green ear, and the yellow sheaf,
Unculled, as came to hand a shepherd next,
More meek, came with the firstlings of his flock,
Choicest and best then, sacrificing, laid
The inwards and their fat, with incense strowed,
On the cleft wood, and all due rights performed:
His offering soon propitious fire from Heaven
Consumed with nimble glance, and grateful steam
The others not, for his was not sincere
Whereat he inly raged, and, as they talked,
Smote him into the midriff with a stone
That beat out life he felland, deadly pale,
Groaned out his soul with gushing blood effused.
Much at that sight was Adam in his heart
Dismayed, and thus in haste to the Angel cried.
O Teacher, some great mischief hath befallen
To that meek man, who well had sacrificed
Is piety thus and pure devotion paid?
To whom Michael thus, he also moved, replied.
These two are brethren, Adam, and to come
Out of thy loins the unjust the just hath slain,
For envy that his brothers offering found
From Heaven acceptance but the bloody fact
Will be avenged and the others faith, approved,
Lose no reward though here thou see him die,
Rolling in dust and gore.  To which our sire.
Alas! both for the deed, and for the cause!
But have I now seen Death?  Is this the way
I must return to native dust?  O sight
Of terrour, foul and ugly to behold,
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!
To whom thus Michael.  Death thou hast seen
In his first shape on Man but many shapes
Of Death, and many are the ways that lead
To his grim cave, all dismal yet to sense
More terrible at the entrance, than within.
Some, as thou sawest, by violent stroke shall die
By fire, flood, famine, by intemperance more
In meats and drinks, which on the earth shall bring
Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew
Before thee shall appear that thou mayest know
What misery the inabstinence of Eve
Shall bring on Men.  Immediately a place
Before his eyes appeared, sad, noisome, dark
A lazarhouse it seemed wherein were laid
Numbers of all diseased all maladies
Of ghastly spasm, or racking torture, qualms
Of heartsick agony, all feverous kinds,
Convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs,
Intestine stone and ulcer, colickpangs,
Demoniack phrenzy, moaping melancholy,
And moonstruck madness, pining atrophy,
Marasmus, and widewasting pestilence,
Dropsies, and asthmas, and jointracking rheums.
Dire was the tossing, deep the groans Despair
Tended the sick busiest from couch to couch
And over them triumphant Death his dart
Shook, but delayed to strike, though oft invoked
With vows, as their chief good, and final hope.
Sight so deform what heart of rock could long
Dryeyed behold?  Adam could not, but wept,
Though not of woman born compassion quelled
His best of man, and gave him up to tears
A space, till firmer thoughts restrained excess
And, scarce recovering words, his plaint renewed.
O miserable mankind, to what fall
Degraded, to what wretched state reserved!
Better end here unborn.  Why is life given
To be thus wrested from us? rather, why
Obtruded on us thus? who, if we knew
What we receive, would either no accept
Life offered, or soon beg to lay it down
Glad to be so dismissed in peace.  Can thus
The image of God in Man, created once
So goodly and erect, though faulty since,
To such unsightly sufferings be debased
Under inhuman pains?  Why should not Man,
Retaining still divine similitude
In part, from such deformities be free,
And, for his Makers image sake, exempt?
Their Makers image, answered Michael, then
Forsook them, when themselves they vilified
To serve ungoverned Appetite and took
His image whom they served, a brutish vice,
Inductive mainly to the sin of Eve.
Therefore so abject is their punishment,
Disfiguring not Gods likeness, but their own
Or if his likeness, by themselves defaced
While they pervert pure Natures healthful rules
To loathsome sickness worthily, since they
Gods image did not reverence in themselves.
I yield it just, said Adam, and submit.
But is there yet no other way, besides
These painful passages, how we may come
To death, and mix with our connatural dust?
There is, said Michael, if thou well observe
The rule of Not too much by temperance taught,
In what thou eatest and drinkest seeking from thence
Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight,
Till many years over thy head return:
So mayest thou live till, like ripe fruit, thou drop
Into thy mothers lap or be with ease
Gathered, nor harshly plucked for death mature:
This is Old Age but then, thou must outlive
Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty which will change
To withered, weak, and gray thy senses then,
Obtuse, all taste of pleasure must forego,
To what thou hast and, for the air of youth,
Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reign
A melancholy damp of cold and dry
To weigh thy spirits down, and last consume
The balm of life.  To whom our ancestor.
Henceforth I fly not death, nor would prolong
Life much bent rather, how I may be quit,
Fairest and easiest, of this cumbrous charge
Which I must keep till my appointed day
Of rendering up, and patiently attend
My dissolution.  Michael replied.
Nor love thy life, nor hate but what thou livest
Live well how long, or short, permit to Heaven:
And now prepare thee for another sight.
He looked, and saw a spacious plain, whereon
Were tents of various hue by some, were herds
Of cattle grazing others, whence the sound
Of instruments, that made melodious chime,
Was heard, of harp and organ and, who moved
Their stops and chords, was seen his volant touch,
Instinct through all proportions, low and high,
Fled and pursued transverse the resonant fugue.
In other part stood one who, at the forge
Labouring, two massy clods of iron and brass
Had melted, whether found where casual fire
Had wasted woods on mountain or in vale,
Down to the veins of earth thence gliding hot
To some caves mouth or whether washed by stream
From underground the liquid ore he drained
Into fit moulds prepared from which he formed
First his own tools then, what might else be wrought
Fusil or graven in metal.  After these,
But on the hither side, a different sort
From the high neighbouring hills, which was their seat,
Down to the plain descended by their guise
Just men they seemed, and all their study bent
To worship God aright, and know his works
Not hid nor those things last, which might preserve
Freedom and peace to Men they on the plain
Long had not walked, when from the tents, behold!
A bevy of fair women, richly gay
In gems and wanton dress to the harp they sung
Soft amorous ditties, and in dance came on:
The men, though grave, eyed them and let their eyes
Rove without rein till, in the amorous net
Fast caught, they liked and each his liking chose
And now of love they treat, till the eveningstar,
Loves harbinger, appeared then, all in heat
They light the nuptial torch, and bid invoke
Hymen, then first to marriage rites invoked:
With feast and musick all the tents resound.
Such happy interview, and fair event
Of love and youth not lost, songs, garlands, flowers,
And charming symphonies, attached the heart
Of Adam, soon inclined to admit delight,
The bent of nature which he thus expressed.
True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blest
Much better seems this vision, and more hope
Of peaceful days portends, than those two past
Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse
Here Nature seems fulfilled in all her ends.
To whom thus Michael.  Judge not what is best
By pleasure, though to nature seeming meet
Created, as thou art, to nobler end
Holy and pure, conformity divine.
Those tents thou sawest so pleasant, were the tents
Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his race
Who slew his brother studious they appear
Of arts that polish life, inventers rare
Unmindful of their Maker, though his Spirit
Taught them but they his gifts acknowledged none.
Yet they a beauteous offspring shall beget
For that fair female troop thou sawest, that seemed
Of Goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay,
Yet empty of all good wherein consists
Womans domestick honour and chief praise
Bred only and completed to the taste
Of lustful appetence, to sing, to dance,
To dress, and troll the tongue, and roll the eye:
To these that sober race of men, whose lives
Religious titled them the sons of God,
Shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame
Ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles
Of these fair atheists and now swim in joy,
Erelong to swim at large and laugh, for which
The world erelong a world of tears must weep.
To whom thus Adam, of short joy bereft.
O pity and shame, that they, who to live well
Entered so fair, should turn aside to tread
Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint!
But still I see the tenour of Mans woe
Holds on the same, from Woman to begin.
From Mans effeminate slackness it begins,
Said the Angel, who should better hold his place
By wisdom, and superiour gifts received.
But now prepare thee for another scene.
He looked, and saw wide territory spread
Before him, towns, and rural works between
Cities of men with lofty gates and towers,
Concourse in arms, fierce faces threatening war,
Giants of mighty bone and bold emprise
Part wield their arms, part curb the foaming steed,
Single or in array of battle ranged
Both horse and foot, nor idly mustering stood
One way a band select from forage drives
A herd of beeves, fair oxen and fair kine,
From a fat meadow ground or fleecy flock,
Ewes and their bleating lambs over the plain,
Their booty scarce with life the shepherds fly,
But call in aid, which makes a bloody fray
With cruel tournament the squadrons join
Where cattle pastured late, now scattered lies
