CHARLES	Good morrow to your worship.

OLIVER	Good Monsieur Charles, whats the new news at the
	new court?

CHARLES	Theres no news at the court, sir, but the old news:
	that is, the old duke is banished by his younger
	brother the new duke and three or four loving lords
	have put themselves into voluntary exile with him,
	whose lands and revenues enrich the new duke
	therefore he gives them good leave to wander.

OLIVER	Can you tell if Rosalind, the dukes daughter, be
	banished with her father?

CHARLES	O, no for the dukes daughter, her cousin, so loves
	her, being ever from their cradles bred together,
	that she would have followed her exile, or have died
	to stay behind her. She is at the court, and no
	less beloved of her uncle than his own daughter and
	never two ladies loved as they do.

OLIVER	Where will the old duke live?

CHARLES	They say he is already in the forest of Arden, and
	a many merry men with him and there they live like
	the old Robin Hood of England: they say many young
	gentlemen flock to him every day, and fleet the time
	carelessly, as they did in the golden world.

OLIVER	What, you wrestle tomorrow before the new duke?

CHARLES	Marry, do I, sir and I came to acquaint you with a
	matter. I am given, sir, secretly to understand
	that your younger brother Orlando hath a disposition
	to come in disguised against me to try a fall.
	Tomorrow, sir, I wrestle for my credit and he that
	escapes me without some broken limb shall acquit him
	well. Your brother is but young and tender and,
	for your love, I would be loath to foil him, as I
	must, for my own honour, if he come in: therefore,
	out of my love to you, I came hither to acquaint you
	withal, that either you might stay him from his
	intendment or brook such disgrace well as he shall
	run into, in that it is a thing of his own search
	and altogether against my will.

OLIVER	Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which
	thou shalt find I will most kindly requite. I had
	myself notice of my brothers purpose herein and
	have by underhand means laboured to dissuade him from
	it, but he is resolute. Ill tell thee, Charles:
	it is the stubbornest young fellow of France, full
	of ambition, an envious emulator of every mans
	good parts, a secret and villanous contriver against
	me his natural brother: therefore use thy
	discretion I had as lief thou didst break his neck
	as his finger. And thou wert best look tot for if
	thou dost him any slight disgrace or if he do not
