
	Exeunt ROSALIND and CELIA

ORLANDO	What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?
	I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference.
	O poor Orlando, thou art overthrown!
	Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.

	Reenter LE BEAU

LE BEAU	Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you
	To leave this place. Albeit you have deserved
	High commendation, true applause and love,
	Yet such is now the dukes condition
	That he misconstrues all that you have done.
	The duke is humorous what he is indeed,
	More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.

ORLANDO	I thank you, sir: and, pray you, tell me this:
	Which of the two was daughter of the duke
	That here was at the wrestling?

LE BEAU	Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners
	But yet indeed the lesser is his daughter
	The other is daughter to the banishd duke,
	And here detaind by her usurping uncle,
	To keep his daughter company whose loves
	Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters.
	But I can tell you that of late this duke
	Hath taen displeasure gainst his gentle niece,
	Grounded upon no other argument
	But that the people praise her for her virtues
	And pity her for her good fathers sake
	And, on my life, his malice gainst the lady
	Will suddenly break forth. Sir, fare you well:
	Hereafter, in a better world than this,
	I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.

ORLANDO	I rest much bounden to you: fare you well.

	Exit LE BEAU

	Thus must I from the smoke into the smother
	From tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother:
	But heavenly Rosalind!

	Exit




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT I



SCENE III	A room in the palace.


	Enter CELIA and ROSALIND

CELIA	Why, cousin! why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy! not a word?

ROSALIND	Not one to throw at a dog.

CELIA	No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon
	curs throw some of them at me come, lame me with reasons.

ROSALIND	Then there were two cousins laid up when the one
	should be lamed with reasons and the other mad
	without any.

CELIA	But is all this for your father?

