environment  Review of copyright law in the United States  The notion
of the public good and the desirability of incentives to promote it 
What copyright protects  Works not protected by copyright  The rights
of copyright holders  Publishers concerns in todays electronic
environment  Compulsory licenses  The price of copyright in a digital
medium and the need for cooperation  Additional clarifications   Rough
justice oftentimes the outcome in numerous copyright matters  Copyright
in an electronic society  Copyright law always only sets up the
boundaries anything can be changed by contract 


Marybeth PETERS, policy planning adviser to the Register of Copyrights,
Library of Congress,   made several general comments and then opened the
floor to discussion of subjects of interest to the audience.

Having attended several sessions in an effort to gain a sense of what
people did and where copyright would affect their lives, PETERS expressed
the following cautions:

      If one takes and converts materials and puts them in new forms,
     then, from a copyright point of view, one is creating something and
     will receive some rights.

      However, if what one is converting already exists, a question
     immediately arises about the status of the materials in question.

      Putting something in the public domain in the United States offers
     some freedom from anxiety, but distributing it throughout the world
     on a network is another matter, even if one has put it in the public
     domain in the United States.  Re foreign laws, very frequently a
     work can be in the public domain in the United States but protected
     in other countries.  Thus, one must consider all of the places a
     work may reach, lest one unwittingly become liable to being faced
     with a suit for copyright infringement, or at least a letter
     demanding discussion of what one is doing.

PETERS reviewed copyright law in the United States.  The U.S.
Constitution effectively states that Congress has the power to enact
copyright laws for two purposes:  1 to encourage the creation and
dissemination of intellectual works for the good of society as a whole
and, significantly, 2 to give creators and those who package and
disseminate materials the economic rewards that are due them.

Congress strives to strike a balance, which at times can become an
emotional issue.  The United States has never accepted the notion of the
natural right of an author so much as it has accepted the notion of the
public good and the desirability of incentives to promote it.  This state
of affairs, however, has created strains on the international level and
is the reason for several of the differences in the laws that we have.
Today the United States protects almost every kind of work that can be
called an expression of an author.  The standard for gaining copyright
protection is simply originality.  This is a low standard and means that
