
  Its the oldest rule in the book, said the King.

  Then it ought to be Number One, said Alice.

  The King turned pale, and shut his notebook hastily.
Consider your verdict, he said to the jury, in a low, trembling
voice.

  Theres more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty, said
the White Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry this paper has
just been picked up.

  Whats in it? said the Queen.

  I havent opened it yet, said the White Rabbit, but it seems
to be a letter, written by the prisoner toto somebody.

  It must have been that, said the King, unless it was
written to nobody, which isnt usual, you know.

  Who is it directed to? said one of the jurymen.

  It isnt directed at all, said the White Rabbit in fact,
theres nothing written on the OUTSIDE.  He unfolded the paper
as he spoke, and added It isnt a letter, after all:  its a set
of verses.

  Are they in the prisoners handwriting? asked another of
they jurymen.

  No, theyre not, said the White Rabbit, and thats the
queerest thing about it.  The jury all looked puzzled.

  He must have imitated somebody elses hand, said the King.
The jury all brightened up again.

  Please your Majesty, said the Knave, I didnt write it, and
they cant prove I did:  theres no name signed at the end.

  If you didnt sign it, said the King, that only makes the
matter worse.  You MUST have meant some mischief, or else youd
have signed your name like an honest man.

  There was a general clapping of hands at this:  it was the
first really clever thing the King had said that day.

  That PROVES his guilt, said the Queen.

  It proves nothing of the sort! said Alice.  Why, you dont
even know what theyre about!

  Read them, said the King.

  The White Rabbit put on his spectacles.  Where shall I begin,
please your Majesty? he asked.

  Begin at the beginning, the King said gravely, and go on
till you come to the end:  then stop.

  These were the verses the White Rabbit read:

        They told me you had been to her,
          And mentioned me to him:
        She gave me a good character,
          But said I could not swim.
