     conduct their own research and draw their own conclusions.

      Perhaps the most ironic strength of these kinds of archival
     electronic resources is that many of the teachers AM interviewed
     were desperate, it is no exaggeration to say, not only for primary
     materials but for unstructured primary materials.  These would, they
     thought, foster personally motivated research, exploration, and
     excitement in their students.  Indeed, these materials have done
     just that.  Ironically, however, this lack of structure produces
     some of the confusion to which the newness of these kinds of
     resources may also contribute.  The key to effective use of archival
     products in a school environment is a clear, effective introduction
     to the system and to what it contains.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Nothing known, quantitatively, about the number of
humanities scholars who must see the original versus those who would
settle for an edited transcript, or about the ways in which humanities
scholars are using information technology  Firm conclusions concerning
the manner and extent of the use of supporting materials in print
provided by AM to await completion of evaluative study  A listeners
reflections on additional applications of electronic texts  Role of
electronic resources in teaching elementary research skills to students 


During the discussion that followed the presentations by MICHELSON,
VECCIA, and FREEMAN, additional points emerged.

LESK asked if MICHELSON could give any quantitative estimate of the
number of humanities scholars who must see or want to see the original,
or the best possible version of the material, versus those who typically
would settle for an edited transcript.  While unable to provide a figure,
she offered her impressions as an archivist who has done some reference
work and has discussed this issue with other archivists who perform
reference, that those who use archives and those who use primary sources
for what would be considered very highlevel scholarly research, as
opposed to, say, undergraduate papers, were few in number, especially
given the public interest in using primary sources to conduct
genealogical or avocational research and the kind of professional
research done by people in private industry or the federal government.
More important in MICHELSONs view was that, quantitatively, nothing is
known about the ways in which, for example, humanities scholars are using
information technology.  No studies exist to offer guidance in creating
strategies.  The most recent study was conducted in 1985 by the American
Council of Learned Societies ACLS, and what it showed was that 50
percent of humanities scholars at that time were using computers.  That
constitutes the extent of our knowledge.

Concerning AMs strategy for orienting people toward the scope of
electronic resources, FREEMAN could offer no hard conclusions at this
point, because she and her colleagues were still waiting to see,
particularly in the schools, what has been made of their efforts.  Within
the system, however, AM has provided what are called electronic exhibits
such as introductions to time periods and materialsand these are
intended to offer a student user a sense of what a broadside is  and what
it might tell her or him.  But FREEMAN conceded that the project staff
would have to talk with students next year, after teachers have had a
summer to use the materials, and attempt to discover what the students
were learning from the materials.  In addition, FREEMAN described
supporting materials in print provided by AM at the request of local
teachers during a meeting held at LC.  These included time lines,
bibliographies, and other materials that could be reproduced on a
photocopier in a classroom.  Teachers could walk away with and use these,
and in this way gain a better understanding of the contents.  But again,
reaching firm conclusions concerning the manner and extent of their use
would have to wait until next year.

As to the changes she saw occurring at the National Archives and Records
Administration NARA as a result of the increasing emphasis on
technology in scholarly research, MICHELSON stated that NARA at this
point was absorbing the report by her and Jeff Rothenberg addressing
strategies for the archival profession in general, although not for the
National Archives specifically.  NARA is just beginning to establish its
role and what it can do.  In terms of changes and initiatives that NARA
can take, no clear response could be given at this time.

GREENFIELD remarked two trends mentioned in the session.  Reflecting on
DALYs opening comments on how he could have used a Latin collection of
text in an electronic form, he said that at first he thought most scholars
would be unwilling to do that.  But as he thought of that in terms of the
original meaning of researchthat is, having already mastered these texts,
researching them for critical and comparative purposesfor the first time,
the electronic format made a lot of sense.  GREENFIELD could envision
growing numbers of scholars learning the new technologies for that very
aspect of their scholarship and for conveniences sake.

Listening to VECCIA and FREEMAN, GREENFIELD thought of an additional
application of electronic texts.  He realized that AM could be used as a
guide to lead someone to original sources.  Students cannot be expected
to have mastered these sources, things they have never known about
before.  Thus, AM is leading them, in theory, to a vast body of
information and giving them a superficial overview of it, enabling them
to select parts of it.  GREENFIELD asked if any evidence exists that this
resource will indeed teach the new user, the K12 students, how to do
research.  Scholars already know how to do research and are applying
these new tools.  But he wondered why students would go beyond picking
out things that were most exciting to them.

FREEMAN conceded the correctness of GREENFIELDs observation as applied
to a school environment.  The risk is that a student would sit down at a
system, play with it, find some things of interest, and then walk away.
But in the relatively controlled situation of a school library, much will
depend on the instructions a teacher or a librarian gives a student.  She
viewed the situation not as one of finetuning research skills but of
involving students at a personal level in understanding and researching
things.  Given the guidance one can receive at school, it then becomes
possible to teach elementary research skills to students, which in fact
one particular librarian said she was teaching her fifth graders.
FREEMAN concluded that introducing the idea of following ones own path
of inquiry, which is essentially what research entails, involves more
than teaching specific skills.  To these comments VECCIA added the
observation that the individual teacher and the use of a creative
resource, rather than AM itself, seemed to make the key difference.
Some schools and some teachers are making excellent use of the nature
of critical thinking and teaching skills, she said.

Concurring with these remarks, DALY closed the session with the thought that
the more that producers produced for teachers and for scholars to use with
their students, the more successful their electronic products would prove.

                                 

SESSION II.  SHOW AND TELL

Jacqueline HESS, director, National Demonstration Laboratory, served as
moderator of the "showandtell" session.  She noted that a
questionandanswer period would follow each presentation.


MYLONAS  Overview and content of Perseus  Perseus primary materials
exist in a systemindependent, archival form  A concession  Textual
aspects of Perseus  Tools to use with the Greek text  Prepared indices
and fulltext searches in Perseus  EnglishGreek word search leads to
close study of words and concepts  Navigating Perseus by tracing down
indices  Using the iconography to perform research 


Elli MYLONAS, managing editor, Perseus Project, Harvard University, first
gave an overview of Perseus, a large, collaborative effort based at
Harvard University but with contributors and collaborators located at
numerous universities and colleges in the United States e.g., Bowdoin,
Maryland, Pomona, Chicago, Virginia.  Funded primarily by the
AnnenbergCPB Project, with additional funding from Apple, Harvard, and
the Packard Humanities Institute, among others, Perseus is a multimedia,
hypertextual database for teaching and research on classical Greek
civilization, which was released in February 1992 in version 1.0 and
distributed by Yale University Press.

Consisting entirely of primary materials, Perseus includes ancient Greek
texts and translations of those texts catalog entriesthat is, museum
catalog entries, not library catalog entrieson vases, sites, coins,
sculpture, and archaeological objects maps and a dictionary, among
other sources.  The number of objects and the objects for which catalog
entries exist are accompanied by thousands of color images, which
constitute a major feature of the database.  Perseus contains
approximately 30 megabytes of text, an amount that will double in
subsequent versions.  In addition to these primary materials, the Perseus
Project has been building tools for using them, making access and
navigation easier, the goal being to build part of the electronic
environment discussed earlier in the morning in which students or
scholars can work with their sources.

The demonstration of Perseus will show only a fraction of the real work
that has gone into it, because the project had to face the dilemma of
what to enter when putting something into machinereadable form:  should
one aim for very high quality or make concessions in order to get the
material in?  Since Perseus decided to opt for very high quality, all of
its primary materials exist in a systemindependentinsofar as it is
possible to be systemindependentarchival form.  Deciding what that
archival form would be and attaining it required much work and thought.
For example, all the texts are marked up in SGML, which will be made
compatible with the guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative TEI when
they are issued.

Drawings are postscript files, not meeting international standards, but
at least designed to go across platforms.  Images, or rather the real
archival forms, consist of the best available slides, which are being
digitized.  Much of the catalog material exists in database forma form
that the average user could use, manipulate, and display on a personal
computer, but only at great cost.  Thus, this is where the concession
comes in:  All of this rich, wellmarkedup information is stripped of
much of its content the images are converted into bitmaps and the text
into small formatted chunks.  All this information can then be imported
into HyperCard and run on a midrange Macintosh, which is what Perseus
users have.  This fact has made it possible for Perseus to attain wide
use fairly rapidly.  Without those archival forms the HyperCard version
