

ROSALIND	It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue
	but it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord
	the prologue. If it be true that good wine needs
	no bush, tis true that a good play needs no
	epilogue yet to good wine they do use good bushes,
	and good plays prove the better by the help of good
	epilogues. What a case am I in then, that am
	neither a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with
	you in the behalf of a good play! I am not
	furnished like a beggar, therefore to beg will not
	become me: my way is to conjure you and Ill begin
	with the women. I charge you, O women, for the love
	you bear to men, to like as much of this play as
	please you: and I charge you, O men, for the love
	you bear to womenas I perceive by your simpering,
	none of you hates themthat between you and the
	women the play may please. If I were a woman I
	would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased
	me, complexions that liked me and breaths that I
	defied not: and, I am sure, as many as have good
	beards or good faces or sweet breaths will, for my
	kind offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell.

	Exeunt


The Project Gutenberg Etext of LOC WORKSHOP ON ELECTRONIC TEXTS




                      WORKSHOP ON ELECTRONIC TEXTS

                               PROCEEDINGS



                          Edited by James Daly







                             910 June 1992


                           Library of Congress
                            Washington, D.C.



    Supported by a Grant from the David and Lucile Packard Foundation


                                 


                            TABLE OF CONTENTS


Acknowledgements

Introduction

Proceedings
   Welcome
      Prosser Gifford and Carl Fleischhauer

   Session I.  Content in a New Form:  Who Will Use It and What Will They Do?
      James Daly Moderator
      Avra Michelson, Overview
      Susan H. Veccia, User Evaluation
      Joanne Freeman, Beyond the Scholar
         Discussion

   Session II.  Show and Tell
      Jacqueline Hess Moderator
      Elli Mylonas, Perseus Project
         Discussion
      Eric M. Calaluca, Patrologia Latina Database
      Carl Fleischhauer and Ricky Erway, American Memory
         Discussion
      Dorothy Twohig, The Papers of George Washington
         Discussion
      Maria L. Lebron, The Online Journal of Current Clinical Trials
         Discussion
      Lynne K. Personius, Cornell mathematics books
         Discussion

   Session III.  Distribution, Networks, and Networking:
                 Options for Dissemination
      Robert G. Zich Moderator
      Clifford A. Lynch
         Discussion
      Howard Besser
         Discussion
      Ronald L. Larsen
      Edwin B. Brownrigg
         Discussion

   Session IV.  Image Capture, Text Capture, Overview of Text and
                Image Storage Formats
         William L. Hooton Moderator
      A Principal Methods for Image Capture of Text:
            direct scanning, use of microform
         Anne R. Kenney
         Pamela Q.J. Andre
         Judith A. Zidar
         Donald J. Waters
            Discussion
      B Special Problems:  bound volumes, conservation,
                            reproducing printed halftones
         George Thoma
         Carl Fleischhauer
            Discussion
      C Image Standards and Implications for Preservation
         Jean Baronas
         Patricia Battin
            Discussion
      D Text Conversion:  OCR vs. rekeying, standards of accuracy
                           and use of imperfect texts, service bureaus
         Michael Lesk
         Ricky Erway
         Judith A. Zidar
            Discussion

   Session V.  Approaches to Preparing Electronic Texts
      Susan Hockey Moderator
      Stuart Weibel
         Discussion
      C.M. SperbergMcQueen
         Discussion
      Eric M. Calaluca
         Discussion

   Session VI.  Copyright Issues
      Marybeth Peters

   Session VII.  Conclusion
      Prosser Gifford Moderator
      General discussion

Appendix I:  Program

Appendix II:  Abstracts

Appendix III:  Directory of Participants


                                 


                            Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Carl Fleischhauer and Prosser Gifford for the
opportunity to learn about areas of human activity unknown to me a scant
ten months ago, and the David and Lucile Packard Foundation for
supporting that opportunity.  The help given by others is acknowledged on
a separate page.

                                                          19 October 1992


                                 


                              INTRODUCTION

The Workshop on Electronic Texts 1 drew together representatives of
various projects and interest groups to compare ideas, beliefs,
experiences, and, in particular, methods of placing and presenting
historical textual materials in computerized form.  Most attendees gained
much in insight and outlook from the event.  But the assembly did not
form a new nation, or, to put it another way, the diversity of projects
and interests was too great to draw the representatives into a cohesive,
actionoriented body.2

Everyone attending the Workshop shared an interest in preserving and
providing access to historical texts.  But within this broad field the
attendees represented a variety of formal, informal, figurative, and
literal groups, with many individuals belonging to more than one.  These
groups may be defined roughly according to the following topics or
activities:

 Imaging
 Searchable coded texts
 National and international computer networks
 CDROM production and dissemination
 Methods and technology for converting older paper materials into
electronic form
 Study of the use of digital materials by scholars and others

This summary is arranged thematically and does not follow the actual
sequence of presentations.

NOTES:
     1  In this document, the phrase electronic text is used to mean
     any computerized reproduction or version of a document, book,
     article, or manuscript including images, and not merely a machine
     readable or machinesearchable text.

     2  The Workshop was held at the Library of Congress on 910 June
     1992, with funding from the David and Lucile Packard Foundation.
     The document that follows represents a summary of the presentations
     made at the Workshop and was compiled by James DALY.  This
     introduction was written by DALY and Carl FLEISCHHAUER.


PRESERVATION AND IMAGING

Preservation, as that term is used by archivists,3 was most explicitly
discussed in the context of imaging.  Anne KENNEY and Lynne PERSONIUS
explained how the concept of a faithful copy and the userfriendliness of
the traditional book have guided their project at Cornell University.4
Although interested in computerized dissemination, participants in the
Cornell project are creating digital image sets of older books in the
public domain as a source for a fresh paper facsimile or, in a future
phase, microfilm.  The books returned to the library shelves are
highquality and useful replacements on acidfree paper that should last
a long time.  To date, the Cornell project has placed little or no
emphasis on creating searchable texts one would not be surprised to find
that the project participants view such texts as new editions, and thus
not as faithful reproductions.

In her talk on preservation, Patricia BATTIN struck an ecumenical and
flexible note as she endorsed the creation and dissemination of a variety
of types of digital copies.  Do not be too narrow in defining what counts
as a preservation element, BATTIN counseled for the present, at least,
digital copies made with preservation in mind cannot be as narrowly
standardized as, say, microfilm copies with the same objective.  Setting
standards precipitously can inhibit creativity, but delay can result in
chaos, she advised.

In part, BATTINs position reflected the unsettled nature of imageformat
standards, and attendees could hear echoes of this unsettledness in the
comments of various speakers.  For example, Jean BARONAS reviewed the
status of several formal standards moving through committees of experts
and Clifford LYNCH encouraged the use of a new guideline for transmitting
document images on Internet.  Testimony from participants in the National
Agricultural Librarys NAL Text Digitization Program and LCs American
Memory project highlighted some of the challenges to the actual creation
or interchange of images, including difficulties in converting
preservation microfilm to digital form.  Donald WATERS reported on the
progress of a master plan for a project at Yale University to convert
books on microfilm to digital image sets, Project Open Book POB.

The Workshop offered rather less of an imaging practicum than planned,
but "howto" hints emerge at various points, for example, throughout
KENNEYs presentation and in the discussion of arcana such as
thresholding and dithering offered by George THOMA and FLEISCHHAUER.

NOTES:
     3  Although there is a sense in which any reproductions of
     historical materials preserve the human record, specialists in the
     field have developed particular guidelines for the creation of
