great many more than three.

  Your hair wants cutting, said the Hatter.  He had been
looking at Alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was
his first speech.

  You should learn not to make personal remarks, Alice said
with some severity its very rude.

  The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this but all
he SAID was, Why is a raven like a writingdesk?

  Come, we shall have some fun now! thought Alice.  Im glad
theyve begun asking riddles.I believe I can guess that, she
added aloud.

  Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?
said the March Hare.

  Exactly so, said Alice.

  Then you should say what you mean, the March Hare went on.

  I do, Alice hastily replied at leastat least I mean what
I saythats the same thing, you know.

  Not the same thing a bit! said the Hatter.  You might just
as well say that "I see what I eat" is the same thing as "I eat
what I see"!

  You might just as well say, added the March Hare, that "I
like what I get" is the same thing as "I get what I like"!

  You might just as well say, added the Dormouse, who seemed to
be talking in his sleep, that "I breathe when I sleep" is the
same thing as "I sleep when I breathe"!

  It IS the same thing with you, said the Hatter, and here the
conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute,
while Alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and
writingdesks, which wasnt much.

  The Hatter was the first to break the silence.  What day of
the month is it? he said, turning to Alice:  he had taken his
watch out of his pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking
it every now and then, and holding it to his ear.

  Alice considered a little, and then said The fourth.

  Two days wrong! sighed the Hatter.  I told you butter
wouldnt suit the works! he added looking angrily at the March
Hare.

  It was the BEST butter, the March Hare meekly replied.

  Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well, the Hatter
grumbled:  you shouldnt have put it in with the breadknife.

  The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily:  then
he dipped it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again:  but he
could think of nothing better to say than his first remark, It
was the BEST butter, you know.

  Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity.
What a funny watch! she remarked.  It tells the day of the
month, and doesnt tell what oclock it is!

