little way off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was:  at
first she thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then
she remembered how small she was now, and she soon made out that
it was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself.

  Would it be of any use, now, thought Alice, to speak to this
mouse?  Everything is so outoftheway down here, that I should
think very likely it can talk:  at any rate, theres no harm in
trying.  So she began:  O Mouse, do you know the way out of
this pool?  I am very tired of swimming about here, O Mouse!
Alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse:
she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having
seen in her brothers Latin Grammar, A mouseof a mouseto a
mousea mouseO mouse!  The Mouse looked at her rather
inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little
eyes, but it said nothing.

  Perhaps it doesnt understand English, thought Alice I
daresay its a French mouse, come over with William the
Conqueror.  For, with all her knowledge of history, Alice had
no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened.  So she
began again:  Ou est ma chatte? which was the first sentence in
her French lessonbook.  The Mouse gave a sudden leap out of the
water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.  Oh, I beg
your pardon! cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the
poor animals feelings.  I quite forgot you didnt like cats.

  Not like cats! cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate
voice.  Would YOU like cats if you were me?

  Well, perhaps not, said Alice in a soothing tone:  dont be
angry about it.  And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah:
I think youd take a fancy to cats if you could only see her.
She is such a dear quiet thing, Alice went on, half to herself,
as she swam lazily about in the pool, and she sits purring so
nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her faceand
she is such a nice soft thing to nurseand shes such a capital
one for catching miceoh, I beg your pardon! cried Alice again,
for this time the Mouse was bristling all over, and she felt
certain it must be really offended.  We wont talk about her any
more if youd rather not.

  We indeed! cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end
of his tail.  As if I would talk on such a subject!  Our family
always HATED cats:  nasty, low, vulgar things!  Dont let me hear
the name again!

  I wont indeed! said Alice, in a great hurry to change the
subject of conversation.  Are youare you fondofof dogs?
The Mouse did not answer, so Alice went on eagerly:  There is
such a nice little dog near our house I should like to show you!
A little brighteyed terrier, you know, with oh, such long curly
brown hair!  And itll fetch things when you throw them, and
itll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts of thingsI
cant remember half of themand it belongs to a farmer, you
know, and he says its so useful, its worth a hundred pounds!
He says it kills all the rats andoh dear! cried Alice in a
sorrowful tone, Im afraid Ive offended it again!  For the
Mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and
