in the Humanities CETH and the Department of Classics at Rutgers
University, where an old friend, Lowell Edmunds, introduced him to the
departments IBYCUS scholarly personal computer, and, in particular, the
new Latin CDROM, containing, among other things, almost all classical
Latin literary texts through A.D. 200.  Packard Humanities Institute
PHI, Los Altos, California, released this disk late in 1991, with a
nominal triennial licensing fee.

Playing with the disk for an hour or so at Rutgers brought home to DALY
at once the revolutionizing impact of the new technology on his previous
methods of research.  Had this disk been available two or three years
earlier, DALY contended, when he was engaged in preparing a commentary on
Book 10 of Virgils Aeneid for Cambridge University Press, he would not
have required a fortyeightsquarefoot table on which to spread the
numerous, most frequently consulted items, including some ten or twelve
concordances to key Latin authors, an almost equal number of lexica to
authors who lacked concordances, and where either lexica or concordances
were lacking, numerous editions of authors antedating and postdating Virgil.

Nor, when checking each of the average six to seven words contained in
the Virgilian hexameter for its usage elsewhere in Virgils works or
other Latin authors, would DALY have had to maintain the laborious
mechanical process of flipping through these concordances, lexica, and
editions each time.  Nor would he have had to frequent as often the
Milton S. Eisenhower Library at the Johns Hopkins University to consult
the Thesaurus Linguae Latinae.  Instead of devoting countless hours, or
the bulk of his research time, to gathering data concerning Virgils use
of words, DALYnow freed by PHIs Latin authors disk from the
tyrannical, yet in some ways paradoxically happy scholarly drudgery
would have been able to devote that same bulk of time to analyzing and
interpreting Virgilian verbal usage.

Citing Theodore Brunner, Gregory Crane, Elli MYLONAS, and Avra MICHELSON,
DALY argued that this reversal in his style of work, made possible by the
new technology, would perhaps have resulted in better, more productive
research.  Indeed, even in the course of his browsing the Latin authors
disk at Rutgers, its powerful search, retrieval, and highlighting
capabilities suggested to him several new avenues of research into
Virgils use of sound effects.  This anecdotal account, DALY maintained,
may serve to illustrate in part the sudden and radical transformation
being wrought in the ways scholars work.

                                 


MICHELSON  Elements related to scholarship and technology  Electronic
texts within the context of broader trends within information technology
and scholarly communication  Evaluation of the prospects for the use of
electronic texts  Relationship of electronic texts to processes of
scholarly communication in humanities research  New exchange formats
created by scholars  Projects initiated to increase scholarly access to
converted text  Trend toward making electronic resources available
through research and education networks  Changes taking place in
scholarly communication among humanities scholars  Networkmediated
scholarship transforming traditional scholarly practices  Key
information technology trends affecting the conduct of scholarly
communication over the next decade  The trend toward enduser computing
 The trend toward greater connectivity  Effects of these trends  Key
transformations taking place  Summary of principal arguments 


Avra MICHELSON, Archival Research and Evaluation Staff, National Archives
and Records Administration NARA, argued that establishing who will use
electronic texts and what they will use them for involves a consideration
of both information technology and scholarship trends.  This
consideration includes several elements related to scholarship and
