
  Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall:  in
fact she was now more than nine feet high, and she at once took
up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.

  Poor Alice!  It was as much as she could do, lying down on one
side, to look through into the garden with one eye but to get
through was more hopeless than ever:  she sat down and began to
cry again.

  You ought to be ashamed of yourself, said Alice, a great
girl like you, she might well say this, to go on crying in
this way!  Stop this moment, I tell you!  But she went on all
the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool
all round her, about four inches deep and reaching half down the
hall.

  After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the
distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming.
It was the White Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a
pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the
other:  he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to
himself as he came, Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess! Oh! wont she
be savage if Ive kept her waiting!  Alice felt so desperate
that she was ready to ask help of any one so, when the Rabbit
came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, If you please,
sir  The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid
gloves and the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard
as he could go.

  Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very
hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking:
Dear, dear!  How queer everything is today!  And yesterday
things went on just as usual.  I wonder if Ive been changed in
the night?  Let me think:  was I the same when I got up this
morning?  I almost think I can remember feeling a little
different.  But if Im not the same, the next question is, Who in
the world am I?  Ah, THATS the great puzzle!  And she began
thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age
as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of
them.

  Im sure Im not Ada, she said, for her hair goes in such
long ringlets, and mine doesnt go in ringlets at all and Im
sure I cant be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she,
oh! she knows such a very little!  Besides, SHES she, and Im I,
andoh dear, how puzzling it all is!  Ill try if I know all the
things I used to know.  Let me see:  four times five is twelve,
and four times six is thirteen, and four times seven isoh dear!
I shall never get to twenty at that rate!  However, the
Multiplication Table doesnt signify:  lets try Geography.
London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of Rome,
and Romeno, THATS all wrong, Im certain!  I must have been
changed for Mabel!  Ill try and say "How doth the little"
and she crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons,
and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and
strange, and the words did not come the same as they used to do:

            How doth the little crocodile
              Improve his shining tail,
            And pour the waters of the Nile
              On every golden scale!

            How cheerfully he seems to grin,
              How neatly spread his claws,
            And welcome little fishes in
              With gently smiling jaws!

  Im sure those are not the right words, said poor Alice, and
her eyes filled with tears again as she went on, I must be Mabel
after all, and I shall have to go and live in that poky little
house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh! ever so
many lessons to learn!  No, Ive made up my mind about it if Im
Mabel, Ill stay down here!  Itll be no use their putting their
heads down and saying "Come up again, dear!"  I shall only look
up and say "Who am I then?  Tell me that first, and then, if I
like being that person, Ill come up:  if not, Ill stay down
here till Im somebody else"but, oh dear! cried Alice, with a
sudden burst of tears, I do wish they WOULD put their heads
down!  I am so VERY tired of being all alone here!

  As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was
surprised to see that she had put on one of the Rabbits little
white kid gloves while she was talking.  How CAN I have done
that? she thought.  I must be growing small again.  She got up
and went to the table to measure herself by it, and found that,
as nearly as she could guess, she was now about two feet high,
and was going on shrinking rapidly:  she soon found out that the
cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it
hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

That WAS a narrow escape! said Alice, a good deal frightened at
the sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in
existence and now for the garden! and she ran with all speed
back to the little door:  but, alas! the little door was shut
again, and the little golden key was lying on the glass table as
before, and things are worse than ever, thought the poor child,
for I never was so small as this before, never!  And I declare
its too bad, that it is!

  As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another
moment, splash! she was up to her chin in salt water.  He first
idea was that she had somehow fallen into the sea, and in that
case I can go back by railway, she said to herself.  Alice had
been to the seaside once in her life, and had come to the general
conclusion, that wherever you go to on the English coast you find
a number of bathing machines in the sea, some children digging in
the sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging houses, and
behind them a railway station.  However, she soon made out that
she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was nine
feet high.

  I wish I hadnt cried so much! said Alice, as she swam about,
trying to find her way out.  I shall be punished for it now, I
suppose, by being drowned in my own tears!  That WILL be a queer
thing, to be sure!  However, everything is queer today.

  Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a
little way off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was:  at
first she thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then
she remembered how small she was now, and she soon made out that
it was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself.

  Would it be of any use, now, thought Alice, to speak to this
mouse?  Everything is so outoftheway down here, that I should
think very likely it can talk:  at any rate, theres no harm in
trying.  So she began:  O Mouse, do you know the way out of
this pool?  I am very tired of swimming about here, O Mouse!
Alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse:
she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having
seen in her brothers Latin Grammar, A mouseof a mouseto a
mousea mouseO mouse!  The Mouse looked at her rather
inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little
eyes, but it said nothing.

  Perhaps it doesnt understand English, thought Alice I
daresay its a French mouse, come over with William the
Conqueror.  For, with all her knowledge of history, Alice had
no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened.  So she
began again:  Ou est ma chatte? which was the first sentence in
her French lessonbook.  The Mouse gave a sudden leap out of the
water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.  Oh, I beg
your pardon! cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the
poor animals feelings.  I quite forgot you didnt like cats.

  Not like cats! cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate
voice.  Would YOU like cats if you were me?

  Well, perhaps not, said Alice in a soothing tone:  dont be
angry about it.  And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah:
I think youd take a fancy to cats if you could only see her.
She is such a dear quiet thing, Alice went on, half to herself,
as she swam lazily about in the pool, and she sits purring so
nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her faceand
she is such a nice soft thing to nurseand shes such a capital
one for catching miceoh, I beg your pardon! cried Alice again,
for this time the Mouse was bristling all over, and she felt
certain it must be really offended.  We wont talk about her any
more if youd rather not.

  We indeed! cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end
of his tail.  As if I would talk on such a subject!  Our family
always HATED cats:  nasty, low, vulgar things!  Dont let me hear
the name again!

  I wont indeed! said Alice, in a great hurry to change the
subject of conversation.  Are youare you fondofof dogs?
The Mouse did not answer, so Alice went on eagerly:  There is
such a nice little dog near our house I should like to show you!
A little brighteyed terrier, you know, with oh, such long curly
brown hair!  And itll fetch things when you throw them, and
itll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts of thingsI
cant remember half of themand it belongs to a farmer, you
know, and he says its so useful, its worth a hundred pounds!
He says it kills all the rats andoh dear! cried Alice in a
sorrowful tone, Im afraid Ive offended it again!  For the
Mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and
making quite a commotion in the pool as it went.

  So she called softly after it, Mouse dear!  Do come back
again, and we wont talk about cats or dogs either, if you dont
like them!  When the Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam
slowly back to her:  its face was quite pale with passion, Alice
thought, and it said in a low trembling voice, Let us get to
the shore, and then Ill tell you my history, and youll
understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.

  It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded
with the birds and animals that had fallen into it:  there were a
Duck and a Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious
creatures.  Alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the
shore.



                           CHAPTER III

                  A CaucusRace and a Long Tale


  They were indeed a queerlooking party that assembled on the
bankthe birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their
fur clinging close to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and
uncomfortable.

  The first question of course was, how to get dry again:  they
had a consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed
quite natural to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with
them, as if she had known them all her life.  Indeed, she had
quite a long argument with the Lory, who at last turned sulky,
and would only say, I am older than you, and must know better
and this Alice would not allow without knowing how old it was,
and, as the Lory positively refused to tell its age, there was no
more to be said.

  At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among
them, called out, Sit down, all of you, and listen to me!  ILL
soon make you dry enough!  They all sat down at once, in a large
ring, with the Mouse in the middle.  Alice kept her eyes
anxiously fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad
cold if she did not get dry very soon.

  Ahem! said the Mouse with an important air, are you all ready?
