LCs text collections, for example, bound volumes, microfilm, and
handwritten manuscripts.

Two assumptions have guided AMs approach, ERWAY said:  1 A desire not
to perform the conversion inhouse.  Because of the variety of formats and
types of texts, to capitalize the equipment and have the talents and
skills to operate them at LC would be extremely expensive.  Further, the
natural inclination to upgrade to newer and better equipment each year
made it reasonable for AM to focus on what it did best and seek external
conversion services.  Using service bureaus also allowed AM to have
several types of operations take place at the same time.  2 AM was not a
technology project, but an effort to improve access to library
collections.  Hence, whether text was converted using OCR or rekeying
mattered little to AM.  What mattered were cost and accuracy of results.

AM considered different types of service bureaus and selected three to
perform several small tests in order to acquire a sense of the field.
The sample collections with which they worked included handwritten
correspondence, typewritten manuscripts from the 1940s, and
eighteenthcentury printed broadsides on microfilm.  On none of these
samples was OCR performed they were all rekeyed.  AM had several special
requirements for the three service bureaus it had engaged.  For instance,
any errors in the original text were to be retained.  Working from bound
volumes or anything that could not be sheetfed also constituted a factor
eliminating companies that would have performed OCR.

AM requires 99.95 percent accuracy, which, though it sounds high, often
means one or two errors per page.  The initial batch of test samples
contained several handwritten materials for which AM did not require
textcoding.  The results, ERWAY reported, were in all cases fairly
comparable:  for the most part, all three service bureaus achieved 99.95
percent accuracy.  AM was satisfied with the work but surprised at the cost.

As AM began converting whole collections, it retained the requirement for
99.95 percent accuracy and added requirements for textcoding.  AM needed
to begin performing work more than three years ago before LC requirements
for SGML applications had been established.  Since AMs goal was simply
to retain any of the intellectual content represented by the formatting
of the document which would be lost if one performed a straight ASCII
conversion, AM used "SGMLlike" codes.  These codes resembled SGML tags
but were used without the benefit of documenttype definitions.  AM found
that many service bureaus were not yet SGMLproficient.

Additional factors influencing the approach AM took with respect to
coding included:  1 the inability of any known microcomputerbased
userretrieval software to take advantage of SGML coding and 2 the
multiple inconsistencies in format of the older documents, which
confirmed AM in its desire not to attempt to force the different formats
to conform to a single documenttype definition DTD and thus create the
need for a separate DTD for each document.

The five text collections that AM has converted or is in the process of
converting include a collection of eighteenthcentury broadsides, a
collection of pamphlets, two typescript document collections, and a
collection of 150 books.

ERWAY next reviewed the results of AMs experience with rekeying, noting
again that because the bulk of AMs materials are historical, the quality
of the text often does not lend itself to OCR.  While nonEnglish
speakers are less likely to guess or elaborate or correct typos in the
original text, they are also less able to infer what we would they also
are nearly incapable of converting handwritten text.  Another
disadvantage of working with overseas keyers is that they are much less
likely to telephone with questions, especially on the coding, with the
result that they develop their own rules as they encounter new
situations.

