DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERGtm"

You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this "Small
Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg, or:

1  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this re
     quires that you do not remove, alter or modify the etext or
     this "small print!" statement.  You may however, if you
     wish, distribute this etext in machine readable binary,
     compressed, markup, or proprietary form, including any
     form resulting from conversion by word processing or hyper
     text software, but only so long as EITHER:

       The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable.  We
          consider an etext not clearly readable if it
          contains characters other than those intended by the
          author of the work, although tilde ~, asterisk 
          and underline  characters may be used to convey
          punctuation intended by the author, and additional
          characters may be used to indicate hypertext links.

       The etext may be readily converted by the reader at no
          expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent form
          by the program that displays the etext as is the
          case, for instance, with most word processors.

       You provide, or agree to also provide on request at no
          additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the etext
          in its original plain ASCII form or in EBCDIC or
          other equivalent proprietary form.

2   Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

3  Pay a trademark license fee of 20 twenty percent of the
     net profits you derive from distributing this etext under
     the trademark, determined in accordance with generally
     accepted accounting practices.  The license fee:

       Is required only if you derive such profits.  In
          distributing under our trademark, you incur no
          obligation to charge money or earn profits for your
          distribution.

       Shall be paid to "Project Gutenberg Association 
          Illinois Benedictine College" or to such other person
          as the Project Gutenberg Association may direct
          within the 60 days following each date you prepare or
          were legally required to prepare your yearend tax
          return with respect to your income for that year.

WHAT IF YOU WANT TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DONT HAVE TO?

The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association  Illinois Benedictine College".

WRITE TO US!  We can be reached at:

Project Gutenberg Director of Communications PGDIRCOM

Internet:     pgdircomvmd.cso.uiuc.edu
Bitnet:       pgdircomuiucvmd
CompuServe:   >internet:pgdircom.vmd.cso.uiuc.edu
Attmail:      internet!vmd.cso.uiuc.edu!pgdircom

Drafted by CHARLES B. KRAMER, Attorney
CompuServe:  72600,2026
  Internet:  72600.2026compuserve.com
       Tel:  212 2545093
ENDTHE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTSVer.07.02.92END



The Project Gutenberg Edition of THE WORLD FACTBOOK 1992:    January 1, 1993

This edition, as are all Project Gutenberg Editions, is Plain Vanilla ASCII,
meaning there are no characters other than what you would see on paper, thus
no page returns, no markup, nothing but the characters you would type if you
were to copy this from a book on a typewriter.  Repetitive paged headers and
trailing spaces are not present.  Leading spaces have been preserved in fact
sections for readability.

Mail subject headers can be searched with leading :s. . .such as:

:Afghanistan Geography
:Afghanistan People
:Afghanistan Government
:Afghanistan Government
:Afghanistan Economy
:Afghanistan Economy
:Afghanistan Communications
:Afghanistan Defense Forces

To find the beginning of any country, search for :country
To find internal information, search for :country section, as above.


THE WORLD FACTBOOK 1992


:Afghanistan Geography

Total area:
    647,500 km2
Land area:
    647,500 km2
Comparative area:
    slightly smaller than Texas
Land boundaries:
    5,529 km total China 76 km, Iran 936 km, Pakistan 2,430 km, Tajikistan
    1,206 km, Turkmenistan 744 km, Uzbekistan 137 km
Coastline:
    none  landlocked
Maritime claims:
    none  landlocked
Disputes:
    Pashtunistan issue over the NorthWest Frontier Province with Pakistan
