Let us not then suspect our happy state
Left so imperfect by the Maker wise,
As not secure to single or combined.
Frail is our happiness, if this be so,
And Eden were no Eden, thus exposed.
To whom thus Adam fervently replied.
O Woman, best are all things as the will
Of God ordained them: His creating hand
Nothing imperfect or deficient left
Of all that he created, much less Man,
Or aught that might his happy state secure,
Secure from outward force within himself
The danger lies, yet lies within his power:
Against his will he can receive no harm.
But God left free the will for what obeys
Reason, is free and Reason he made right,
But bid her well be ware, and still erect
Lest, by some fairappearing good surprised,
She dictate false and misinform the will
To do what God expressly hath forbid.
Not then mistrust, but tender love, enjoins,
That I should mind thee oft and mind thou me.
Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve
Since Reason not impossibly may meet
Some specious object by the foe suborned,
And fall into deception unaware,
Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warned.
Seek not temptation then, which to avoid
Were better, and most likely if from me
Thou sever not: Trial will come unsought.
Wouldst thou approve thy constancy, approve
First thy obedience the other who can know,
Not seeing thee attempted, who attest?
But, if thou think, trial unsought may find
Us both securer than thus warned thou seemest,
Go for thy stay, not free, absents thee more
Go in thy native innocence, rely
On what thou hast of virtue summon all!
For God towards thee hath done his part, do thine.
So spake the patriarch of mankind but Eve
Persisted yet submiss, though last, replied.
With thy permission then, and thus forewarned
Chiefly by what thy own last reasoning words
Touched only that our trial, when least sought,
May find us both perhaps far less prepared,
The willinger I go, nor much expect
A foe so proud will first the weaker seek
So bent, the more shall shame him his repulse.
Thus saying, from her husbands hand her hand
Soft she withdrew and, like a WoodNymph light,
Oread or Dryad, or of Delias train,
Betook her to the groves but Delias self
In gait surpassed, and Goddesslike deport,
Though not as she with bow and quiver armed,
But with such gardening tools as Art yet rude,
Guiltless of fire, had formed, or Angels brought.
To Pales, or Pomona, thus adorned,
Likest she seemed, Pomona when she fled
Vertumnus, or to Ceres in her prime,
Yet virgin of Proserpina from Jove.
Her long with ardent look his eye pursued
Delighted, but desiring more her stay.
Oft he to her his charge of quick return
Repeated she to him as oft engaged
To be returned by noon amid the bower,
And all things in best order to invite
