
                           CHAPTER IX

                     The Mock Turtles Story


  You cant think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old
thing! said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately
into Alices, and they walked off together.

  Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and
thought to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had
made her so savage when they met in the kitchen.

  When IM a Duchess, she said to herself, not in a very
hopeful tone though, I wont have any pepper in my kitchen AT
ALL.  Soup does very well withoutMaybe its always pepper that
makes people hottempered, she went on, very much pleased at
having found out a new kind of rule, and vinegar that makes them
sourand camomile that makes them bitterandand barleysugar
and such things that make children sweettempered.  I only wish
people knew that:  then they wouldnt be so stingy about it, you
know

  She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a
little startled when she heard her voice close to her ear.
Youre thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you
forget to talk.  I cant tell you just now what the moral of that
is, but I shall remember it in a bit.

  Perhaps it hasnt one, Alice ventured to remark.

  Tut, tut, child! said the Duchess.  Everythings got a
moral, if only you can find it.  And she squeezed herself up
closer to Alices side as she spoke.

  Alice did not much like keeping so close to her:  first,
because the Duchess was VERY ugly and secondly, because she was
exactly the right height to rest her chin upon Alices shoulder,
and it was an uncomfortably sharp chin.  However, she did not
like to be rude, so she bore it as well as she could.

  The games going on rather better now, she said, by way of
keeping up the conversation a little.

  Tis so, said the Duchess:  and the moral of that is"Oh,
tis love, tis love, that makes the world go round!"

  Somebody said, Alice whispered, that its done by everybody
minding their own business!

  Ah, well!  It means much the same thing, said the Duchess,
digging her sharp little chin into Alices shoulder as she added,
and the moral of THAT is"Take care of the sense, and the
sounds will take care of themselves."

  How fond she is of finding morals in things! Alice thought to
herself.

  I dare say youre wondering why I dont put my arm round your
waist, the Duchess said after a pause:  the reason is, that Im
doubtful about the temper of your flamingo.  Shall I try the
experiment?

  HE might bite, Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all
anxious to have the experiment tried.

  Very true, said the Duchess:  flamingoes and mustard both
bite.  And the moral of that is"Birds of a feather flock
together."

  Only mustard isnt a bird, Alice remarked.

  Right, as usual, said the Duchess:  what a clear way you
have of putting things!
