world without standards 


Patricia BATTIN, president, the Commission on Preservation and Access
CPA, addressed the implications of standards for preservation.  She
listed several areas where the library profession and the analog world of
the printed book had made enormous contributions over the past hundred
yearsfor example, in bibliographic formats, binding standards, and, most
important, in determining what constitutes longevity or archival quality.

Although standards have lightened the preservation burden through the
development of national and international collaborative programs,
nevertheless, a pervasive mistrust of other peoples standards remains a
major obstacle to successful cooperation, BATTIN said.

The zeal to achieve perfection, regardless of the cost, has hindered
rather than facilitated access in some instances, and in the digital
environment, where no real standards exist, has brought an ironically
just reward.

BATTIN argued that standards are a doubleedged sword for those concerned
with the preservation of the human record, that is, the provision of
access to recorded knowledge in a multitude of media as far into the
future as possible.  Standards are essential to facilitate
interconnectivity and access, but, BATTIN said, as LYNCH pointed out
yesterday, if set too soon they can hinder creativity, expansion of
capability, and the broadening of access.  The characteristics of
standards for digital imagery differ radically from those for analog
imagery.  And the nature of digital technology implies continuing
volatility and change.  To reiterate, precipitous standardsetting can
inhibit creativity, but delayed standardsetting results in chaos.

Since in BATTINS opinion the nearterm prognosis for reliable archival
standards, as defined by librarians in the analog world, is poor, two
alternatives remain:  standing pat with the old technology, or
reconceptualizing.

Preservation concerns for electronic media fall into two general domains.
One is the continuing assurance of access to knowledge originally
generated, stored, disseminated, and used in electronic form.  This
domain contains several subdivisions, including 1 the closed,
proprietary systems discussed the previous day, bundled information such
as electronic journals and government agency records, and electronically
produced or captured raw data and 2 the application of digital
technologies to the reformatting of materials originally published on a
deteriorating analog medium such as acid paper or videotape.

The preservation of electronic media requires a reconceptualizing of our
preservation principles during a volatile, standardless transition which
may last far longer than any of us envision today.  BATTIN urged the
necessity of shifting focus from assessing, measuring, and setting
standards for the permanence of the medium to the concept of managing
continuing access to information stored on a variety of media and
requiring a variety of everchanging hardware and software for accessa
fundamental shift for the library profession.

BATTIN offered a primer on how to move forward with reasonable confidence
in a world without standards.  Her comments fell roughly into two sections:
1 standards in the real world and 2 the politics of reproduction.

In regard to realworld standards, BATTIN argued the need to redefine the
concept of archive and to begin to think in terms of life cycles.  In
the past, the naive assumption that paper would last forever produced a
cavalier attitude toward life cycles.  The transient nature of the
electronic media has compelled people to recognize and accept upfront the
concept of life cycles in place of permanency.

Digital standards have to be developed and set in a cooperative context
to ensure efficient exchange of information.  Moreover, during this
transition period, greater flexibility concerning how concepts such as
backup copies and archival copies in the CXP are defined is necessary,
or the opportunity to move forward will be lost.

In terms of cooperation, particularly in the university setting, BATTIN
also argued the need to avoid going off in a hundred different
directions.  The CPA has catalyzed a small group of universities called
the La Guardia Eightbecause La Guardia Airport is where meetings take
placeHarvard, Yale, Cornell, Princeton, Penn State, Tennessee,
Stanford, and USC, to develop a digital preservation consortium to look
at all these issues and develop de facto standards as we move along,
instead of waiting for something that is officially blessed.  Continuing
to apply analog values and definitions of standards to the digital
environment, BATTIN said, will effectively lead to forfeiture of the
benefits of digital technology to research and scholarship.

Under the second rubric, the politics of reproduction, BATTIN reiterated
an oftmade argument concerning the electronic library, namely, that it
is more difficult to transform than to create, and nowhere is that belief
expressed more dramatically than in the conversion of brittle books to
new media.  Preserving information published in electronic media involves
making sure the information remains accessible and that digital
information is not lost through reproduction.  In the analog world of
photocopies and microfilm, the issue of fidelity to the original becomes
paramount, as do issues of "Whose fidelity?" and "Whose original?"

BATTIN elaborated these arguments with a few examples from a recent study
conducted by the CPA on the problems of preserving text and image.
Discussions with scholars, librarians, and curators in a variety of
disciplines dependent on text and image generated a variety of concerns,
for example:  1 Copy what is, not what the technology is capable of.
This is very important for the history of ideas.  Scholars wish to know
what the author saw and worked from.  And make available at the
workstation the opportunity to erase all the defects and enhance the
presentation.  2 The fidelity of reproductionwhat is good enough, what
can we afford, and the difference it makesissues of subjective versus
objective resolution.  3 The differences between primary and secondary
users.  Restricting the definition of primary user to the one in whose
discipline the material has been published runs one headlong into the
reality that these printed books have had a host of other users from a
host of other disciplines, who not only were looking for very different
things, but who also shared values very different from those of the
primary user.  4 The relationship of the standard of reproduction to new
capabilities of scholarshipthe browsing standard versus an archival
standard.  How good must the archival standard be?  Can a distinction be
drawn between potential users in setting standards for reproduction?
Archival storage, use copies, browsing copiesought an attempt to set
standards even be made?  5 Finally, costs.  How much are we prepared to
pay to capture absolute fidelity?  What are the tradeoffs between vastly
enhanced access, degrees of fidelity, and costs?

These standards, BATTIN concluded, serve to complicate further the
reproduction process, and add to the long list of technical standards
that are necessary to ensure widespread access.  Ways to articulate and
analyze the costs that are attached to the different levels of standards
must be found.

Given the chaos concerning standards, which promises to linger for the
foreseeable future, BATTIN urged adoption of the following general
principles:

      Strive to understand the changing information requirements of
     scholarly disciplines as more and more technology is integrated into
