                                 


LYNCH  Creating networked information is different from using networks
as an access or dissemination vehicle  Networked multimedia on a large
scale does not yet work  Typical CDROM publication model a twoedged
sword  Publishing information on a CDROM in the present world of
immature standards  Contrast between CDROM and network pricing 
Examples demonstrated earlier in the day as a set of insular information
gems  Paramount need to link databases  Layering to become increasingly
necessary  Project NEEDS and the issues of information reuse and active
versus passive use  XWindows as a way of differentiating between
network access and networked information  Barriers to the distribution
of networked multimedia information  Need for good, realtime delivery
protocols  The question of presentation integrity in clientserver
computing in the academic world  Recommendations for producing multimedia


Clifford LYNCH, director, Library Automation, University of California,
opened his talk with the general observation that networked information
constituted a difficult and elusive topic because it is something just
starting to develop and not yet fully understood.  LYNCH contended that
creating genuinely networked information was different from using
networks as an access or dissemination vehicle and was more sophisticated
and more subtle.  He invited the members of the audience to extrapolate,
from what they heard about the preceding demonstration projects, to what
sort of a world of electronics informationscholarly, archival,
cultural, etc.they wished to end up with ten or fifteen years from now.
LYNCH suggested that to extrapolate directly from these projects would
produce unpleasant results.

Putting the issue of CDROM in perspective before getting into
generalities on networked information, LYNCH observed that those engaged
in multimedia today who wish to ship a product, so to say, probably do
not have much choice except to use CDROM:  networked multimedia on a
large scale basically does not yet work because the technology does not
exist.  For example, anybody who has tried moving images around over the
Internet knows that this is an exciting touchandgo process, a
fascinating and fertile area for experimentation, research, and
development, but not something that one can become deeply enthusiastic
about committing to production systems at this time.

This situation will change, LYNCH said.  He differentiated CDROM from
the practices that have been followed up to now in distributing data on
CDROM.  For LYNCH the problem with CDROM is not its portability or its
slowness but the twoedged sword of having the retrieval application and
the user interface inextricably bound up with the data, which is the
typical CDROM publication model.  It is not a case of publishing data
but of distributing a typically standalone, typically closed system,
allsoftware, user interface, and dataon a little disk.  Hence, all
the betweendisk navigational issues as well as the impossibility in most
cases of integrating data on one disk with that on another.  Most CDROM
retrieval software does not network very gracefully at present.  However,
in the present world of immature standards and lack of understanding of
what network information is or what the ground rules are for creating or
using it, publishing information on a CDROM does add value in a very
real sense.

LYNCH drew a contrast between CDROM and network pricing and in doing so
highlighted something bizarre in information pricing.  A large
institution such as the University of California has vendors who will
offer to sell information on CDROM for a price per year in four digits,
but for the same data e.g., an abstracting and indexing database on
magnetic tape, regardless of how many people may use it concurrently,
will quote a price in six digits.

What is packaged with the CDROM in one sense adds valuea complete
access system, not just raw, unrefined informationalthough it is not
generally perceived that way.  This is because the access software,
although it adds value, is viewed by some people, particularly in the
university environment where there is a very heavy commitment to
networking, as being developed in the wrong direction.

Given that context, LYNCH described the examples demonstrated as a set of
insular information gemsPerseus, for example, offers nicely linked
information, but would be very difficult to integrate with other
databases, that is, to link together seamlessly with other source files
from other sources.  It resembles an island, and in this respect is
similar to numerous standalone projects that are based on videodiscs,
that is, on the singleworkstation concept.

As scholarship evolves in a network environment, the paramount need will
be to link databases.  We must link personal databases to public
databases, to group databases, in fairly seamless wayswhich is
extremely difficult in the environments under discussion with copies of
databases proliferating all over the place.

The notion of layering also struck LYNCH as lurking in several of the
projects demonstrated.  Several databases in a sense constitute
information archives without a significant amount of navigation built in.
Educators, critics, and others will want a layered structureone that
defines or links paths through the layers to allow users to reach
specific points.  In LYNCHs view, layering will become increasingly
necessary, and not just within a single resource but across resources
e.g., tracing mythology and cultural themes across several classics
databases as well as a database of Renaissance culture.  This ability to
organize resources, to build things out of multiple other things on the
network or select pieces of it, represented for LYNCH one of the key
aspects of network information.

Contending that information reuse constituted another significant issue,
LYNCH commended to the audiences attention Project NEEDS i.e., National
Engineering Education Delivery System.  This projects objective is to
produce a database of engineering courseware as well as the components
that can be used to develop new courseware.  In a number of the existing
applications, LYNCH said, the issue of reuse how much one can take apart
and reuse in other applications was not being well considered.  He also
raised the issue of active versus passive use, one aspect of which  is
how much information will be manipulated locally by users.  Most people,
he argued, may do a little browsing and then will wish to print.  LYNCH
was uncertain how these resources would be used by the vast majority of
users in the network environment.

LYNCH next said a few words about XWindows as a way of differentiating
between network access and networked information.  A number of the
applications demonstrated at the Workshop could be rewritten to use X
across the network, so that one could run them from any Xcapable device
a workstation, an X terminaland transact with a database across the
network.  Although this opens up access a little, assuming one has enough
network to handle it, it does not provide an interface to develop a
program that conveniently integrates information from multiple databases.
X is a viewing technology that has limits.  In a real sense, it is just a
graphical version of remote login across the network.  Xtype applications
represent only one step in the progression towards real access.

LYNCH next discussed barriers to the distribution of networked multimedia
information.  The heart of the problem is a lack of standards to provide
the ability for computers to talk to each other, retrieve information,
and shuffle it around fairly casually.  At the moment, little progress is
being made on standards for networked information for example, present
standards do not cover images, digital voice, and digital video.  A
useful tool kit of exchange formats for basic texts is only now being
assembled.  The synchronization of content streams i.e., synchronizing a
voice track to a video track, establishing temporal relations between
different components in a multimedia object constitutes another issue
for networked multimedia that is just beginning to receive attention.

Underlying network protocols also need some work good, realtime
delivery protocols on the Internet do not yet exist.  In LYNCHs view,
highly important in this context is the notion of networked digital
object IDs, the ability of one object on the network to point to another
object or component thereof on the network.  Serious bandwidth issues
also exist.  LYNCH was uncertain if billionbitpersecond networks would
prove sufficient if numerous people ran video in parallel.

LYNCH concluded by offering an issue for database creators to consider,
as well as several comments about what might constitute good trial
multimedia experiments.  In a networked information world the database
builder or service builder publisher does not exercise the same
extensive control over the integrity of the presentation strange
programs "munge" with ones data before the user sees it.  Serious
thought must be given to what guarantees integrity of presentation.  Part
of that is related to where one draws the boundaries around a networked
information service.  This question of presentation integrity in
clientserver computing has not been stressed enough in the academic
world, LYNCH argued, though commercial service providers deal with it
regularly.

Concerning multimedia, LYNCH observed that good multimedia at the moment
is hideously expensive to produce.  He recommended producing multimedia
with either very high sale value, or multimedia with a very long life
span, or multimedia that will have a very broad usage base and whose
costs therefore can be amortized among large numbers of users.  In this
connection, historical and humanistically oriented material may be a good
place to start, because it tends to have a longer life span than much of
the scientific material, as well as a wider user base.  LYNCH noted, for
example, that American Memory fits many of the criteria outlined.  He
remarked the extensive discussion about bringing the Internet or the
National Research and Education Network NREN into the K12 environment
as a way of helping the American educational system.

LYNCH closed by noting that the kinds of applications demonstrated struck
him as excellent justifications of broadscale networking for K12, but
that at this time no "killer" application exists to mobilize the K12
community to obtain connectivity.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Dearth of genuinely interesting applications on the network
a slowchanging situation  The issue of the integrity of presentation in
a networked environment  Several reasons why CDROM software does not
network 


During the discussion period that followed LYNCHs presentation, several
additional points were made.

LYNCH reiterated even more strongly his contention that, historically,
once one goes outside highend science and the group of those who need
access to supercomputers, there is a great dearth of genuinely
interesting applications on the network.  He saw this situation changing
slowly, with some of the scientific databases and scholarly discussion
groups and electronic journals coming on as well as with the availability
of Wide Area Information Servers WAIS and some of the databases that
are being mounted there.  However, many of those things do not seem to
have piqued great popular interest.  For instance, most high school
students of LYNCHs acquaintance would not qualify as devotees of serious
molecular biology.

Concerning the issue of the integrity of presentation, LYNCH believed
that a couple of information providers have laid down the law at least on
certain things.  For example, his recollection was that the National
Library of Medicine feels strongly that one needs to employ the
identifier field if he or she is to mount a database commercially.  The
problem with a real networked environment is that one does not know who
is reformatting and reprocessing ones data when one enters a client
server mode.  It becomes anybodys guess, for example, if the network
uses a Z39.50 server, or what clients are doing with ones data.  A data
provider can say that his contract will only permit clients to have
access to his data after he vets them and their presentation and makes
certain it suits him.  But LYNCH held out little expectation that the
network marketplace would evolve in that way, because it required too
much prior negotiation.

CDROM software does not network for a variety of reasons, LYNCH said.
He speculated that CDROM publishers are not eager to have their products
really hook into wide area networks, because they fear it will make their
data suppliers nervous.  Moreover, until relatively recently, one had to
be rather adroit to run a full TCPIP stack plus applications on a
PCsize machine, whereas nowadays it is becoming easier as PCs grow
bigger and faster.  LYNCH also speculated that software providers had not
heard from their customers until the last year or so, or had not heard
from enough of their customers.

                                 


BESSER  Implications of disseminating images on the network planning
the distribution of multimedia documents poses two critical
implementation problems  Layered approach represents the way to deal
with users capabilities  Problems in platform design file size and its
implications for networking  Transmission of megabyte size images
impractical  Compression and decompression at the users end  Promising
