in multimedia today who wish to ship a product, so to say, probably do
not have much choice except to use CDROM:  networked multimedia on a
large scale basically does not yet work because the technology does not
exist.  For example, anybody who has tried moving images around over the
Internet knows that this is an exciting touchandgo process, a
fascinating and fertile area for experimentation, research, and
development, but not something that one can become deeply enthusiastic
about committing to production systems at this time.

This situation will change, LYNCH said.  He differentiated CDROM from
the practices that have been followed up to now in distributing data on
CDROM.  For LYNCH the problem with CDROM is not its portability or its
slowness but the twoedged sword of having the retrieval application and
the user interface inextricably bound up with the data, which is the
typical CDROM publication model.  It is not a case of publishing data
but of distributing a typically standalone, typically closed system,
allsoftware, user interface, and dataon a little disk.  Hence, all
the betweendisk navigational issues as well as the impossibility in most
cases of integrating data on one disk with that on another.  Most CDROM
retrieval software does not network very gracefully at present.  However,
in the present world of immature standards and lack of understanding of
what network information is or what the ground rules are for creating or
using it, publishing information on a CDROM does add value in a very
real sense.

LYNCH drew a contrast between CDROM and network pricing and in doing so
highlighted something bizarre in information pricing.  A large
institution such as the University of California has vendors who will
offer to sell information on CDROM for a price per year in four digits,
but for the same data e.g., an abstracting and indexing database on
magnetic tape, regardless of how many people may use it concurrently,
will quote a price in six digits.

What is packaged with the CDROM in one sense adds valuea complete
