  Repeat, "YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM," said the Caterpillar.

  Alice folded her hands, and began:

    You are old, Father William, the young man said,
      And your hair has become very white
    And yet you incessantly stand on your head
      Do you think, at your age, it is right?

    In my youth, Father William replied to his son,
      I feared it might injure the brain
    But, now that Im perfectly sure I have none,
      Why, I do it again and again.

    You are old, said the youth, as I mentioned before,
      And have grown most uncommonly fat
    Yet you turned a backsomersault in at the door
      Pray, what is the reason of that?

    In my youth, said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
      I kept all my limbs very supple
    By the use of this ointmentone shilling the box
      Allow me to sell you a couple?

    You are old, said the youth, and your jaws are too weak
      For anything tougher than suet
    Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak
      Pray how did you manage to do it?

    In my youth, said his father, I took to the law,
      And argued each case with my wife
    And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,
      Has lasted the rest of my life.

    You are old, said the youth, one would hardly suppose
      That your eye was as steady as ever
    Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose
      What made you so awfully clever?

    I have answered three questions, and that is enough,
      Said his father dont give yourself airs!
    Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
      Be off, or Ill kick you down stairs!


  That is not said right, said the Caterpillar.

  Not QUITE right, Im afraid, said Alice, timidly some of the
words have got altered.

  It is wrong from beginning to end, said the Caterpillar
decidedly, and there was silence for some minutes.

  The Caterpillar was the first to speak.

  What size do you want to be? it asked.

  Oh, Im not particular as to size, Alice hastily replied
only one doesnt like changing so often, you know.

  I DONT know, said the Caterpillar.

  Alice said nothing:  she had never been so much contradicted in
her life before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.

  Are you content now? said the Caterpillar.

  Well, I should like to be a LITTLE larger, sir, if you
wouldnt mind, said Alice:  three inches is such a wretched
