What thoughts in my unquiet breast are risen,
Tending to some relief of our extremes,
Or end though sharp and sad, yet tolerable,
As in our evils, and of easier choice.
If care of our descent perplex us most,
Which must be born to certain woe, devoured
By Death at last and miserable it is
To be to others cause of misery,
Our own begotten, and of our loins to bring
Into this cursed world a woeful race,
That after wretched life must be at last
Food for so foul a monster in thy power
It lies, yet ere conception to prevent
The race unblest, to being yet unbegot.
Childless thou art, childless remain: so Death
Shall be deceived his glut, and with us two
Be forced to satisfy his ravenous maw.
But if thou judge it hard and difficult,
Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain
From loves due rights, nuptial embraces sweet
And with desire to languish without hope,
Before the present object languishing
With like desire which would be misery
And torment less than none of what we dread
Then, both ourselves and seed at once to free
From what we fear for both, let us make short, 
Let us seek Death  or, he not found, supply
With our own hands his office on ourselves:
Why stand we longer shivering under fears,
That show no end but death, and have the power,
Of many ways to die the shortest choosing,
Destruction with destruction to destroy? 
She ended here, or vehement despair
Broke off the rest: so much of death her thoughts
Had entertained, as dyed her cheeks with pale.
But Adam, with such counsel nothing swayed,
To better hopes his more attentive mind
Labouring had raised and thus to Eve replied.
Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems
To argue in thee something more sublime
And excellent, than what thy mind contemns
But selfdestruction therefore sought, refutes
That excellence thought in thee and implies,
Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret
For loss of life and pleasure overloved.
Or if thou covet death, as utmost end
Of misery, so thinking to evade
The penalty pronounced doubt not but God
Hath wiselier armed his vengeful ire, than so
To be forestalled much more I fear lest death,
So snatched, will not exempt us from the pain
We are by doom to pay rather, such acts
Of contumacy will provoke the Highest
To make death in us live:  Then let us seek
Some safer resolution, which methinks
I have in view, calling to mind with heed
Part of our sentence, that thy seed shall bruise
The Serpents head piteous amends! unless
Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand foe,
Satan who, in the serpent, hath contrived
Against us this deceit:  To crush his head
Would be revenge indeed! which will be lost
By death brought on ourselves, or childless days
Resolved, as thou proposest so our foe
Shal scape his punishment ordained, and we
Instead shall double ours upon our heads.
No more be mentioned then of violence
Against ourselves and wilful barrenness,
That cuts us off from hope and savours only
