illustration.  4 A digital image can also be edited, density levels
adjusted to remove underlining and stains, and to increase legibility for
faint documents.  5 Onscreen inspection can take place at the time of
initial setup and adjustments made prior to scanning, factors that
substantially reduce the number of retakes required in quality control.

A primary goal of CXP has been to evaluate the paper output printed on
the Xerox DocuTech, a highspeed printer that produces 600dpi pages from
scanned images at a rate of 135 pages a minute.  KENNEY recounted several
publishing challenges to represent faithful and legible reproductions of
the originals that the 600dpi copy for the most part successfully
captured.  For example, many of the deteriorating volumes in the project
were heavily illustrated with fine line drawings or halftones or came in
languages such as Japanese, in which the buildup of characters comprised
of varying strokes is difficult to reproduce at lower resolutions a
surprising number of them came with annotations and mathematical
formulas, which it was critical to be able to duplicate exactly.

KENNEY noted that 1 the copies are being printed on paper that meets the
ANSI standards for performance, 2 the DocuTech printer meets the machine
and toner requirements for proper adhesion of print to page, as described
by the National Archives, and thus 3 paper product is considered to be
the archival equivalent of preservation photocopy.

KENNEY then discussed several samples of the quality achieved in the
project that had been distributed in a handout, for example, a copy of a
printondemand version of the 1911 Reed lecture on the steam turbine,
which contains halftones, line drawings, and illustrations embedded in
text the first four loose pages in the volume compared the capture
capabilities of scanning to photocopy for a standard test target, the
IEEE standard 167A 1987 test chart.  In all instances scanning proved
superior to photocopy, though only slightly more so in one.

Conceding the simplistic nature of her review of the quality of scanning
to photocopy, KENNEY described it as one representation of the kinds of
settings that could be used with scanning capabilities on the equipment
CXP uses.  KENNEY also pointed out that CXP investigated the quality
achieved with binary scanning only, and noted the great promise in gray
scale and color scanning, whose advantages and disadvantages need to be
examined.  She argued further that scanning resolutions and file formats
can represent a complex tradeoff between the time it takes to capture
material, file size, fidelity to the original, and onscreen display and
printing and equipment availability.  All these factors must be taken
into consideration.

CXP placed primary emphasis on the production in a timely and
costeffective manner of printed facsimiles that consisted largely of
blackandwhite text.  With binary scanning, large files may be
compressed efficiently and in a lossless manner i.e., no data is lost in
the process of compressing and decompressing an imagethe exact
bitrepresentation is maintained using Group 4 CCITT i.e., the French
acronym for International Consultative Committee for Telegraph and
Telephone compression.  CXP was getting compression ratios of about
forty to one.  Grayscale compression, which primarily uses JPEG, is much
less economical and can represent a lossy compression i.e., not
lossless, so that as one compresses and decompresses, the illustration
is subtly changed.  While binary files produce a highquality printed
version, it appears 1 that other combinations of spatial resolution with
gray andor color hold great promise as well, and 2 that gray scale can
represent a tremendous advantage for onscreen viewing.  The quality
associated with binary and gray scale also depends on the equipment used.
For instance, binary scanning produces a much better copy on a binary
printer.

Among CXPs findings concerning the production of microfilm from digital
files, KENNEY reported that the digital files for the same Reed lecture
were used to produce sample film using an electron beam recorder.  The
resulting film was faithful to the image capture of the digital files,
and while CXP felt that the text and image pages represented in the Reed
lecture were superior to that of the lightlens film, the resolution
readings for the 600 dpi were not as high as standard microfilming.
