    NA
Member of:
    CE, CIS, CSCE, ECE, IAEA, ILO, INMARSAT, IOC, ITU, NACC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
    UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO
Diplomatic representation:
    Ambassador Martynov Chancery at NA NW, Washington, DC 200 telephone NA
  US:
    Ambassador vacant David SWARTZ, Charge dAffaires Embassy at Hotel
    Belarus telephone 801170172690802 plus 7 hours mailing address is
    APO New York is 09862 telephone NA
Flag:
    white, red, and white

:Belarus Economy

Overview:
    In many ways Belarus resembles the three Baltic states, for example, in its
    industrial competence, its higherthanaverage standard of living, and its
    critical dependence on the other former Soviet states for fuels and raw
    materials. Belarus ranks fourth in gross output among the former Soviet
    republics, producing 4 of the total GDP and employing 4 of the labor
    force. Once a mainly agricultural area, it now supplies important producer
    and consumer goods  sometimes as the sole producer  to the other states.
    The soil in Belarus is not as fertile as the black earth of Ukraine, but by
    emphasizing favorable crops and livestock especially pigs and chickens,
    Belarus has become a net exporter to the other republics of meat, milk,
    eggs, flour, and potatoes. Belarus produces only small amounts of oil and
    gas and receives most of its fuel from Russia through the Druzhba oil
    pipeline and the Northern Lights gas pipeline. These pipelines transit
    Belarus enroute to Eastern Europe. Belarus produces petrochemicals,
    plastics, synthetic fibers nearly 30 of former Soviet output, and
    fertilizer 20 of former Soviet output. Raw material resources are limited
    to potash and peat deposits. The peat more than onethird of the total for
    the former Soviet Union is used in domestic heating as boiler fuel for
    electric power stations and in the production of chemicals. The potash
    supports fertilizer production.
GDP:
    NA  NA, per capita NA real growth rate 2 1991
Inflation rate consumer prices:
    81 1991
Unemployment rate:
    NA
Budget:
    revenues NA million expenditures NA million, including capital
    expenditures of NA million
Exports:
    4.3 billion f.o.b., 1990
  commodities:
    machinery and transport equipment, chemicals, foodstuffs
  partners:
    NA
Imports:
    5.6 billion c.i.f., 1990
  commodities:
    machinery, chemicals, textiles
  partners:
    NA
External debt:
    2.6 billion end of 1991
Industrial production:
