In song and dance about the sacred hill
Mystical dance, which yonder starry sphere
Of planets, and of fixed, in all her wheels
Resembles nearest, mazes intricate,
Eccentrick, intervolved, yet regular
Then most, when most irregular they seem
And in their motions harmony divine
So smooths her charming tones, that Gods own ear
Listens delighted.  Evening now approached,
For we have also our evening and our morn,
We ours for change delectable, not need
Forthwith from dance to sweet repast they turn
Desirous all in circles as they stood,
Tables are set, and on a sudden piled
With Angels food, and rubied nectar flows
In pearl, in diamond, and massy gold,
Fruit of delicious vines, the growth of Heaven.
On flowers reposed, and with fresh flowerets crowned,
They eat, they drink, and in communion sweet
Quaff immortality and joy, secure
Of surfeit, where full measure only bounds
Excess, before the allbounteous King, who showered
With copious hand, rejoicing in their joy.
Now when ambrosial night with clouds exhaled
From that high mount of God, whence light and shade
Spring both, the face of brightest Heaven had changed
To grateful twilight, for night comes not there
In darker veil, and roseat dews disposed
All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest
Wide over all the plain, and wider far
Than all this globous earth in plain outspread,
Such are the courts of God the angelick throng,
Dispersed in bands and files, their camp extend
By living streams among the trees of life,
Pavilions numberless, and sudden reared,
Celestial tabernacles, where they slept
Fanned with cool winds save those, who, in their course,
Melodious hymns about the sovran throne
Alternate all night long: but not so waked
Satan so call him now, his former name
Is heard no more in Heaven he of the first,
If not the first ArchAngel, great in power,
In favour and preeminence, yet fraught
With envy against the Son of God, that day
Honoured by his great Father, and proclaimed
Messiah King anointed, could not bear
Through pride that sight, and thought himself impaired.
Deep malice thence conceiving and disdain,
Soon as midnight brought on the dusky hour
Friendliest to sleep and silence, he resolved
With all his legions to dislodge, and leave
Unworshipt, unobeyed, the throne supreme,
Contemptuous and his next subordinate
Awakening, thus to him in secret spake.
Sleepest thou, Companion dear?  What sleep can close
Thy eyelids? and rememberest what decree
Of yesterday, so late hath passed the lips
Of Heavens Almighty.  Thou to me thy thoughts
Wast wont, I mine to thee was wont to impart
Both waking we were one how then can now
Thy sleep dissent?  New laws thou seest imposed
New laws from him who reigns, new minds may raise
In us who serve, new counsels to debate
What doubtful may ensue:  More in this place
To utter is not safe.  Assemble thou
Of all those myriads which we lead the chief
Tell them, that by command, ere yet dim night
