to the baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on
again:

  I didnt know that Cheshire cats always grinned in fact, I
didnt know that cats COULD grin.

  They all can, said the Duchess and most of em do.

  I dont know of any that do, Alice said very politely,
feeling quite pleased to have got into a conversation.

  You dont know much, said the Duchess and thats a fact.

  Alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought
it would be as well to introduce some other subject of
conversation.  While she was trying to fix on one, the cook took
the cauldron of soup off the fire, and at once set to work
throwing everything within her reach at the Duchess and the baby
the fireirons came first then followed a shower of saucepans,
plates, and dishes.  The Duchess took no notice of them even when
they hit her and the baby was howling so much already, that it
was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

  Oh, PLEASE mind what youre doing! cried Alice, jumping up
and down in an agony of terror.  Oh, there goes his PRECIOUS
nose as an unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very
nearly carried it off.

  If everybody minded their own business, the Duchess said in a
hoarse growl, the world would go round a deal faster than it
does.

  Which would NOT be an advantage, said Alice, who felt very
glad to get an opportunity of showing off a little of her
knowledge.  Just think of what work it would make with the day
and night!  You see the earth takes twentyfour hours to turn
round on its axis

  Talking of axes, said the Duchess, chop off her head!

  Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant
to take the hint but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and
seemed not to be listening, so she went on again:  Twentyfour
hours, I THINK or is it twelve?  I

  Oh, dont bother ME, said the Duchess I never could abide
figures!  And with that she began nursing her child again,
singing a sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a
violent shake at the end of every line:

        Speak roughly to your little boy,
          And beat him when he sneezes:
        He only does it to annoy,
          Because he knows it teases.

                    CHORUS.

    In which the cook and the baby joined:

                Wow! wow! wow!

  While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept
tossing the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing
howled so, that Alice could hardly hear the words:

        I speak severely to my boy,
          I beat him when he sneezes
        For he can thoroughly enjoy
          The pepper when he pleases!

                    CHORUS.

                Wow! wow! wow!

  Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like! the Duchess said
to Alice, flinging the baby at her as she spoke.  I must go and
get ready to play croquet with the Queen, and she hurried out of
the room.  The cook threw a fryingpan after her as she went out,
but it just missed her.

  Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer
shaped little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all
directions, just like a starfish, thought Alice.  The poor
little thing was snorting like a steamengine when she caught it,
and kept doubling itself up and straightening itself out again,
so that altogether, for the first minute or two, it was as much
as she could do to hold it.

  As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it,
which was to twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep
tight hold of its right ear and left foot, so as to prevent its
