Inductive mainly to the sin of Eve.
Therefore so abject is their punishment,
Disfiguring not Gods likeness, but their own
Or if his likeness, by themselves defaced
While they pervert pure Natures healthful rules
To loathsome sickness worthily, since they
Gods image did not reverence in themselves.
I yield it just, said Adam, and submit.
But is there yet no other way, besides
These painful passages, how we may come
To death, and mix with our connatural dust?
There is, said Michael, if thou well observe
The rule of Not too much by temperance taught,
In what thou eatest and drinkest seeking from thence
Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight,
Till many years over thy head return:
So mayest thou live till, like ripe fruit, thou drop
Into thy mothers lap or be with ease
Gathered, nor harshly plucked for death mature:
This is Old Age but then, thou must outlive
Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty which will change
To withered, weak, and gray thy senses then,
Obtuse, all taste of pleasure must forego,
To what thou hast and, for the air of youth,
Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reign
A melancholy damp of cold and dry
To weigh thy spirits down, and last consume
The balm of life.  To whom our ancestor.
Henceforth I fly not death, nor would prolong
Life much bent rather, how I may be quit,
Fairest and easiest, of this cumbrous charge
Which I must keep till my appointed day
Of rendering up, and patiently attend
My dissolution.  Michael replied.
Nor love thy life, nor hate but what thou livest
Live well how long, or short, permit to Heaven:
And now prepare thee for another sight.
He looked, and saw a spacious plain, whereon
Were tents of various hue by some, were herds
Of cattle grazing others, whence the sound
Of instruments, that made melodious chime,
Was heard, of harp and organ and, who moved
Their stops and chords, was seen his volant touch,
Instinct through all proportions, low and high,
Fled and pursued transverse the resonant fugue.
In other part stood one who, at the forge
Labouring, two massy clods of iron and brass
Had melted, whether found where casual fire
Had wasted woods on mountain or in vale,
Down to the veins of earth thence gliding hot
To some caves mouth or whether washed by stream
From underground the liquid ore he drained
Into fit moulds prepared from which he formed
First his own tools then, what might else be wrought
Fusil or graven in metal.  After these,
But on the hither side, a different sort
From the high neighbouring hills, which was their seat,
Down to the plain descended by their guise
Just men they seemed, and all their study bent
To worship God aright, and know his works
Not hid nor those things last, which might preserve
Freedom and peace to Men they on the plain
Long had not walked, when from the tents, behold!
A bevy of fair women, richly gay
