interchangeable among a variety of systems.  The applications of
different approaches for imagetagging, indexing, compression, and
transfer often cause uncertainty concerning EIM system compatibility,
calibration, performance, and upward compatibility, until standard
implementation parameters are established.  The AIIM standards that are
being developed for these applications can be used to decrease the
uncertainty, successfully integrate imaging processes, and promote "open
systems."  AIIM is an accredited American National Standards Institute
ANSI standards developer with more than twenty committees comprised of
300 volunteers representing users, vendors, and manufacturers.  The
standards publications that are developed in these committees have
national acceptance and provide the basis for international harmonization
in the development of new International Organization for Standardization
ISO standards.

This presentation describes the development of AIIMs EIM standards and a
new effort at AIIM, a database on standards projects in a wide framework
of imaging industries including capture, recording, processing,
duplication, distribution, display, evaluation, and preservation.  The
AIIM Imagery Database will cover imaging standards being developed by
many organizations in many different countries.  It will contain
standards publications dates, origins, related national and
international projects, status, key words, and abstracts.  The ANSI Image
Technology Standards Board requested that such a database be established,
as did the ISOInternational Electrotechnical Commission Joint Task Force
on Imagery.  AIIM will take on the leadership role for the database and
coordinate its development with several standards developers.

Patricia BATTIN

     Characteristics of standards for digital imagery:

           Nature of digital technology implies continuing volatility.

           Precipitous standardsetting not possible and probably not
          desirable.

           Standards are a complex issue involving the medium, the
          hardware, the software, and the technical capacity for
          reproductive fidelity and clarity.

           The prognosis for reliable archival standards as defined by
          librarians in the foreseeable future is poor.

     Significant potential and attractiveness of digital technology as a
     preservation medium and access mechanism.

     Productive use of digital imagery for preservation requires a
     reconceptualizing of preservation principles in a volatile,
     standardless world.

     Concept of managing continuing access in the digital environment
     rather than focusing on the permanence of the medium and longterm
     archival standards developed for the analog world.

     Transition period:  How long and what to do?

            Redefine "archival."

