
                                 


DISCUSSION  Relative use as a criterion for POBs selection of books to
be converted into digital form 


During the discussion period, WATERS noted that one of the criteria for
selecting books among the 10,000 to be converted into digital image form
would be how much relative use they would receivea subject still
requiring evaluation.  The challenge will be to understand whether
coherent bodies of material will increase usage or whether POB should
seek material that is being used, scan that, and make it more accessible.
POB might decide to digitize materials that are already heavily used, in
order to make them more accessible and decrease wear on them.  Another
approach would be to provide a large body of intellectually coherent
material that may be used more in digital form than it is currently used
in microfilm.  POB would seek material that was out of copyright.

                                 


BARONAS  Origin and scope of AIIM  Types of documents produced in
AIIMs standards program  Domain of AIIMs standardization work  AIIMs
structure  TC 171 and MS23  Electronic image management standards 
Categories of EIM standardization where AIIM standards are being
developed 


Jean BARONAS, senior manager, Department of Standards and Technology,
Association for Information and Image Management AIIM, described the
notforprofit association and the national and international programs
for standardization in which AIIM is active.

Accredited for twentyfive years as the nations standards development
organization for document image management, AIIM began life in a library
community developing microfilm standards.  Today the association
maintains both its library and businessimage management standardization
activitiesand has moved into electronic imagemanagement
standardization EIM.

BARONAS defined the programs scope.  AIIM deals with:  1 the
terminology of standards and of the technology it uses 2 methods of
measurement for the systems, as well as quality 3 methodologies for
users to evaluate and measure quality 4 the features of apparatus used
to manage and edit images and 5 the procedures used to manage images.

BARONAS noted that three types of documents are produced in the AIIM
standards program:  the first two, accredited by the American National
Standards Institute ANSI, are standards and standard recommended
practices.  Recommended practices differ from standards in that they
contain more tutorial information.  A technical report is not an ANSI
standard.  Because AIIMs policies and procedures for developing
standards are approved by ANSI, its standards are labeled ANSIAIIM,
followed by the number and title of the standard.

BARONAS then illustrated the domain of AIIMs standardization work.  For
example, AIIM is the administrator of the U.S. Technical Advisory Group
TAG to the International Standards Organizations ISO technical
committee, TC l7l Micrographics and Optical Memories for Document and
Image Recording, Storage, and Use.  AIIM officially works through ANSI in
the international standardization process.

