closer to Alices side as she spoke.

  Alice did not much like keeping so close to her:  first,
because the Duchess was VERY ugly and secondly, because she was
exactly the right height to rest her chin upon Alices shoulder,
and it was an uncomfortably sharp chin.  However, she did not
like to be rude, so she bore it as well as she could.

  The games going on rather better now, she said, by way of
keeping up the conversation a little.

  Tis so, said the Duchess:  and the moral of that is"Oh,
tis love, tis love, that makes the world go round!"

  Somebody said, Alice whispered, that its done by everybody
minding their own business!

  Ah, well!  It means much the same thing, said the Duchess,
digging her sharp little chin into Alices shoulder as she added,
and the moral of THAT is"Take care of the sense, and the
sounds will take care of themselves."

  How fond she is of finding morals in things! Alice thought to
herself.

  I dare say youre wondering why I dont put my arm round your
waist, the Duchess said after a pause:  the reason is, that Im
doubtful about the temper of your flamingo.  Shall I try the
experiment?

  HE might bite, Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all
anxious to have the experiment tried.

  Very true, said the Duchess:  flamingoes and mustard both
bite.  And the moral of that is"Birds of a feather flock
together."

  Only mustard isnt a bird, Alice remarked.

  Right, as usual, said the Duchess:  what a clear way you
have of putting things!

  Its a mineral, I THINK, said Alice.

  Of course it is, said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree
to everything that Alice said theres a large mustardmine near
here.  And the moral of that is"The more there is of mine, the
less there is of yours."

  Oh, I know! exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this
last remark, its a vegetable.  It doesnt look like one, but it
is.

  I quite agree with you, said the Duchess and the moral of
that is"Be what you would seem to be"or if youd like it put
more simply"Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than
what it might appear to others that what you were or might have
been was not otherwise than what you had been would have appeared
to them to be otherwise."

  I think I should understand that better, Alice said very
politely, if I had it written down:  but I cant quite follow it
as you say it.

  Thats nothing to what I could say if I chose, the Duchess
replied, in a pleased tone.

  Pray dont trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,
said Alice.

  Oh, dont talk about trouble! said the Duchess.  I make you
a present of everything Ive said as yet.

  A cheap sort of present! thought Alice.  Im glad they dont
give birthday presents like that!  But she did not venture to
say it out loud.

  Thinking again? the Duchess asked, with another dig of her
sharp little chin.

  Ive a right to think, said Alice sharply, for she was
beginning to feel a little worried.

  Just about as much right, said the Duchess, as pigs have to
fly and the m

  But here, to Alices great surprise, the Duchesss voice died
away, even in the middle of her favourite word moral, and the
arm that was linked into hers began to tremble.  Alice looked up,
and there stood the Queen in front of them, with her arms folded,
frowning like a thunderstorm.

  A fine day, your Majesty! the Duchess began in a low, weak
voice.

  Now, I give you fair warning, shouted the Queen, stamping on
the ground as she spoke either you or your head must be off,
and that in about half no time!  Take your choice!

  The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.

  Lets go on with the game, the Queen said to Alice and Alice
was too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her
back to the croquetground.

  The other guests had taken advantage of the Queens absence,
and were resting in the shade:  however, the moment they saw her,
they hurried back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a
moments delay would cost them their lives.

  All the time they were playing the Queen never left off
quarrelling with the other players, and shouting Off with his
head! or Off with her head!  Those whom she sentenced were
taken into custody by the soldiers, who of course had to leave
off being arches to do this, so that by the end of half an hour
or so there were no arches left, and all the players, except the
King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody and under sentence of
execution.

  Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to
Alice, Have you seen the Mock Turtle yet?

  No, said Alice.  I dont even know what a Mock Turtle is.

  Its the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from, said the Queen.

  I never saw one, or heard of one, said Alice.

  Come on, then, said the Queen, and he shall tell you his
history,

  As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low
voice, to the company generally, You are all pardoned.  Come,
THATS a good thing! she said to herself, for she had felt quite
unhappy at the number of executions the Queen had ordered.

  They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the
sun.  IF you dont know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.
Up, lazy thing! said the Queen, and take this young lady to
see the Mock Turtle, and to hear his history.  I must go back and
see after some executions I have ordered and she walked off,
leaving Alice alone with the Gryphon.  Alice did not quite like
the look of the creature, but on the whole she thought it would
be quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that savage
Queen:  so she waited.

  The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes:  then it watched the
Queen till she was out of sight:  then it chuckled.  What fun!
said the Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice.

  What IS the fun? said Alice.

  Why, SHE, said the Gryphon.  Its all her fancy, that:  they
never executes nobody, you know.  Come on!

  Everybody says "come on!" here, thought Alice, as she went
slowly after it:  I never was so ordered about in all my life,
never!

  They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the
distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and,
as they came nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart
would break.  She pitied him deeply.  What is his sorrow? she
asked the Gryphon, and the Gryphon answered, very nearly in the
same words as before, Its all his fancy, that:  he hasnt got
no sorrow, you know.  Come on!

  So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with
large eyes full of tears, but said nothing.

  This here young lady, said the Gryphon, she wants for to
know your history, she do.

  Ill tell it her, said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow
tone:  sit down, both of you, and dont speak a word till Ive
finished.

  So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes.  Alice
thought to herself, I dont see how he can EVEN finish, if he
doesnt begin.  But she waited patiently.

  Once, said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, I was
a real Turtle.

  These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only
by an occasional exclamation of Hjckrrh! from the Gryphon, and
the constant heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle.  Alice was very
nearly getting up and saying, Thank you, sir, for your
interesting story, but she could not help thinking there MUST be
more to come, so she sat still and said nothing.

  When we were little, the Mock Turtle went on at last, more
calmly, though still sobbing a little now and then, we went to
school in the sea.  The master was an old Turtlewe used to call
him Tortoise

  Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasnt one? Alice asked.

  We called him Tortoise because he taught us, said the Mock
Turtle angrily:  really you are very dull!

  You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple
question, added the Gryphon and then they both sat silent and
looked at poor Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth.  At
last the Gryphon said to the Mock Turtle, Drive on, old fellow!
Dont be all day about it! and he went on in these words:

  Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you maynt believe
it

  I never said I didnt! interrupted Alice.

  You did, said the Mock Turtle.

  Hold your tongue! added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak
again.  The Mock Turtle went on.

  We had the best of educationsin fact, we went to school
every day

