publishing on hard copy  Several technical and behavioral barriers to
electronic publishing  How AAAS and OCLC arrived at the subject of
clinical trials  Advantages of the electronic format and other features
of OJCCT  An illustrated tour of the journal 


Maria LEBRON, managing editor, The Online Journal of Current Clinical
Trials OJCCT, presented an illustrated overview of the history of the
joint project between the American Association for the Advancement of
Science AAAS and the Online Computer Library Center, Inc. OCLC.  The
joint venture between AAAS and OCLC owes its beginning to a
reorganization launched by the new chief executive officer at OCLC about
three years ago and combines the strengths of these two disparate
organizations.  In short, OJCCT represents the process of scholarly
publishing on line.

LEBRON next discussed several practices the online environment shares
with traditional publishing on hard copyfor example, peer review of
manuscriptsthat are highly important in the academic world.  LEBRON
noted in particular the implications of citation counts for tenure
committees and grants committees.  In the traditional hardcopy
environment, citation counts are readily demonstrable, whereas the
online environment represents an ethereal medium to most academics.

LEBRON remarked several technical and behavioral barriers to electronic
publishing, for instance, the problems in transmission created by special
characters or by complex graphics and halftones.  In addition, she noted
economic limitations such as the storage costs of maintaining back issues
and market or audience education.

Manuscripts cannot be uploaded to OJCCT, LEBRON explained, because it is
not a bulletin board or Email, forms of electronic transmission of
information that have created an ambience clouding peoples understanding
of what the journal is attempting to do.  OJCCT, which publishes
peerreviewed medical articles dealing with the subject of clinical
trials, includes text, tabular material, and graphics, although at this
time it can transmit only line illustrations.

Next, LEBRON described how AAAS and OCLC arrived at the subject of
clinical trials:  It is 1 a highly statistical discipline that 2 does
not require halftones but can satisfy the needs of its audience with line
illustrations and graphic material, and 3 there is a need for the speedy
dissemination of highquality research results.  Clinical trials are
research activities that involve the administration of a test treatment
to some experimental unit in order to test its usefulness before it is
made available to the general population.  LEBRON proceeded to give
additional information on OJCCT concerning its editorinchief, editorial
board, editorial content, and the types of articles it publishes
including peerreviewed research reports and reviews, as well as
features shared by other traditional hardcopy journals.

Among the advantages of the electronic format are faster dissemination of
information, including raw data, and the absence of space constraints
because pages do not exist.  This latter fact creates an interesting
situation when it comes to citations.  Nor are there any issues.  AAASs
capacity to download materials directly from the journal to a
subscribers printer, hard drive, or floppy disk helps ensure highly
accurate transcription.  Other features of OJCCT include onscreen alerts
that allow linkage of subsequently published documents to the original
