humanities were added to this directory of listings.  Scholars have
established conferences in virtually every field, within every different
discipline.  For example, there are currently close to 600 active social
science and humanities  conferences on topics such as art and
architecture, ethnomusicology, folklore, Japanese culture, medical
education, and gifted and talented education.  The appeal to scholars of
communicating through these conferences is that, unlike any other medium,
electronic conferences today provide a forum for global communication
with peers at the front end of the research process.

Interpretation and analysis of sources constitutes the third process of
scholarly communication that MICHELSON discussed in terms of texts and
textual resources.  The methods used to analyze sources fall somewhere on
a continuum from quantitative analysis to qualitative analysis.
Typically, evidence is culled and evaluated using methods drawn from both
ends of this continuum.  At one end, quantitative analysis involves the
use of mathematical processes such as a count of frequencies and
distributions of occurrences or, on a higher level, regression analysis.
At the other end of the continuum, qualitative analysis typically
involves nonmathematical processes oriented toward language
interpretation or the building of theory.  Aspects of this work involve
the processingeither manual or computationalof large and sometimes
massive amounts of textual sources, although the use of nontextual
sources as evidence, such as photographs, sound recordings, film footage,
and artifacts, is significant as well.

Scholars have discovered that many of the methods of interpretation and
analysis that are related to both quantitative and qualitative methods
are processes that can be performed by computers.  For example, computers
can count.  They can count brush strokes used in a Rembrandt painting or
perform regression analysis for understanding cause and effect.  By means
of advanced technologies, computers can recognize patterns, analyze text,
and model concepts.  Furthermore, computers can complete these processes
faster with more sources and with greater precision than scholars who
must rely on manual interpretation of data.  But if scholars are to use
computers for these processes, source materials must be in a form
amenable to computerassisted analysis.  For this reason many scholars,
once they have identified the sources that are key to their research, are
converting them to machinereadable form.  Thus, a representative example
of the numerous textual conversion projects organized by scholars around
the world in recent years to support computational text analysis is the
TLG, the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae.  This project is devoted to
converting the extant ancient texts of classical Greece.  Editors note:
according to the TLG Newsletter of May l992, TLG was in use in thirtytwo
different countries.  This figure updates MICHELSONs previous count by one.

The scholars performing these conversions have been asked to recognize
that the electronic sources they are converting for one use possess value
for other research purposes as well.  As a result, during the past few
years, humanities scholars have initiated a number of projects to
increase scholarly access to converted text.  So, for example, the Text
Encoding Initiative TEI, about which more is said later in the program,
was established as an effort by scholars to determine standard elements
and methods for encoding machinereadable text for electronic exchange.
In a second effort to facilitate the sharing of converted text, scholars
have created a new institution, the Center for Electronic Texts in the
Humanities CETH.  The center estimates that there are 8,000 series of
source texts in the humanities that have been converted to
machinereadable form worldwide.  CETH is undertaking an international
search for converted text in the humanities, compiling it into an
electronic library, and preparing bibliographic descriptions of the
sources for the Research Libraries Information Networks RLIN
machinereadable data file.  The library profession has begun to initiate
large conversion projects as well, such as American Memory.

