    NA
Other political or pressure groups:
    NA
Member of:
    CIS, CSCE, ESCAP, ECE, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IMF, INTERPOL, IMO,
    INMARSAT, IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, NACC, NSG, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNTSO,
    UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZG
Diplomatic representation:
    Ambassador LUKIN Chancery at 1125 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20036
    telephone 202 6287551
  US:
    Ambassador Robert S. STRAUSS Embassy at Ulitsa Chaykovskogo 192123,
    Moscow mailing address is APO AE 09721 telephone 7 095 2522450
    through 59 there is a consulate at St. Petersburg formerly Leningrad
    future consulates will be in Yekaterinburg and Vladivostok
Flag:
    tricolor three equal bands of white top, blue, red bottom

:Russia Economy

Overview:
    Russia, one of the worlds largest economies, possesses a wealth of natural
    resources and a diverse industrial base. Within the nowdismantled USSR, it
    had produced 60 of total output, with 55 of the total labor force and 60
    of the total capital stock. Russia depends on its worldclass deposits of
    oil and gas not only for its own needs but also for vital hard currency
    earnings. Selfsufficient in coal and iron ore, it has a crude steel
    production capacity of about 95 million tons, second only to Japan. Russias
    machinebuilding sector  60 of the old USSRs  lags behind world
    standards of efficiency and quality of product. Other major industrial
    sectors  chemicals, construction materials, light industry, and food
    processing  also suffer from quality problems, obsolescent capital
    equipment, and pollution. Consumer goods have had lower priority, and the
    product mix has not mirrored household preferences. Furthermore, the
    transition to a more marketoriented economy has disrupted channels of
    supply to factories and distribution outlets substantial imports of foods
    and medical supplies have helped maintain minimum standards of consumption.
    Russia inherited 70 of the former USSRs defense production facilities and
    is experiencing major social problems during conversion of many of these
    plants to civilian production. Russia produces almost half of the old USSRs
    farm products, but most warmclimate crops must be imported. Under the old
