1 a bibliographic description of the electronic object one is talking
about that is, who included it, when, what for, and under which title
and 2 the copy text from which it was derived, if any.  If there was
no copy text or if the copy text is unknown, then one states as much.
Version 2.0 of the Guidelines was scheduled to be completed in fall 1992
and a revised third version is to be presented to the TEI advisory board
for its endorsement this coming winter.  The TEI itself exists to provide
a markup language, not a markedup text.

Among the challenges the TEI has attempted to face is the need for a
markup language that will work for existing projects, that is, handle the
level of markup that people are using now to tag only chapter, section,
and paragraph divisions and not much else.  At the same time, such a
language also will be able to scale up gracefully to handle the highly
detailed markup which many people foresee as the future destination of
much electronic text, and which is not the future destination but the
present home of numerous electronic texts in specialized areas.

SPERBERGMcQUEEN dismissed the lowestcommondenominator approach as
unable to support the kind of applications that draw people who have
never been in the public library regularly before, and make them come
back.  He advocated more interesting text and more intelligent text.
Asserting that it is not beyond economic feasibility to have good texts,
SPERBERGMcQUEEN noted that the TEI Guidelines listing 200odd tags
contains tags that one is expected to enter every time the relevant
textual feature occurs.  It contains all the tags that people need now,
and it is not expected that everyone will tag things in the same way.

The question of how people will tag the text is in large part a function
of their reaction to what SPERBERGMcQUEEN termed the issue of
reproducibility.  What one needs to be able to reproduce are the things
one wants to work with.  Perhaps a more useful concept than that of
reproducibility or recoverability is that of processability, that is,
what can one get from an electronic text without reading it again
