So were created, nor can justly accuse
Their Maker, or their making, or their fate,
As if predestination overruld
Their will disposd by absolute decree
Or high foreknowledge they themselves decreed
Their own revolt, not I if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.
So without least impulse or shadow of fate,
Or aught by me immutably foreseen,
They trespass, authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge, and what they choose for so
I formd them free: and free they must remain,
Till they enthrall themselves I else must change
Their nature, and revoke the high decree
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordaind
THeir freedom: they themselves ordaind their fall.
The first sort by their own suggestion fell,
Selftempted, selfdepravd:  Man falls, deceivd
By the other first:  Man therefore shall find grace,
The other none:  In mercy and justice both,
Through Heaven and Earth, so shall my glory excel
But Mercy, first and last, shall brightest shine.
Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance filld
All Heaven, and in the blessed Spirits elect
Sense of new joy ineffable diffusd.
Beyond compare the Son of God was seen
Most glorious in him all his Father shone
Substantially expressd and in his face
Divine compassion visibly appeard,
Love without end, and without measure grace,
Which uttering, thus he to his Father spake.
O Father, gracious was that word which closd
Thy sovran command, that Man should find grace
, that Man should find grace
For which both Heaven and earth shall high extol
Thy praises, with the innumerable sound
Of hymns and sacred songs, wherewith thy throne
Encompassd shall resound thee ever blest.
For should Man finally be lost, should Man,
Thy creature late so lovd, thy youngest son,
Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joind
With his own folly?  that be from thee far,
That far be from thee, Father, who art judge
Of all things made, and judgest only right.
Or shall the Adversary thus obtain
His end, and frustrate thine?  shall he fulfill
His malice, and thy goodness bring to nought,
Or proud return, though to his heavier doom,
Yet with revenge accomplishd, and to Hell
Draw after him the whole race of mankind,
By him corrupted?  or wilt thou thyself
Abolish thy creation, and unmake
For him, what for thy glory thou hast made?
So should thy goodness and thy greatness both
Be questiond and blasphemd without defence.
To whom the great Creator thus replied.
O son, in whom my soul hath chief delight,
Son of my bosom, Son who art alone.
My word, my wisdom, and effectual might,
All hast thou spoken as my thoughts are, all
As my eternal purpose hath decreed
Man shall not quite be lost, but savd who will
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me
Freely vouchsafd once more I will renew
His lapsed powers, though forfeit and enthralld
By sin to foul exorbitant desires
Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand
On even ground against his mortal foe
By me upheld, that he may know how frail
His fallen condition is, and to me owe
All his deliverance, and to none but me.
Some I have chosen of peculiar grace,
Elect above the rest so is my will:
The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warnd
Their sinful state, and to appease betimes
The incensed Deity, while offerd grace
Invites for I will clear their senses dark,
What may suffice, and soften stony hearts
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
To prayer, repentance, and obedience due,
Though but endeavourd with sincere intent,
Mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut.
And I will place within them as a guide,
My umpire Conscience whom if they will hear,
Light after light, well usd, they shall attain,
And to the end, persisting, safe arrive.
This my long sufferance, and my day of grace,
They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste
But hard be hardend, blind be blinded more,
That they may stumble on, and deeper fall
