    Constantin TAMPIZA since June 1990 1st Deputy Prime Minister Andrei
    SANGHELI since June 1990
  Chief of State:
    President Mircea SNEGUR since 3 September 1990
  Head of Legislature:
    Chairman of the Supreme Soviet Premier Valeriy MURAVSKIY since May 1991
    1st Deputy Prime Minister Ian HADIRCA since 11 May 1990 Deputy Prime
    Minister Victor PUSCASU, 21 November 1989 Deputy Prime Minister Mihial
    PLASICHUK, NA
Political parties and leaders:
    Moldovan Popular Front, Yuriy ROSHKA, chairman since summer 1990
    UnitateaYedinstvo Intermovement, V. YAKOVLEV, chairman Bulgarian Rebirth
    Society, Ivan ZABUNOV, chairman Democratic Group, five cochairmen
Suffrage:
    universal at age 18
Elections:
  President:
    last held 8 December 1991 results  Mircea SNEGUR won 98.17 of vote
  Moldovan Supreme Soviet:
    last held 25 February 1990 results  Moldovan Popular Front 33,
    Intermovement 34, Communist Party 32 seats  366 total Popular Front
    Club 35 Sovereignty Club 35 Club of Independent Deputies 25 Agrarian Club
    110 Club Bujak 15 Reality Club 25 Soviet Moldova 80 remaining 41 seats
    probably belong to Onestr region deputies who usually boycott Moldovan
    legislative proceedings

:Moldova Government

Other political or pressure groups:
    United Council of Labor Collectives UCLC, Igor SMIRNOV, chairman Social
    Democratic Party of Moldova SDPM, V. CHIOBATARU, leader The Ecology
    Movement of Moldova EMM, G. MALARCHUK, chairman The Christian Democratic
    League of Women of Moldova CDLWM, L. LARI, chairman National Christian
    Party of Moldova NCPM, D. TODIKE, M. BARAGA, V. NIKU, leaders The Peoples
    Movement Gagauz Khalky GKh, S. GULGAR, leader The Democratic Party of
    Gagauzia DPG, G. SAVOSTIN, chairman The Alliance of Working People of
    Moldova AWPM, G. POLOGOV, president
Member of:
    CSCE, UN
Diplomatic representation:
    Ambassador vacant
  US:
    Charge Howard Steers Interim Chancery at 103 Strada Alexei Mateevich,
    Kishinev mailing address is APO AE 09862 telephone 801170422232894
    at Hotel Seabeco in Kishinev
Flag:
    same color scheme as Romania  3 equal vertical bands of blue hoist side,
    yellow, and red emblem in center of flag is of a Roman eagle carrying a
    cross in its beak and an olive branch in its claws

:Moldova Economy

Overview:
    Moldova, the nexttosmallest of the former Soviet republics in area, is the
    most densely inhabited. Moldova has a little more than 1 of the population,
    labor force, capital stock, and output of the former Soviet Union. Living
    standards have been below average for the European USSR. The country enjoys
    a favorable climate, and economic development has been primarily based on
    agriculture, featuring fruits, vegetables, wine, and tobacco. Industry
    accounts for 20 of the labor force, whereas agriculture employs more than
    onethird. Moldova has no major mineral resources and has depended on the
    former Soviet republics for coal, oil, gas, steel, most electronic
    equipment, machine tools, and major consumer durables such as automobiles.
    Its industrial and agricultural products, in turn, have been exported to the
    other former Soviet republics. Moldova has freed prices on most goods and
    has legalized private ownership of property, including agricultural land.
    Moldovas economic prospects are dimmed by the difficulties of moving toward
