And this imperial sovereignty, adorned
With splendour, armed with power, if aught proposed
And judged of public moment in the shape
Of difficulty or danger, could deter
Me from attempting. Wherefore do I assume
These royalties, and not refuse to reign,
Refusing to accept as great a share
Of hazard as of honour, due alike
To him who reigns, and so much to him due
Of hazard more as he above the rest
High honoured sits? Go, therefore, mighty Powers,
Terror of Heaven, though fallen intend at home,
While here shall be our home, what best may ease
The present misery, and render Hell
More tolerable if there be cure or charm
To respite, or deceive, or slack the pain
Of this ill mansion: intermit no watch
Against a wakeful foe, while I abroad
Through all the coasts of dark destruction seek
Deliverance for us all. This enterprise
None shall partake with me." Thus saying, rose
The Monarch, and prevented all reply
Prudent lest, from his resolution raised,
Others among the chief might offer now,
Certain to be refused, what erst they feared,
And, so refused, might in opinion stand
His rivals, winning cheap the high repute
Which he through hazard huge must earn. But they
Dreaded not more th adventure than his voice
Forbidding and at once with him they rose.
Their rising all at once was as the sound
Of thunder heard remote. Towards him they bend
With awful reverence prone, and as a God
Extol him equal to the Highest in Heaven.
Nor failed they to express how much they praised
That for the general safety he despised
His own: for neither do the Spirits damned
Lose all their virtue lest bad men should boast
Their specious deeds on earth, which glory excites,
Or close ambition varnished oer with zeal.
  Thus they their doubtful consultations dark
Ended, rejoicing in their matchless Chief:
As, when from mountaintops the dusky clouds
Ascending, while the north wind sleeps, oerspread
Heavens cheerful face, the louring element
Scowls oer the darkened landscape snow or shower,
If chance the radiant sun, with farewell sweet,
Extend his evening beam, the fields revive,
The birds their notes renew, and bleating herds
Attest their joy, that hill and valley rings.
O shame to men! Devil with devil damned
Firm concord holds men only disagree
Of creatures rational, though under hope
Of heavenly grace, and, God proclaiming peace,
Yet live in hatred, enmity, and strife
Among themselves, and levy cruel wars
Wasting the earth, each other to destroy:
As if which might induce us to accord
Man had not hellish foes enow besides,
That day and night for his destruction wait!
  The Stygian council thus dissolved and forth
In order came the grand infernal Peers:
Midst came their mighty Paramount, and seemed
Alone th antagonist of Heaven, nor less
Than Hells dread Emperor, with pomp supreme,
And godlike imitated state: him round
A globe of fiery Seraphim enclosed
With bright emblazonry, and horrent arms.
Then of their session ended they bid cry
With trumpets regal sound the great result:
Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim
Put to their mouths the sounding alchemy,
By heralds voice explained the hollow Abyss
Heard far adn wide, and all the host of Hell
With deafening shout returned them loud acclaim.
Thence more at ease their minds, and somewhat raised
By false presumptuous hope, the ranged Powers
Disband and, wandering, each his several way
Pursues, as inclination or sad choice
Leads him perplexed, where he may likeliest find
Truce to his restless thoughts, and entertain
The irksome hours, till his great Chief return.
Part on the plain, or in the air sublime,
Upon the wing or in swift race contend,
As at th Olympian games or Pythian fields
Part curb their fiery steeds, or shun the goal
With rapid wheels, or fronted brigades form:
As when, to warn proud cities, war appears
Waged in the troubled sky, and armies rush
To battle in the clouds before each van
Prick forth the airy knights, and couch their spears,
Till thickest legions close with feats of arms
From either end of heaven the welkin burns.
Others, with vast Typhoean rage, more fell,
Rend up both rocks and hills, and ride the air
In whirlwind Hell scarce holds the wild uproar:
As when Alcides, from Oechalia crowned
With conquest, felt th envenomed robe, and tore
Through pain up by the roots Thessalian pines,
And Lichas from the top of Oeta threw
Into th Euboic sea. Others, more mild,
Retreated in a silent valley, sing
With notes angelical to many a harp
Their own heroic deeds, and hapless fall
By doom of battle, and complain that Fate
Free Virtue should enthrall to Force or Chance.
Their song was partial but the harmony
What could it less when Spirits immortal sing?
Suspended Hell, and took with ravishment
The thronging audience. In discourse more sweet
For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Sense
Others apart sat on a hill retired,
In thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will, and Fate
Fixed fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute,
And found no end, in wandering mazes lost.
Of good and evil much they argued then,
Of happiness and final misery,
Passion and apathy, and glory and shame:
Vain wisdom all, and false philosophy!
Yet, with a pleasing sorcery, could charm
Pain for a while or anguish, and excite
Fallacious hope, or arm th obdured breast
With stubborn patience as with triple steel.
Another part, in squadrons and gross bands,
On bold adventure to discover wide
That dismal world, if any clime perhaps
Might yield them easier habitation, bend
Four ways their flying march, along the banks
Of four infernal rivers, that disgorge
Into the burning lake their baleful streams
Abhorred Styx, the flood of deadly hate
Sad Acheron of sorrow, black and deep
Cocytus, named of lamentation loud
Heard on the rueful stream fierce Phlegeton,
Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage.
Far off from these, a slow and silent stream,
Lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls
Her watery labyrinth, whereof who drinks
Forthwith his former state and being forgets
Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain.
Beyond this flood a frozen continent
Lies dark and wild, beat with perpetual storms
Of whirlwind and dire hail, which on firm land
Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin seems
Of ancient pile all else deep snow and ice,
A gulf profound as that Serbonian bog
Betwixt Damiata and Mount Casius old,
Where armies whole have sunk: the parching air
Burns frore, and cold performs th effect of fire.
Thither, by harpyfooted Furies haled,
At certain revolutions all the damned
Are brought and feel by turns the bitter change
Of fierce extremes, extremes by change more fierce,
From beds of raging fire to starve in ice
Their soft ethereal warmth, and there to pine
Immovable, infixed, and frozen round
Periods of time,thence hurried back to fire.
They ferry over this Lethean sound
Both to and fro, their sorrow to augment,
And wish and struggle, as they pass, to reach
The tempting stream, with one small drop to lose
In sweet forgetfulness all pain and woe,
All in one moment, and so near the brink
But Fate withstands, and, to oppose th attempt,
Medusa with Gorgonian terror guards
The ford, and of itself the water flies
All taste of living wight, as once it fled
The lip of Tantalus. Thus roving on
In confused march forlorn, th adventurous bands,
With shuddering horror pale, and eyes aghast,
Viewed first their lamentable lot, and found
No rest. Through many a dark and dreary vale
They passed, and many a region dolorous,
Oer many a frozen, many a fiery alp,
Rocks, caves, lakes, fens, bogs, dens, and shades of death
A universe of death, which God by curse
Created evil, for evil only good
Where all life dies, death lives, and Nature breeds,
Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things,
Obominable, inutterable, and worse
Than fables yet have feigned or fear conceived,
Gorgons, and Hydras, and Chimeras dire.
  Meanwhile the Adversary of God and Man,
Satan, with thoughts inflamed of highest design,
Puts on swift wings, and toward the gates of Hell
Explores his solitary flight: sometimes
He scours the right hand coast, sometimes the left
Now shaves with level wing the deep, then soars
Up to the fiery concave towering high.
As when far off at sea a fleet descried
Hangs in the clouds, by equinoctial winds
Close sailing from Bengala, or the isles
Of Ternate and Tidore, whence merchants bring
Their spicy drugs they on the trading flood,
Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape,
Ply stemming nightly toward the pole: so seemed
Far off the flying Fiend. At last appear
Hellbounds, high reaching to the horrid roof,
And thrice threefold the gates three folds were brass,
Three iron, three of adamantine rock,
Impenetrable, impaled with circling fire,
Yet unconsumed. Before the gates there sat
On either side a formidable Shape.
The one seemed woman to the waist, and fair,
But ended foul in many a scaly fold,
Voluminous and vasta serpent armed
With mortal sting. About her middle round
A cry of Hellhounds neverceasing barked
With wide Cerberean mouths full loud, and rung
A hideous peal yet, when they list, would creep,
If aught disturbed their noise, into her womb,
And kennel there yet there still barked and howled
Within unseen. Far less abhorred than these
Vexed Scylla, bathing in the sea that parts
Calabria from the hoarse Trinacrian shore
Nor uglier follow the nighthag, when, called
In secret, riding through the air she comes,
Lured with the smell of infant blood, to dance
With Lapland witches, while the labouring moon
Eclipses at their charms. The other Shape
If shape it might be called that shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joint, or limb
Or substance might be called that shadow seemed,
For each seemed eitherblack it stood as Night,
Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell,
And shook a dreadful dart: what seemed his head
The likeness of a kingly crown had on.
Satan was now at hand, and from his seat
The monster moving onward came as fast
With horrid strides Hell trembled as he strode.
Th undaunted Fiend what this might be admired
Admired, not feared God and his Son except,
Created thing naught valued he nor shunned,
And with disdainful look thus first began:
  "Whence and what art thou, execrable Shape,
That darst, though grim and terrible, advance
Thy miscreated front athwart my way
To yonder gates? Through them I mean to pass,
That be assured, without leave asked of thee.
Retire or taste thy folly, and learn by proof,
Hellborn, not to contend with Spirits of Heaven."
  To whom the Goblin, full of wrath, replied:
"Art thou that traitor Angel? art thou he,
Who first broke peace in Heaven and faith, till then
Unbroken, and in proud rebellious arms
Drew after him the third part of Heavens sons,
Conjured against the Highestfor which both thou
And they, outcast from God, are here condemned
To waste eternal days in woe and pain?
And reckonst thou thyself with Spirits of Heaven
Helldoomed, and breathst defiance here and scorn,
Where I reign king, and, to enrage thee more,
Thy king and lord? Back to thy punishment,
False fugitive and to thy speed add wings,
Lest with a whip of scorpions I pursue
Thy lingering, or with one stroke of this dart
Strange horror seize thee, and pangs unfelt before."
  So spake the grisly Terror, and in shape,
So speaking and so threatening, grew tenfold,
More dreadful and deform. On th other side,
Incensed with indignation, Satan stood
Unterrified, and like a comet burned,
That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
In th arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
Shakes pestilence and war. Each at the head
Levelled his deadly aim their fatal hands
No second stroke intend and such a frown
Each cast at th other as when two black clouds,
With heavens artillery fraught, came rattling on
Over the Caspian,then stand front to front
Hovering a space, till winds the signal blow
To join their dark encounter in midair.
So frowned the mighty combatants that Hell
Grew darker at their frown so matched they stood
For never but once more was wither like
To meet so great a foe. And now great deeds
Had been achieved, whereof all Hell had rung,
Had not the snaky Sorceress, that sat
Fast by Hellgate and kept the fatal key,
Risen, and with hideous outcry rushed between.
  "O father, what intends thy hand," she cried,
"Against thy only son? What fury, O son,
Possesses thee to bend that mortal dart
Against thy fathers head? And knowst for whom?
For him who sits above, and laughs the while
At thee, ordained his drudge to execute
Whateer his wrath, which he calls justice, bids
His wrath, which one day will destroy ye both!"
  She spake, and at her words the hellish Pest
Forbore: then these to her Satan returned:
  "So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange
Thou interposest, that my sudden hand,
Prevented, spares to tell thee yet by deeds
What it intends, till first I know of thee
What thing thou art, thus doubleformed, and why,
In this infernal vale first met, thou callst
Me father, and that phantasm callst my son.
I know thee not, nor ever saw till now
Sight more detestable than him and thee."
  T whom thus the Portress of Hellgate replied:
"Hast thou forgot me, then and do I seem
Now in thine eye so foul?once deemed so fair
In Heaven, when at th assembly, and in sight
Of all the Seraphim with thee combined
In bold conspiracy against Heavens King,
All on a sudden miserable pain
Surprised thee, dim thine eyes and dizzy swum
In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast
Threw forth, till on the left side opening wide,
Likest to thee in shape and countenance bright,
Then shining heavenly fair, a goddess armed,
Out of thy head I sprung. Amazement seized
All th host of Heaven back they recoiled afraid
At first, and called me Sin, and for a sign
Portentous held me but, familiar grown,
I pleased, and with attractive graces won
The most aversethee chiefly, who, full oft
Thyself in me thy perfect image viewing,
Becamst enamoured and such joy thou tookst
With me in secret that my womb conceived
A growing burden. Meanwhile war arose,
And fields were fought in Heaven: wherein remained
For what could else? to our Almighty Foe
Clear victory to our part loss and rout
Through all the Empyrean. Down they fell,
Driven headlong from the pitch of Heaven, down
Into this Deep and in the general fall
I also: at which time this powerful key
Into my hands was given, with charge to keep
These gates for ever shut, which none can pass
Without my opening. Pensive here I sat
Alone but long I sat not, till my womb,
Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown,
Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes.
At last this odious offspring whom thou seest,
Thine own begotten, breaking violent way,
Tore through my entrails, that, with fear and pain
Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew
Transformed: but he my inbred enemy
Forth issued, brandishing his fatal dart,
Made to destroy. I fled, and cried out Death!
Hell trembled at the hideous name, and sighed
From all her caves, and back resounded Death!
I fled but he pursued though more, it seems,
Inflamed with lust than rage, and, swifter far,
Me overtook, his mother, all dismayed,
And, in embraces forcible and foul
Engendering with me, of that rape begot
These yelling monsters, that with ceaseless cry
Surround me, as thou sawsthourly conceived
And hourly born, with sorrow infinite
To me for, when they list, into the womb
That bred them they return, and howl, and gnaw
My bowels, their repast then, bursting forth
Afresh, with conscious terrors vex me round,
That rest or intermission none I find.
Before mine eyes in opposition sits
Grim Death, my son and foe, who set them on,
And me, his parent, would full soon devour
For want of other prey, but that he knows
His end with mine involved, and knows that I
Should prove a bitter morsel, and his bane,
Whenever that shall be: so Fate pronounced.
But thou, O father, I forewarn thee, shun
His deadly arrow neither vainly hope
To be invulnerable in those bright arms,
Through tempered heavenly for that mortal dint,
Save he who reigns above, none can resist."
  She finished and the subtle Fiend his lore
Soon learned, now milder, and thus answered smooth:
  "Dear daughtersince thou claimst me for thy sire,
And my fair son here showst me, the dear pledge
Of dalliance had with thee in Heaven, and joys
Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change
Befallen us unforeseen, unthoughtofknow,
I come no enemy, but to set free
From out this dark and dismal house of pain
Both him and thee, and all the heavenly host
Of Spirits that, in our just pretences armed,
Fell with us from on high. From them I go
This uncouth errand sole, and one for all
Myself expose, with lonely steps to tread
Th unfounded Deep, and through the void immense
To search, with wandering quest, a place foretold
Should beand, by concurring signs, ere now
Created vast and rounda place of bliss
In the purlieus of Heaven and therein placed
A race of upstart creatures, to supply
Perhaps our vacant room, though more removed,
Lest Heaven, surcharged with potent multitude,
Might hap to move new broils. Be this, or aught
Than this more secret, now designed, I haste
To know and, this once known, shall soon return,
And bring ye to the place where thou and Death
Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen
Wing silently the buxom air, embalmed
With odours. There ye shall be fed and filled
Immeasurably all things shall be your prey."
  He ceased for both seemed highly pleased, and Death
Grinned horrible a ghastly smile, to hear
His famine should be filled, and blessed his maw
Destined to that good hour. No less rejoiced
His mother bad, and thus bespake her sire:
  "The key of this infernal Pit, by due
And by command of Heavens allpowerful King,
I keep, by him forbidden to unlock
These adamantine gates against all force
Death ready stands to interpose his dart,
Fearless to be oermatched by living might.
But what owe I to his commands above,
Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down
Into this gloom of Tartarus profound,
To sit in hateful office here confined,
Inhabitant of Heaven and heavenly born
Here in perpetual agony and pain,
With terrors and with clamours compassed round
Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed?
Thou art my father, thou my author, thou
My being gavst me whom should I obey
But thee? whom follow? Thou wilt bring me soon
To that new world of light and bliss, among
The gods who live at ease, where I shall reign
At thy right hand voluptuous, as beseems
Thy daughter and thy darling, without end."
  Thus saying, from her side the fatal key,
Sad instrument of all our woe, she took
And, towards the gate rolling her bestial train,
Forthwith the huge portcullis high updrew,
Which, but herself, not all the Stygian Powers
Could once have moved then in the keyhole turns
Th intricate wards, and every bolt and bar
Of massy iron or solid rock with ease
Unfastens. On a sudden open fly,
With impetuous recoil and jarring sound,
Th infernal doors, and on their hinges grate
Harsh thunder, that the lowest bottom shook
Of Erebus. She opened but to shut
Excelled her power: the gates wide open stood,
That with extended wings a bannered host,
Under spread ensigns marching, mibht pass through
With horse and chariots ranked in loose array
So wide they stood, and like a furnacemouth
Cast forth redounding smoke and ruddy flame.
Before their eyes in sudden view appear
The secrets of the hoary Deepa dark
Illimitable ocean, without bound,
Without dimension where length, breadth, and height,
And time, and place, are lost where eldest Night
And Chaos, ancestors of Nature, hold
Eternal anarchy, amidst the noise
Of endless wars, and by confusion stand.
For Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry, four champions fierce,
Strive here for mastery, and to battle bring
Their embryon atoms: they around the flag
Of each his faction, in their several clans,
Lightarmed or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift, or slow,
Swarm populous, unnumbered as the sands
Of Barca or Cyrenes torrid soil,
Levied to side with warring winds, and poise
Their lighter wings. To whom these most adhere
He rules a moment: Chaos umpire sits,
And by decision more embroils the fray
By which he reigns: next him, high arbiter,
Chance governs all. Into this wild Abyss,
The womb of Nature, and perhaps her grave,
Of neither sea, nor shore, nor air, nor fire,
But all these in their pregnant causes mixed
Confusedly, and which thus must ever fight,
Unless th Almighty Maker them ordain
His dark materials to create more worlds
Into this wild Abyss the wary Fiend
Stood on the brink of Hell and looked a while,
Pondering his voyage for no narrow frith
He had to cross. Nor was his ear less pealed
With noises loud and ruinous to compare
Great things with small than when Bellona storms
With all her battering engines, bent to rase
Some capital city or less than if this frame
Of Heaven were falling, and these elements
In mutiny had from her axle torn
The steadfast Earth. At last his sailbroad vans
He spread for flight, and, in the surging smoke
Uplifted, spurns the ground thence many a league,
As in a cloudy chair, ascending rides
Audacious but, that seat soon failing, meets
A vast vacuity. All unawares,
Fluttering his pennons vain, plumbdown he drops
Ten thousand fathom deep, and to this hour
Down had been falling, had not, by ill chance,
The strong rebuff of some tumultuous cloud,
Instinct with fire and nitre, hurried him
As many miles aloft. That fury stayed
Quenched in a boggy Syrtis, neither sea,
Nor good dry landnigh foundered, on he fares,
Treading the crude consistence, half on foot,
Half flying behoves him now both oar and sail.
As when a gryphon through the wilderness
With winged course, oer hill or moory dale,
Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stealth
Had from his wakeful custody purloined
The guarded gold so eagerly the Fiend
Oer bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
With head, hands, wings, or feet, pursues his way,
And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies.
At length a universal hubbub wild
Of stunning sounds, and voices all confused,
Borne through the hollow dark, assaults his ear
With loudest vehemence. Thither he plies
Undaunted, to meet there whatever Power
Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyss
Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask
Which way the nearest coast of darkness lies
Bordering on light when straight behold the throne
Of Chaos, and his dark pavilion spread
Wide on the wasteful Deep! With him enthroned
Sat sablevested Night, eldest of things,
The consort of his reign and by them stood
Orcus and Ades, and the dreaded name
Of Demogorgon Rumour next, and Chance,
And Tumult, and Confusion, all embroiled,
And Discord with a thousand various mouths.
  T whom Satan, turning boldly, thus:"Ye Powers
And Spirtis of this nethermost Abyss,
Chaos and ancient Night, I come no spy
With purpose to explore or to disturb
The secrets of your realm but, by constraint
Wandering this darksome desert, as my way
Lies through your spacious empire up to light,
Alone and without guide, half lost, I seek,
What readiest path leads where your gloomy bounds
Confine with Heaven or, if some other place,
From your dominion won, th Ethereal King
Possesses lately, thither to arrive
I travel this profound. Direct my course:
Directed, no mean recompense it brings
To your behoof, if I that region lost,
All usurpation thence expelled, reduce
To her original darkness and your sway
Which is my present journey, and once more
Erect the standard there of ancient Night.
Yours be th advantage all, mine the revenge!"
  Thus Satan and him thus the Anarch old,
With faltering speech and visage incomposed,
Answered:  "I know thee, stranger, who thou art  
That mighty leading Angel, who of late
Made head against Heavens King, though overthrown.
I saw and heard for such a numerous host
Fled not in silence through the frighted Deep,
With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout,
Confusion worse confounded and Heavengates
Poured out by millions her victorious bands,
Pursuing. I upon my frontiers here
Keep residence if all I can will serve
That little which is left so to defend,
Encroached on still through our intestine broils
Weakening the sceptre of old Night: first, Hell,
Your dungeon, stretching far and wide beneath
Now lately Heaven and Earth, another world
Hung oer my realm, linked in a golden chain
To that side Heaven from whence your legions fell!
If that way be your walk, you have not far
So much the nearer danger. Go, and speed
Havoc, and spoil, and ruin, are my gain."
  He ceased and Satan stayed not to reply,
But, glad that now his sea should find a shore,
With fresh alacrity and force renewed
Springs upward, like a pyramid of fire,
Into the wild expanse, and through the shock
Of fighting elements, on all sides round
Environed, wins his way harder beset
And more endangered than when Argo passed
Through Bosporus betwixt the justling rocks,
Or when Ulysses on the larboard shunned
Charybdis, and by th other whirlpool steered.
So he with difficulty and labour hard
Moved on, with difficulty and labour he
But, he once passed, soon after, when Man fell,
Strange alteration! Sin and Death amain,
Following his track such was the will of Heaven
Paved after him a broad and beaten way
Over the dark Abyss, whose boiling gulf
Tamely endured a bridge of wondrous length,
From Hell continued, reaching th utmost orb
Of this frail World by which the Spirits perverse
With easy intercourse pass to and fro
To tempt or punish mortals, except whom
God and good Angels guard by special grace.
  But now at last the sacred influence
Of light appears, and from the walls of Heaven
Shoots far into the bosom of dim Night
A glimmering dawn. Here Nature first begins
Her farthest verge, and Chaos to retire,
As from her outmost works, a broken foe,
With tumult less and with less hostile din
That Satan with less toil, and now with ease,
Wafts on the calmer wave by dubious light,
And, like a weatherbeaten vessel, holds
Gladly the port, though shrouds and tackle torn
Or in the emptier waste, resembling air,
Weighs his spread wings, at leisure to behold
Far off th empyreal Heaven, extended wide
In circuit, undetermined square or round,
With opal towers and battlements adorned
Of living sapphire, once his native seat
And, fast by, hanging in a golden chain,
This pendent World, in bigness as a star
Of smallest magnitude close by the moon.
Thither, full fraught with mischievous revenge,
Accursed, and in a cursed hour, he hies.



Book III


Hail, holy Light, offspring of Heaven firstborn,
Or of the Eternal coeternal beam
May I express thee unblamd?  since God is light,
And never but in unapproached light
Dwelt from eternity, dwelt then in thee
Bright effluence of bright essence increate.
Or hear"st thou rather pure ethereal stream,
Whose fountain who shall tell?  before the sun,
Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice
Of God, as with a mantle, didst invest  
The rising world of waters dark and deep,
Won from the void and formless infinite.
Thee I revisit now with bolder wing,
Escapd the Stygian pool, though long detaind
In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight
Through utter and through middle darkness borne,
With other notes than to the Orphean lyre
I sung of Chaos and eternal Night
Taught by the heavenly Muse to venture down
The dark descent, and up to reascend,
Though hard and rare:  Thee I revisit safe,
And feel thy sovran vital lamp but thou
Revisitst not these eyes, that roll in vain
To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn
So  thick a drop serene hath quenchd their orbs,
Or dim suffusion veild.  Yet not the more
Cease I to wander, where the Muses haunt,
Clear spring, or shady grove, or sunny hill,
Smit with the love of sacred song but chief
Thee, Sion, and the flowery brooks beneath,
That wash thy hallowd feet, and warbling flow,
Nightly I visit:  nor sometimes forget
So were I equalld with them in renown,
Thy sovran command, that Man should find grace
Blind Thamyris, and blind Maeonides,
And Tiresias, and Phineus, prophets old:
Then feed on thoughts, that voluntary move
Harmonious numbers as the wakeful bird
Sings darkling, and in shadiest covert hid
Tunes her nocturnal note.  Thus with the year
Seasons return but not to me returns
Day, or the sweet approach of even or morn,
Or sight of vernal bloom, or summers rose,
Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine
But cloud instead, and everduring dark
Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men
Cut off, and for the book of knowledge fair
Presented with a universal blank
Of natures works to me expungd and rasd,
And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out.
So much the rather thou, celestial Light,
Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers
Irradiate there plant eyes, all mist from thence
Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell
Of things invisible to mortal sight.
Now had the Almighty Father from above,
From the pure empyrean where he sits
High thrond above all highth, bent down his eye
His own works and their works at once to view:
About him all the Sanctities of Heaven
Stood thick as stars, and from his sight receivd
Beatitude past utterance on his right
The radiant image of his glory sat,
His only son on earth he first beheld
Our two first parents, yet the only two
Of mankind in the happy garden placd
Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love,
Uninterrupted joy, unrivalld love,
In blissful solitude he then surveyd
Hell and the gulf between, and Satan there
Coasting the wall of Heaven on this side Night
In the dun air sublime, and ready now
To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet,
On the bare outside of this world, that seemd
Firm land imbosomd, without firmament,
Uncertain which, in ocean or in air.
Him God beholding from his prospect high,
Wherein past, present, future, he beholds,
Thus to his only Son foreseeing spake.
Only begotten Son, seest thou what rage
Transports our Adversary?  whom no bounds
Prescribd no bars of Hell, nor all the chains
Heapd on him there, nor yet the main abyss
Wide interrupt, can hold so bent he seems
On desperate revenge, that shall redound
Upon his own rebellious head.  And now,
Through all restraint broke loose, he wings his way
Not far off Heaven, in the precincts of light,
Directly towards the new created world,
And man there placd, with purpose to assay
If him by force he can destroy, or, worse,
By some false guile pervert and shall pervert
For man will hearken to his glozing lies,
And easily transgress the sole command,
Sole pledge of his obedience:  So will fall
He and his faithless progeny:  Whose fault?
Whose but his own?  ingrate, he had of me
All he could have I made him just and right,
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
Such I created all the ethereal Powers
And Spirits, both them who stood, and them who faild
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have given sincere
Of true allegiance, constant faith or love,
Where only what they needs must do appeard,
Not what they would?  what praise could they receive?
What pleasure I from such obedience paid,
When will and reason reason also is choice
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoild,
Made passive both, had servd necessity,
Not me?  they therefore, as to right belong d,
So were created, nor can justly accuse
Their Maker, or their making, or their fate,
As if predestination overruld
Their will disposd by absolute decree
Or high foreknowledge they themselves decreed
Their own revolt, not I if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.
So without least impulse or shadow of fate,
Or aught by me immutably foreseen,
They trespass, authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge, and what they choose for so
I formd them free: and free they must remain,
Till they enthrall themselves I else must change
Their nature, and revoke the high decree
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordaind
THeir freedom: they themselves ordaind their fall.
The first sort by their own suggestion fell,
Selftempted, selfdepravd:  Man falls, deceivd
By the other first:  Man therefore shall find grace,
The other none:  In mercy and justice both,
Through Heaven and Earth, so shall my glory excel
But Mercy, first and last, shall brightest shine.
Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance filld
All Heaven, and in the blessed Spirits elect
Sense of new joy ineffable diffusd.
Beyond compare the Son of God was seen
Most glorious in him all his Father shone
Substantially expressd and in his face
Divine compassion visibly appeard,
Love without end, and without measure grace,
Which uttering, thus he to his Father spake.
O Father, gracious was that word which closd
Thy sovran command, that Man should find grace
, that Man should find grace
For which both Heaven and earth shall high extol
Thy praises, with the innumerable sound
Of hymns and sacred songs, wherewith thy throne
Encompassd shall resound thee ever blest.
For should Man finally be lost, should Man,
Thy creature late so lovd, thy youngest son,
Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joind
With his own folly?  that be from thee far,
That far be from thee, Father, who art judge
Of all things made, and judgest only right.
Or shall the Adversary thus obtain
His end, and frustrate thine?  shall he fulfill
His malice, and thy goodness bring to nought,
Or proud return, though to his heavier doom,
Yet with revenge accomplishd, and to Hell
Draw after him the whole race of mankind,
By him corrupted?  or wilt thou thyself
Abolish thy creation, and unmake
For him, what for thy glory thou hast made?
So should thy goodness and thy greatness both
Be questiond and blasphemd without defence.
To whom the great Creator thus replied.
O son, in whom my soul hath chief delight,
Son of my bosom, Son who art alone.
My word, my wisdom, and effectual might,
All hast thou spoken as my thoughts are, all
As my eternal purpose hath decreed
Man shall not quite be lost, but savd who will
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me
Freely vouchsafd once more I will renew
His lapsed powers, though forfeit and enthralld
By sin to foul exorbitant desires
Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand
On even ground against his mortal foe
By me upheld, that he may know how frail
His fallen condition is, and to me owe
All his deliverance, and to none but me.
Some I have chosen of peculiar grace,
Elect above the rest so is my will:
The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warnd
Their sinful state, and to appease betimes
The incensed Deity, while offerd grace
Invites for I will clear their senses dark,
What may suffice, and soften stony hearts
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
To prayer, repentance, and obedience due,
Though but endeavourd with sincere intent,
Mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut.
And I will place within them as a guide,
My umpire Conscience whom if they will hear,
Light after light, well usd, they shall attain,
And to the end, persisting, safe arrive.
This my long sufferance, and my day of grace,
They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste
But hard be hardend, blind be blinded more,
That they may stumble on, and deeper fall
And none but such from mercy I exclude.
