involves testing of the Macintosh implementation of AM.  Since the
primary goal of this evaluation is to determine the most appropriate
audience or audiences for AM, very different sites were selected.  This
makes evaluation difficult because of the varying degrees of technology
literacy among the sites.  AM is situated in fortyfour locations, of
which six are public libraries and sixteen are schools.  Represented
among the schools are elementary, junior high, and high schools.
District offices also are involved in the evaluation, which will
conclude in summer 1993.

VECCIA focused the remainder of her talk on the six public libraries, one
of which doubles as a state library.  They represent a range of
geographic areas and a range of demographic characteristics.  For
example, three are located in urban settings, two in rural settings, and
one in a suburban setting.  A range of technical expertise is to be found
among these facilities as well.  For example, one is an "Apple library of
the future," while two others are rural oneroom librariesin one, AM
sits at the front desk next to a tractor manual.

All public libraries have been extremely enthusiastic, supportive, and
appreciative of the work that AM has been doing.  VECCIA characterized
various users:  Most users in public libraries describe themselves as
general readers of the students who use AM in the public libraries,
those in fourth grade and above seem most interested.  Public libraries
in rural sites tend to attract retired people, who have been highly
receptive to AM.  Users tend to fall into two additional categories:
people interested in the content and historical connotations of these
primary resources, and those fascinated by the technology.  The format
receiving the most comments has been motion pictures.  The adult users in
public libraries are more comfortable with IBM computers, whereas young
people seem comfortable with either IBM or Macintosh, although most of
them seem to come from a Macintosh background.  This same tendency is
found in the schools.

What kinds of things do users do with AM?  In a public library there are
two main goals or ways that AM is being used:  as an individual learning
tool, and as a leisure activity.  Adult learning was one area that VECCIA
would highlight as a possible application for a tool such as AM.  She
described a patron of a rural public library who comes in every day on
his lunch hour and literally reads AM, methodically going through the
collection image by image.  At the end of his hour he makes an electronic
bookmark, puts it in his pocket, and returns to work.  The next day he
comes in and resumes where he left off.  Interestingly, this man had
never been in the library before he used AM.  In another small, rural
library, the coordinator reports that AM is a popular activity for some
of the older, retired people in the community, who ordinarily would not
use "those things,"computers.  Another example of adult learning in
public libraries is book groups, one of which, in particular, is using AM
as part of its reading on industrialization, integration, and urbanization
in the early 1900s.

One library reports that a family is using AM to help educate their
children.  In another instance, individuals from a local museum came in
to use AM to prepare an exhibit on toys of the past.  These two examples
emphasize the mission of the public library as a cultural institution,
reaching out to people who do not have the same resources available to
those who live in a metropolitan area or have access to a major library.
One rural library reports that junior high school students in large
numbers came in one afternoon to use AM for entertainment.  A number of
public libraries reported great interest among postcard collectors in the
Detroit collection, which was essentially a collection of images used on
postcards around the turn of the century.  Train buffs are similarly
interested because that was a time of great interest in railroading.
People, it was found, relate to things that they know of firsthand.  For
example, in both rural public libraries where AM was made available,
observers reported that the older people with personal remembrances of
the turn of the century were gravitating to the Detroit collection.
These examples served to underscore MICHELSONs observation re the
integration of electronic tools and ideasthat people learn best when
the material relates to something they know.

VECCIA made the final point that in many cases AM serves as a
publicrelations tool for the public libraries that are testing it.  In
one case, AM is being used as a vehicle to secure additional funding for
the library.  In another case, AM has served as an inspiration to the
staff of a major local public library in the South to think about ways to
make its own collection of photographs more accessible to the public.

                                  


FREEMAN  AM and archival electronic resources in a school environment 
Questions concerning context  Questions concerning the electronic format
itself  Computer anxiety  Access and availability of the system 
Hardware  Strengths gained through the use of archival resources in
schools 


Reiterating an observation made by VECCIA, that AM is an archival
resource made up of primary materials with very little interpretation,
FREEMAN stated that the project has attempted to bridge the gap between
these bare primary materials and a school environment, and in that cause
has created guided introductions to AM collections.  Loud demand from the
educational community,  chiefly from teachers working with the upper
grades of elementary school through high school, greeted the announcement
that AM would be tested around the country.

FREEMAN reported not only on what was learned about AM in a school
environment, but also on several universal questions that were raised
concerning archival electronic resources in schools.  She discussed
several strengths of this type of material in a school environment as
opposed to a highly structured resource that offers a limited number of
paths to follow.

FREEMAN first raised several questions about using AM in a school
environment.  There is often some difficulty in developing a sense of
what the system contains.  Many students sit down at a computer resource
and assume that, because AM comes from the Library of Congress, all of
American history is now at their fingertips.  As a result of that sort of
mistaken judgment, some students are known to conclude that AM contains
nothing of use to them when they look for one or two things and do not
find them.  It is difficult to discover that middle ground where one has
a sense of what the system contains.  Some students grope toward the idea
of an archive, a new idea to them, since they have not previously
experienced what it means to have access to a vast body of somewhat
random information.

Other questions raised by FREEMAN concerned the electronic format itself.
For instance, in a school environment it is often difficult both for
teachers and students to gain a sense of what it is they are viewing.
They understand that it is a visual image, but they do not necessarily
know that it is a postcard from the turn of the century, a panoramic
photograph, or even machinereadable text of an eighteenthcentury
broadside, a twentiethcentury printed book, or a nineteenthcentury
diary.  That distinction is often difficult for people in a school
environment to grasp.  Because of that, it occasionally becomes difficult
to draw conclusions from what one is viewing.

FREEMAN also noted the obvious fear of the computer, which constitutes a
