on networks, identifying the pool of existing networks, determining how a
producer  would choose between networks, and identifying the elements of
a business arrangement in a network.

Options for publishing in CDROM:  an outside publisher versus
selfpublication.  If an outside publisher is used, it can be nonprofit,
such as the Government Printing Office GPO or the National Technical
Information Service NTIS, in the case of government.  The pros and cons
associated with employing an outside publisher are obvious.  Among the
pros, there is no trouble getting accepted.  One pays the bill and, in
effect, goes ones way.  Among the cons, when one pays an outside
publisher to perform the work, that publisher will perform the work it is
obliged to do, but perhaps without the production expertise and skill in
marketing and dissemination that some would seek.  There is the body of
commercial publishers that do possess that kind of expertise in
distribution and marketing but that obviously are selective.  In
selfpublication, one exercises full control, but then one must handle
matters such as distribution and marketing.  Such are some of the options
for publishing in the case of CDROM.

In the case of technical and design issues, which are also important,
there are many matters which many at the Workshop already knew a good
deal about:  retrieval system requirements and costs, what to do about
images, the various capabilities and platforms, the tradeoffs between
cost and performance, concerns about localarea networkability,
interoperability, etc.

                                 


LYNCH  Creating networked information is different from using networks
as an access or dissemination vehicle  Networked multimedia on a large
scale does not yet work  Typical CDROM publication model a twoedged
sword  Publishing information on a CDROM in the present world of
immature standards  Contrast between CDROM and network pricing 
Examples demonstrated earlier in the day as a set of insular information
