	And then the whining schoolboy, with his satchel
	And shining morning face, creeping like snail
	Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
	Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
	Made to his mistress eyebrow. Then a soldier,
	Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,
	Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
	Seeking the bubble reputation
	Even in the cannons mouth. And then the justice,
	In fair round belly with good capon lined,
	With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
	Full of wise saws and modern instances
	And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
	Into the lean and slipperd pantaloon,
	With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
	His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide
	For his shrunk shank and his big manly voice,
	Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
	And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
	That ends this strange eventful history,
	Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
	Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.

	Reenter ORLANDO, with ADAM

DUKE SENIOR	Welcome. Set down your venerable burthen,
	And let him feed.

ORLANDO	I thank you most for him.

ADAM	So had you need:
	I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.

DUKE SENIOR	Welcome fall to: I will not trouble you
	As yet, to question you about your fortunes.
	Give us some music and, good cousin, sing.

	SONG.
AMIENS	Blow, blow, thou winter wind.
	Thou art not so unkind
	As mans ingratitude
	Thy tooth is not so keen,
	Because thou art not seen,
	Although thy breath be rude.
	Heighho! sing, heighho! unto the green holly:
	Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:
	Then, heighho, the holly!
	This life is most jolly.
	Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
	That dost not bite so nigh
	As benefits forgot:
	Though thou the waters warp,
	Thy sting is not so sharp
	As friend rememberd not.
	Heighho! sing, c.

DUKE SENIOR	If that you were the good Sir Rowlands son,
	As you have whisperd faithfully you were,
	And as mine eye doth his effigies witness
	Most truly limnd and living in your face,
	Be truly welcome hither: I am the duke
	That loved your father: the residue of your fortune,
	Go to my cave and tell me. Good old man,
	Thou art right welcome as thy master is.
