
  So she called softly after it, Mouse dear!  Do come back
again, and we wont talk about cats or dogs either, if you dont
like them!  When the Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam
slowly back to her:  its face was quite pale with passion, Alice
thought, and it said in a low trembling voice, Let us get to
the shore, and then Ill tell you my history, and youll
understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.

  It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded
with the birds and animals that had fallen into it:  there were a
Duck and a Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious
creatures.  Alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the
shore.



                           CHAPTER III

                  A CaucusRace and a Long Tale


  They were indeed a queerlooking party that assembled on the
bankthe birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their
fur clinging close to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and
uncomfortable.

  The first question of course was, how to get dry again:  they
had a consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed
quite natural to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with
them, as if she had known them all her life.  Indeed, she had
quite a long argument with the Lory, who at last turned sulky,
and would only say, I am older than you, and must know better
and this Alice would not allow without knowing how old it was,
and, as the Lory positively refused to tell its age, there was no
more to be said.

  At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among
them, called out, Sit down, all of you, and listen to me!  ILL
soon make you dry enough!  They all sat down at once, in a large
ring, with the Mouse in the middle.  Alice kept her eyes
anxiously fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad
cold if she did not get dry very soon.

  Ahem! said the Mouse with an important air, are you all ready?
This is the driest thing I know.  Silence all round, if you please!
"William the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was
soon submitted to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been
of late much accustomed to usurpation and conquest.  Edwin and
Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria"

  Ugh! said the Lory, with a shiver.

  I beg your pardon! said the Mouse, frowning, but very
politely:  Did you speak?

  Not I! said the Lory hastily.

  I thought you did, said the Mouse.  I proceed.  "Edwin and
