emphasis of AM, from the outset, has been on archival collections of the
basic material, and on making these collections themselves available,
rather than selected or heavily edited products.

From AMs emphasis followed the questions with which the Workshop began:
who will use these materials, and in what form will they wish to use
them.  But an even larger issue deserving mention, in GIFFORDs view, was
the phenomenal growth in Internet connectivity.  He expressed the hope
that the prospect of greater interconnectedness than ever before would
lead to:  1 much more cooperative and mutually supportive endeavors 2
development of systems of shared and distributed responsibilities to
avoid duplication and to ensure accuracy and preservation of unique
materials and 3 agreement on the necessary standards and development of
the appropriate directories and indices to make navigation
straightforward among the varied resources that are, and increasingly
will be, available.  In this connection, GIFFORD requested that
participants reflect from the outset upon the sorts of outcomes they
thought the Workshop might have.  Did those present constitute a group
with sufficient common interests to propose a next step or next steps,
and if so, what might those be?  They would return to these questions the
following afternoon.

                                 


FLEISCHHAUER  Core of Workshop concerns preparation and production of
materials  Special challenge in conversion of textual materials 
Quality versus quantity  Do the several groups represented share common
interests? 


Carl FLEISCHHAUER, coordinator, American Memory, Library of Congress,
emphasized that he would attempt to represent the people who perform some
of the work of converting or preparing  materials and that the core of
the Workshop had to do with preparation and production.  FLEISCHHAUER
then drew a distinction between the long term, when many things would be
available and connected in the ways that GIFFORD described, and the short
term, in which AM not only has wrestled with the issue of what is the
best course to pursue but also has faced a variety of technical
challenges.

FLEISCHHAUER remarked AMs endeavors to deal with a wide range of library
formats, such as motion picture collections, soundrecording collections,
and pictorial collections of various sorts, especially collections of
photographs.  In the course of these efforts, AM kept coming back to
textual materialsmanuscripts or rare printed matter, bound materials,
etc.  Text posed the greatest conversion challenge of all.  Thus, the
genesis of the Workshop, which reflects the problems faced by AM.  These
problems include physical problems.  For example, those in the library
and archive business deal with collections made up of fragile and rare
manuscript items, bound materials, especially the notoriously brittle
bound materials of the late nineteenth century.  These are precious
cultural artifacts, however, as well as interesting sources of
information, and LC desires to retain and conserve them.  AM needs to
handle things without damaging them.  Guillotining a book to run it
through a sheet feeder must be avoided at all costs.

Beyond physical problems, issues pertaining to quality arose.  For
example, the desire to provide users with a searchable text is affected
by the question of acceptable level of accuracy.  One hundred percent
accuracy is tremendously expensive.  On the other hand, the output of
optical character recognition OCR can be tremendously inaccurate.
Although AM has attempted to find a middle ground, uncertainty persists
as to whether or not it has discovered the right solution.

Questions of quality arose concerning images as well.  FLEISCHHAUER
