or kettle had been broken to pieces.

  Please, then, said Alice, how am I to get in?

  There might be some sense in your knocking, the Footman went
on without attending to her, if we had the door between us.  For
instance, if you were INSIDE, you might knock, and I could let
you out, you know.  He was looking up into the sky all the time
he was speaking, and this Alice thought decidedly uncivil.  But
perhaps he cant help it, she said to herself his eyes are so
VERY nearly at the top of his head.  But at any rate he might
answer questions.How am I to get in? she repeated, aloud.

  I shall sit here, the Footman remarked, till tomorrow

  At this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate
came skimming out, straight at the Footmans head:  it just
grazed his nose, and broke to pieces against one of the trees
behind him.

  or next day, maybe, the Footman continued in the same tone,
exactly as if nothing had happened.

  How am I to get in? asked Alice again, in a louder tone.

  ARE you to get in at all? said the Footman.  Thats the
first question, you know.

  It was, no doubt:  only Alice did not like to be told so.
Its really dreadful, she muttered to herself, the way all the
creatures argue.  Its enough to drive one crazy!

  The Footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for
repeating his remark, with variations.  I shall sit here, he
said, on and off, for days and days.

  But what am I to do? said Alice.

  Anything you like, said the Footman, and began whistling.

  Oh, theres no use in talking to him, said Alice desperately:
hes perfectly idiotic!  And she opened the door and went in.

  The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of
smoke from one end to the other:  the Duchess was sitting on a
threelegged stool in the middle, nursing a baby the cook was
leaning over the fire, stirring a large cauldron which seemed to
be full of soup.

  Theres certainly too much pepper in that soup! Alice said to
herself, as well as she could for sneezing.

  There was certainly too much of it in the air.  Even the
Duchess sneezed occasionally and as for the baby, it was
sneezing and howling alternately without a moments pause.  The
only things in the kitchen that did not sneeze, were the cook,
and a large cat which was sitting on the hearth and grinning from
ear to ear.

  Please would you tell me, said Alice, a little timidly, for
she was not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to
speak first, why your cat grins like that?

  Its a Cheshire cat, said the Duchess, and thats why.
Pig!

  She said the last word with such sudden violence that Alice
quite jumped but she saw in another moment that it was addressed
to the baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on
