dont take this child away with me, thought Alice, theyre sure
to kill it in a day or two:  wouldnt it be murder to leave it
behind?  She said the last words out loud, and the little thing
grunted in reply it had left off sneezing by this time.  Dont
grunt, said Alice thats not at all a proper way of expressing
yourself.

  The baby grunted again, and Alice looked very anxiously into
its face to see what was the matter with it.  There could be no
doubt that it had a VERY turnup nose, much more like a snout
than a real nose also its eyes were getting extremely small for
a baby:  altogether Alice did not like the look of the thing at
all.  But perhaps it was only sobbing, she thought, and looked
into its eyes again, to see if there were any tears.

  No, there were no tears.  If youre going to turn into a pig,
my dear, said Alice, seriously, Ill have nothing more to do
with you.  Mind now!  The poor little thing sobbed again or
grunted, it was impossible to say which, and they went on for
some while in silence.

  Alice was just beginning to think to herself, Now, what am I
to do with this creature when I get it home? when it grunted
again, so violently, that she looked down into its face in some
alarm.  This time there could be NO mistake about it:  it was
neither more nor less than a pig, and she felt that it would be
quite absurd for her to carry it further.

  So she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to
see it trot away quietly into the wood.  If it had grown up,
she said to herself, it would have made a dreadfully ugly child:
but it makes rather a handsome pig, I think.  And she began
thinking over other children she knew, who might do very well as
pigs, and was just saying to herself, if one only knew the right
way to change them when she was a little startled by seeing
the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of a tree a few yards off.

  The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice.  It looked good
natured, she thought:  still it had VERY long claws and a great
many teeth, so she felt that it ought to be treated with respect.

  Cheshire Puss, she began, rather timidly, as she did not at
all know whether it would like the name:  however, it only
grinned a little wider.  Come, its pleased so far, thought
Alice, and she went on.  Would you tell me, please, which way I
ought to go from here?

  That depends a good deal on where you want to get to, said
the Cat.

  I dont much care where said Alice.

  Then it doesnt matter which way you go, said the Cat.

  so long as I get SOMEWHERE, Alice added as an explanation.

  Oh, youre sure to do that, said the Cat, if you only walk
long enough.

  Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another
question.  What sort of people live about here?

  In THAT direction, the Cat said, waving its right paw round,
lives a Hatter:  and in THAT direction, waving the other paw,
lives a March Hare.  Visit either you like:  theyre both mad.

  But I dont want to go among mad people, Alice remarked.

  Oh, you cant help that, said the Cat:  were all mad here.
Im mad.  Youre mad.

  How do you know Im mad? said Alice.

  You must be, said the Cat, or you wouldnt have come here.

  Alice didnt think that proved it at all however, she went on
And how do you know that youre mad?

  To begin with, said the Cat, a dogs not mad.  You grant
that?

  I suppose so, said Alice.

  Well, then, the Cat went on, you see, a dog growls when its
angry, and wags its tail when its pleased.  Now I growl when Im
pleased, and wag my tail when Im angry.  Therefore Im mad.

  I call it purring, not growling, said Alice.

  Call it what you like, said the Cat.  Do you play croquet
with the Queen today?

  I should like it very much, said Alice, but I havent been
invited yet.

  Youll see me there, said the Cat, and vanished.

  Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used
to queer things happening.  While she was looking at the place
where it had been, it suddenly appeared again.

  Bythebye, what became of the baby? said the Cat.  Id
nearly forgotten to ask.

  It turned into a pig, Alice quietly said, just as if it had
come back in a natural way.

  I thought it would, said the Cat, and vanished again.

  Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it
did not appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the
direction in which the March Hare was said to live.  Ive seen
hatters before, she said to herself the March Hare will be
much the most interesting, and perhaps as this is May it wont be
raving madat least not so mad as it was in March.  As she said
this, she looked up, and there was the Cat again, sitting on a
branch of a tree.

  Did you say pig, or fig? said the Cat.

  I said pig, replied Alice and I wish you wouldnt keep
appearing and vanishing so suddenly:  you make one quite giddy.

  All right, said the Cat and this time it vanished quite
slowly, beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the
grin, which remained some time after the rest of it had gone.

  Well!  Ive often seen a cat without a grin, thought Alice
but a grin without a cat!  Its the most curious thing I ever
say in my life!

  She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the
house of the March Hare:  she thought it must be the right house,
because the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was
thatched with fur.  It was so large a house, that she did not
like to go nearer till she had nibbled some more of the lefthand
bit of mushroom, and raised herself to about two feet high:  even
then she walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself
Suppose it should be raving mad after all!  I almost wish Id
gone to see the Hatter instead!



                           CHAPTER VII

                         A Mad TeaParty


  There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house,
and the March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it:  a
Dormouse was sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other two
were using it as a cushion, resting their elbows on it, and the
talking over its head.  Very uncomfortable for the Dormouse,
thought Alice only, as its asleep, I suppose it doesnt mind.

  The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded
together at one corner of it:  No room!  No room! they cried
out when they saw Alice coming.  Theres PLENTY of room! said
Alice indignantly, and she sat down in a large armchair at one
end of the table.

  Have some wine, the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.

  Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it
but tea.  I dont see any wine, she remarked.

  There isnt any, said the March Hare.

  Then it wasnt very civil of you to offer it, said Alice
angrily.

  It wasnt very civil of you to sit down without being
invited, said the March Hare.

  I didnt know it was YOUR table, said Alice its laid for a
great many more than three.

  Your hair wants cutting, said the Hatter.  He had been
looking at Alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was
