Who all the sacred mysteries of Heaven
To their own vile advantages shall turn
Of lucre and ambition and the truth
With superstitions and traditions taint,
Left only in those written records pure,
Though not but by the Spirit understood.
Then shall they seek to avail themselves of names,
Places, and titles, and with these to join
Secular power though feigning still to act
By spiritual, to themselves appropriating
The Spirit of God, promised alike and given
To all believers and, from that pretence,
Spiritual laws by carnal power shall force
On every conscience laws which none shall find
Left them inrolled, or what the Spirit within
Shall on the heart engrave.  What will they then
But force the Spirit of Grace itself, and bind
His consort Liberty? what, but unbuild
His living temples, built by faith to stand,
Their own faith, not anothers? for, on earth,
Who against faith and conscience can be heard
Infallible? yet many will presume:
Whence heavy persecution shall arise
On all, who in the worship persevere
Of spirit and truth the rest, far greater part,
Will deem in outward rites and specious forms
Religion satisfied Truth shall retire
Bestuck with slanderous darts, and works of faith
Rarely be found:  So shall the world go on,
To good malignant, to bad men benign
Under her own weight groaning till the day
Appear of respiration to the just,
And vengeance to the wicked, at return
Of him so lately promised to thy aid,
The Womans Seed obscurely then foretold,
Now ampler known thy Saviour and thy Lord
Last, in the clouds, from Heaven to be revealed
In glory of the Father, to dissolve
Satan with his perverted world then raise
From the conflagrant mass, purged and refined,
New Heavens, new Earth, ages of endless date,
Founded in righteousness, and peace, and love
To bring forth fruits, joy and eternal bliss.
He ended and thus Adam last replied.
How soon hath thy prediction, Seer blest,
Measured this transient world, the race of time,
Till time stand fixed!  Beyond is all abyss,
Eternity, whose end no eye can reach.
Greatlyinstructed I shall hence depart
Greatly in peace of thought and have my fill
Of knowledge, what this vessel can contain
Beyond which was my folly to aspire.
Henceforth I learn, that to obey is best,
And love with fear the only God to walk
As in his presence ever to observe
His providence and on him sole depend,
Merciful over all his works, with good
Still overcoming evil, and by small
Accomplishing great things, by things deemed weak
Subverting worldly strong, and worldly wise
By simply meek: that suffering for truths sake
Is fortitude to highest victory,
And, to the faithful, death the gate of life
