Entities: Some of the nations, dependent areas, areas of special sovereignty,
and governments included in this publication are not independent, and others
are not officially recognized by the US Government. Nation refers to a
people politically organized into a sovereign state with a definite territory.
Dependent area refers to a broad category of political entities that are
associated in some way with a nation. Names used for page headings are usually
the shortform names as approved by the US Board on Geographic Names. The
longform name is included in the Government section, and an entry of
none indicates a longform name does not exist. In some instances, no
shortform name exists  then the longform name must serve for all usages.
There are 264 entities in The World Factbook that may be categorized as
follows:

NATIONS

177 UN members excluding Yugoslavia

11 nations that are not members of the UN  Andorra, Georgia, Kiribati,
Macedonia, Monaco, Nauru, Serbia and Montenegro, Switzerland, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Vatican City Holy See

OTHER

1 Taiwan

DEPENDENT AREAS

6 Australia  Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Christmas Island, Cocos Keeling
Islands, Coral Sea Islands, Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Norfolk Island

2 Denmark  Faroe Islands, Greenland

16 France  Bassas da India, Clipperton Island, Europa Island, French Guiana,
French Polynesia, French Southern and Antarctic Lands, Glorioso Islands,
Guadeloupe, Juan de Nova Island, Martinique, Mayotte, New Caledonia, Reunion,
Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Tromelin Island, Wallis and Futuna

2 Netherlands  Aruba, Netherlands Antilles

3 New Zealand  Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau

3 Norway  Bouvet Island, Jan Mayen, Svalbard

1 Portugal  Macau

16 United Kingdom  Anguilla, Bermuda, British Indian Ocean Territory, British
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, Gibraltar, Guernsey,
Hong Kong, Isle of Man, Jersey, Montserrat, Pitcairn Islands, Saint Helena,
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands

15 United States  American Samoa, Baker Island, Guam, Howland Island, Jarvis
Island, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Midway Islands, Navassa Island, Northern
Mariana Islands, Palmyra Atoll, Puerto Rico, Trust Territory of the Pacific
Islands Palau, Virgin Islands, Wake Island

MISCELLANEOUS

6 Antarctica, Gaza Strip, Paracel Islands, Spratly Islands, West Bank, Western
Sahara

OTHER ENTITIES

4 oceans  Arctic Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, Indian Ocean, Pacific Ocean

1 World

264 total

note: The US Government does not recognize the four socalled independent
homelands of Bophuthatswana, Ciskei, Transkei, and Venda in South Africa.

Gross domestic product GDP: The value of all goods and services produced
domestically.

Gross national product GNP: The value of all goods and services produced
domestically plus income earned abroad, minus income earned by foreigners
from domestic production.

GNPGDP methodology: In the Economy section, GNPGDP dollar estimates for
the OECD countries, the former Soviet republics, and the East European
countries are derived from purchasing power parity PPP calculations rather
than from conversions at official currency exchange rates. The PPP method
normally involves the use of international dollar price weights, which are
applied to the quantities of goods and services produced in a given economy.
In addition to the lack of reliable data from the majority of countries, the
statistician faces a major difficulty in specifying, identifying, and allowing
for the quality of goods and services. The division of a PPP GNPGDP estimate
in dollars by the corresponding estimate in the local currency gives the PPP
conversion rate. One thousand dollars will buy the same market basket of goods
in the US as one thousand dollars  converted to the local currency at the PPP
conversion rate  will buy in the other country. GNPGDP estimates for the
LDCs, on the other hand, are based on the conversion of GNPGDP estimates in
local currencies to dollars at the official currency exchange rates. One
caution: the proportion of, say, defense expenditures as a percent of GNPGDP
in local currency accounts may differ substantially from the proportion when
GNPGDP accounts are expressed in PPP terms, as, for example, when an observer
estimates the dollar level of Russian or Japanese military expenditures
similar problems exist when components are expressed in dollars under currency
exchange rate procedures. Finally, as academic research moves forward on the
PPP method, we hope to convert all GNPGDP estimates to this method in future
editions of The World Factbook.

Growth rate population: The annual percent change in the population,
resulting from a surplus or deficit of births over deaths and the balance
of migrants entering and leaving a country. The rate may be positive or
negative.

Illicit drugs: There are five categories of illicit drugs  narcotics,
stimulants, depressants sedatives, hallucinogens, and cannabis. These
categories include many drugs legally produced and prescribed by doctors as
well as those illegally produced and sold outside medical channels.

Cannabis Cannabis sativa is the common hemp plant, which provides
hallucinogens with some sedative properties, and includes marijuana pot,
Acapulco gold, grass, reefer, tetrahydrocannabinol THC, Marinol, hashish
hash, and hashish oil hash oil.

Coca Erythroxylon coca is a bush, and the leaves contain the stimulant
cocaine. Coca is not to be confused with cocoa, which comes from cacao seeds
and is used in making chocolate, cocoa, and cocoa butter.

Cocaine is a stimulant derived from the leaves of the coca bush.

Depressants sedatives are drugs that reduce tension and anxiety and include
chloral hydrate, barbiturates Amytal, Nembutal, Seconal, phenobarbital,
benzodiazepines Librium, Valium, methaqualone Quaalude, glutethimide
Doriden, and others Equanil, Placidyl, Valmid.

Drugs are any chemical substances that effect a physical, mental, emotional,
or behavioral change in an individual.

Drug abuse is the use of any licit or illicit chemical substance that results
in physical, mental, emotional, or behavioral impairment in an individual.

Hallucinogens are drugs that affect sensation, thinking, selfawareness, and
emotion.

Hallucinogens include LSD acid, microdot, mescaline and peyote mexc,
buttons, cactus, amphetamine variants PMA, STP, DOB, phencyclidine PCP,
angel dust, hog, phencyclidine analogues PCE, PCPy, TCP, and others
psilocybin, psilocyn.

Hashish is the resinous exudate of the cannabis or hemp plant Cannabis
sativa.

Heroin is a semisynthetic derivative of morphine.

Marijuana is the dried leaves of the cannabis or hemp plant Cannabis sativa.

Narcotics are drugs that relieve pain, often induce sleep, and refer to opium,
opium derivatives, and synthetic substitutes. Natural narcotics include opium
paregoric, parepectolin, morphine MSContin, Roxanol, codeine Tylenol
wcodeine, Empirin wcodeine, Robitussan AC, and thebaine. Semisynthetic
narcotics include heroin horse, smack, and hydromorphone Dilaudid.
Synthetic narcotics include meperidine or Pethidine Demerol, Mepergan,
methadone Dolophine, Methadose, and others Darvon, Lomotil.

Opium is the milky exudate of the incised, unripe seedpod of the opium poppy.

Opium poppy Papaver somniferum is the source for many natural and
semisynthetic narcotics.

Poppy straw concentrate is the alkaloid derived from the mature dried opium
poppy.

Qat kat, khat is a stimulant from the buds or leaves of Catha edulis that
is chewed or drunk as tea.

Stimulants are drugs that relieve mild depression, increase energy and
activity, and include cocaine coke, snow, crack, amphetamines Desoxyn,
Dexedrine, phenmetrazine Preludin, methylphenidate Ritalin, and others
Cylert, Sanorex, Tenuate.

Infant mortality rate: The number of deaths to infants under one year old in
a given year per l,000 live births occurring in the same year.

Land use: Human use of the land surface is categorized as arable land  land
cultivated for crops that are replanted after each harvest wheat, maize,
rice permanent crops  land cultivated for crops that are not replanted
after each harvest citrus, coffee, rubber meadows and pastures  land
permanently used for herbaceous forage crops forest and woodland  land
under dense or open stands of trees and other  any land type not specifi
cally mentioned above urban areas, roads, desert. The percentage figure for
irrigated land refers to the portion of the entire amount of land area that
is artificially supplied with water.

Leaders: The chief of state is the titular leader of the country who
represents the state at official and ceremonial funcions but is not involved
with the daytoday activities of the government. The head of government is
the administrative leader who manages the daytoday activities of the
government. In the UK, the monarch is the chief of state, and the Prime
Minister is the head of government. In the US, the President is both the
chief of state and the head of government.

Life expectancy at birth: The average number of years to be lived by a group
of people all born in the same year, if mortality at each age remains
constant in the future.

Literacy: There are no universal definitions and standards of literacy.
Unless otherwise noted, all rates are based on the most common definition 
the ability to read and write at a specified age. Detailing the standards
that individual countries use to assess the ability to read and write is
beyond the scope of this publication.

Maps: All maps will be available only in the printed version for the fore
seeable future.

Maritime claims: The proximity of neighboring states may prevent some
national claims from being fully extended.

Merchant marine: All ships engaged in the carriage of goods. All commercial
vessels as opposed to all nonmilitary ships, which excludes tugs, fishing
vessels, offshore oil rigs, etc. also, a grouping of merchant ships by
nationality or register.

Captive register  A register of ships maintained by a territory, possession,
or colony primarily or exclusively for the use of ships owned in the parent
country also referred to as an offshore register, the offshore equivalent
of an internal register. Ships on a captive register will fly the same flag
as the parent country, or a local variant of it, but will be subject to the
maritime laws and taxation rules of the offshore territory. Although the
nature of a captive register makes it especially desirable for ships owned in
the parent country, just as in the internal register, the ships may also be
owned abroad. The captive register then acts as a flag of convenience
register, except that it is not the register of an independent state.

Flag of convenience register  A national register offering registration to a
merchant ship not owned in the flag state. The major flags of convenience
FOC attract ships to their register by virtue of low fees, low or
nonexistent taxation of profits, and liberal manning requirements. True FOC
