	When that I say the citywoman bears
	The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?
	Who can come in and say that I mean her,
	When such a one as she such is her neighbour?
	Or what is he of basest function
	That says his bravery is not of my cost,
	Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
	His folly to the mettle of my speech?
	There then how then? what then? Let me see wherein
	My tongue hath wrongd him: if it do him right,
	Then he hath wrongd himself if he be free,
	Why then my taxing like a wildgoose flies,
	Unclaimd of any man. But who comes here?

	Enter ORLANDO, with his sword drawn

ORLANDO	Forbear, and eat no more.

JAQUES	Why, I have eat none yet.

ORLANDO	Nor shalt not, till necessity be served.

JAQUES	Of what kind should this cock come of?

DUKE SENIOR	Art thou thus boldend, man, by thy distress,
	Or else a rude despiser of good manners,
	That in civility thou seemst so empty?

ORLANDO	You touchd my vein at first: the thorny point
	Of bare distress hath taen from me the show
	Of smooth civility: yet am I inland bred
	And know some nurture. But forbear, I say:
	He dies that touches any of this fruit
	Till I and my affairs are answered.

JAQUES	An you will not be answered with reason, I must die.

DUKE SENIOR	What would you have? Your gentleness shall force
	More than your force move us to gentleness.

ORLANDO	I almost die for food and let me have it.

DUKE SENIOR	Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.

ORLANDO	Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you:
	I thought that all things had been savage here
	And therefore put I on the countenance
	Of stern commandment. But whateer you are
	That in this desert inaccessible,
	Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
	Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time
	If ever you have lookd on better days,
	If ever been where bells have knolld to church,
	If ever sat at any good mans feast,
	If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear
	And know what tis to pity and be pitied,
	Let gentleness my strong enforcement be:
	In the which hope I blush, and hide my sword.

DUKE SENIOR	True is it that we have seen better days,
	And have with holy bell been knolld to church
	And sat at good mens feasts and wiped our eyes
	Of drops that sacred pity hath engenderd:
	And therefore sit you down in gentleness
	And take upon command what help we have
	That to your wanting may be ministerd.

ORLANDO	Then but forbear your food a little while,
	Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn
	And give it food. There is an old poor man,
	Who after me hath many a weary step
	Limpd in pure love: till he be first sufficed,
	Oppressd with two weak evils, age and hunger,
	I will not touch a bit.

DUKE SENIOR	Go find him out,
	And we will nothing waste till you return.

ORLANDO	I thank ye and be blest for your good comfort!

	Exit

DUKE SENIOR	Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy:
	This wide and universal theatre
	Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
	Wherein we play in.

JAQUES	All the worlds a stage,
	And all the men and women merely players:
	They have their exits and their entrances
	And one man in his time plays many parts,
	His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
	Mewling and puking in the nurses arms.
	And then the whining schoolboy, with his satchel
	And shining morning face, creeping like snail
	Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
	Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
	Made to his mistress eyebrow. Then a soldier,
	Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,
	Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
	Seeking the bubble reputation
	Even in the cannons mouth. And then the justice,
	In fair round belly with good capon lined,
	With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
	Full of wise saws and modern instances
	And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
	Into the lean and slipperd pantaloon,
	With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
	His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide
	For his shrunk shank and his big manly voice,
	Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
	And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
	That ends this strange eventful history,
	Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
	Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.

	Reenter ORLANDO, with ADAM

DUKE SENIOR	Welcome. Set down your venerable burthen,
	And let him feed.

ORLANDO	I thank you most for him.

ADAM	So had you need:
	I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.

DUKE SENIOR	Welcome fall to: I will not trouble you
	As yet, to question you about your fortunes.
	Give us some music and, good cousin, sing.

	SONG.
AMIENS	Blow, blow, thou winter wind.
	Thou art not so unkind
	As mans ingratitude
	Thy tooth is not so keen,
	Because thou art not seen,
	Although thy breath be rude.
	Heighho! sing, heighho! unto the green holly:
	Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:
	Then, heighho, the holly!
	This life is most jolly.
	Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
	That dost not bite so nigh
	As benefits forgot:
	Though thou the waters warp,
	Thy sting is not so sharp
	As friend rememberd not.
	Heighho! sing, c.

DUKE SENIOR	If that you were the good Sir Rowlands son,
	As you have whisperd faithfully you were,
	And as mine eye doth his effigies witness
	Most truly limnd and living in your face,
	Be truly welcome hither: I am the duke
	That loved your father: the residue of your fortune,
	Go to my cave and tell me. Good old man,
	Thou art right welcome as thy master is.
	Support him by the arm. Give me your hand,
	And let me all your fortunes understand.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE I	A room in the palace.


	Enter DUKE FREDERICK, Lords, and OLIVER

DUKE FREDERICK	Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be:
	But were I not the better part made mercy,
	I should not seek an absent argument
	Of my revenge, thou present. But look to it:
	Find out thy brother, wheresoeer he is
	Seek him with candle bring him dead or living
	Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more
	To seek a living in our territory.
	Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine
	Worth seizure do we seize into our hands,
	Till thou canst quit thee by thy brothers mouth
	Of what we think against thee.

OLIVER	O that your highness knew my heart in this!
	I never loved my brother in my life.

DUKE FREDERICK	More villain thou. Well, push him out of doors
	And let my officers of such a nature
	Make an extent upon his house and lands:
	Do this expediently and turn him going.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE II	The forest.


