To whom thus Michael.  Doubt not but that sin
Will reign among them, as of thee begot
And therefore was law given them, to evince
Their natural pravity, by stirring up
Sin against law to fight: that when they see
Law can discover sin, but not remove,
Save by those shadowy expiations weak,
The blood of bulls and goats, they may conclude
Some blood more precious must be paid for Man
Just for unjust that, in such righteousness
To them by faith imputed, they may find
Justification towards God, and peace
Of conscience which the law by ceremonies
Cannot appease nor Man the mortal part
Perform and, not performing, cannot live.
So law appears imperfect and but given
With purpose to resign them, in full time,
Up to a better covenant disciplined
From shadowy types to truth from flesh to spirit
From imposition of strict laws to free
Acceptance of large grace from servile fear
To filial works of law to works of faith.
And therefore shall not Moses, though of God
Highly beloved, being but the minister
Of law, his people into Canaan lead
But Joshua, whom the Gentiles Jesus call,
His name and office bearing, who shall quell
The adversarySerpent, and bring back
Through the worlds wilderness longwandered Man
Safe to eternal Paradise of rest.
Mean while they, in their earthly Canaan placed,
Long time shall dwell and prosper, but when sins
National interrupt their publick peace,
Provoking God to raise them enemies
From whom as oft he saves them penitent
By Judges first, then under Kings of whom
The second, both for piety renowned
And puissant deeds, a promise shall receive
Irrevocable, that his regal throne
For ever shall endure the like shall sing
All Prophecy, that of the royal stock
Of David so I name this king shall rise
A Son, the Womans seed to thee foretold,
Foretold to Abraham, as in whom shall trust
All nations and to kings foretold, of kings
The last for of his reign shall be no end.
But first, a long succession must ensue
And his next son, for wealth and wisdom famed,
The clouded ark of God, till then in tents
Wandering, shall in a glorious temple enshrine.
Such follow him, as shall be registered
Part good, part bad of bad the longer scroll
Whose foul idolatries, and other faults
Heaped to the popular sum, will so incense
God, as to leave them, and expose their land,
Their city, his temple, and his holy ark,
With all his sacred things, a scorn and prey
To that proud city, whose high walls thou sawest
Left in confusion Babylon thence called.
There in captivity he lets them dwell
The space of seventy years then brings them back,
Remembering mercy, and his covenant sworn
To David, stablished as the days of Heaven.
Returned from Babylon by leave of kings
Their lords, whom God disposed, the house of God
They first reedify and for a while
In mean estate live moderate till, grown
In wealth and multitude, factious they grow
But first among the priests dissention springs,
Men who attend the altar, and should most
Endeavour peace: their strife pollution brings
Upon the temple itself: at last they seise
The scepter, and regard not Davids sons
Then lose it to a stranger, that the true
Anointed King Messiah might be born
Barred of his right yet at his birth a star,
Unseen before in Heaven, proclaims him come
And guides the eastern sages, who inquire
His place, to offer incense, myrrh, and gold:
His place of birth a solemn Angel tells
To simple shepherds, keeping watch by night
They gladly thither haste, and by a quire
Of squadroned Angels hear his carol sung.
A virgin is his mother, but his sire
The power of the Most High:  He shall ascend
The throne hereditary, and bound his reign
With Earths wide bounds, his glory with the Heavens.
He ceased, discerning Adam with such joy
Surcharged, as had like grief been dewed in tears,
Without the vent of words which these he breathed.
O prophet of glad tidings, finisher
Of utmost hope! now clear I understand
What oft my steadiest thoughts have searched in vain
Why our great Expectation should be called
The seed of Woman:  Virgin Mother, hail,
High in the love of Heaven yet from my loins
Thou shalt proceed, and from thy womb the Son
Of God Most High: so God with Man unites!
Needs must the Serpent now his capital bruise
Expect with mortal pain:  Say where and when
Their fight, what stroke shall bruise the victors heel.
To whom thus Michael.  Dream not of their fight,
As of a duel, or the local wounds
Of head or heel:  Not therefore joins the Son
Manhood to Godhead, with more strength to foil
Thy enemy nor so is overcome
Satan, whose fall from Heaven, a deadlier bruise,
Disabled, not to give thee thy deaths wound:
Which he, who comes thy Saviour, shall recure,
Not by destroying Satan, but his works
In thee, and in thy seed:  Nor can this be,
But by fulfilling that which thou didst want,
Obedience to the law of God, imposed
On penalty of death, and suffering death
The penalty to thy transgression due,
And due to theirs which out of thine will grow:
So only can high Justice rest appaid.
The law of God exact he shall fulfil
Both by obedience and by love, though love
Alone fulfil the law thy punishment
He shall endure, by coming in the flesh
To a reproachful life, and cursed death
Proclaiming life to all who shall believe
In his redemption and that his obedience,
Imputed, becomes theirs by faith his merits
To save them, not their own, though legal, works.
For this he shall live hated, be blasphemed,
Seised on by force, judged, and to death condemned
A shameful and accursed, nailed to the cross
By his own nation slain for bringing life:
But to the cross he nails thy enemies,
The law that is against thee, and the sins
Of all mankind, with him there crucified,
Never to hurt them more who rightly trust
In this his satisfaction so he dies,
But soon revives Death over him no power
Shall long usurp ere the third dawning light
Return, the stars of morn shall see him rise
Out of his grave, fresh as the dawning light,
Thy ransom paid, which Man from death redeems,
His death for Man, as many as offered life
Neglect not, and the benefit embrace
By faith not void of works:  This Godlike act
Annuls thy doom, the death thou shouldest have died,
In sin for ever lost from life this act
Shall bruise the head of Satan, crush his strength,
Defeating Sin and Death, his two main arms
And fix far deeper in his head their stings
Than temporal death shall bruise the victors heel,
Or theirs whom he redeems a death, like sleep,
A gentle wafting to immortal life.
Nor after resurrection shall he stay
Longer on earth, than certain times to appear
To his disciples, men who in his life
Still followed him to them shall leave in charge
To teach all nations what of him they learned
And his salvation them who shall believe
Baptizing in the profluent stream, the sign
Of washing them from guilt of sin to life
Pure, and in mind prepared, if so befall,
For death, like that which the Redeemer died.
All nations they shall teach for, from that day,
Not only to the sons of Abrahams loins
Salvation shall be preached, but to the sons
Of Abrahams faith wherever through the world
So in his seed all nations shall be blest.
Then to the Heaven of Heavens he shall ascend
With victory, triumphing through the air
Over his foes and thine there shall surprise
The Serpent, prince of air, and drag in chains
Through all his realm, and there confounded leave
Then enter into glory, and resume
His seat at Gods right hand, exalted high
Above all names in Heaven and thence shall come,
When this worlds dissolution shall be ripe,
With glory and power to judge both quick and dead
To judge the unfaithful dead, but to reward
His faithful, and receive them into bliss,
Whether in Heaven or Earth for then the Earth
Shall all be Paradise, far happier place
Than this of Eden, and far happier days.
So spake the ArchAngel Michael then paused,
As at the worlds great period and our sire,
Replete with joy and wonder, thus replied.
O Goodness infinite, Goodness immense!
That all this good of evil shall produce,
And evil turn to good more wonderful
Than that which by creation first brought forth
Light out of darkness!  Full of doubt I stand,
Whether I should repent me now of sin
By me done, and occasioned or rejoice
Much more, that much more good thereof shall spring
To God more glory, more goodwill to Men
From God, and over wrath grace shall abound.
But say, if our Deliverer up to Heaven
Must reascend, what will betide the few
His faithful, left among the unfaithful herd,
The enemies of truth?  Who then shall guide
His people, who defend?  Will they not deal
Worse with his followers than with him they dealt?
Be sure they will, said the Angel but from Heaven
He to his own a Comforter will send,
The promise of the Father, who shall dwell
His Spirit within them and the law of faith,
Working through love, upon their hearts shall write,
To guide them in all truth and also arm
With spiritual armour, able to resist
Satans assaults, and quench his fiery darts
What man can do against them, not afraid,
Though to the death against such cruelties
With inward consolations recompensed,
And oft supported so as shall amaze
Their proudest persecutors:  For the Spirit,
Poured first on his Apostles, whom he sends
To evangelize the nations, then on all
Baptized, shall them with wonderous gifts endue
To speak all tongues, and do all miracles,
As did their Lord before them.  Thus they win
Great numbers of each nation to receive
With joy the tidings brought from Heaven:  At length
Their ministry performed, and race well run,
Their doctrine and their story written left,
They die but in their room, as they forewarn,
Wolves shall succeed for teachers, grievous wolves,
Who all the sacred mysteries of Heaven
To their own vile advantages shall turn
Of lucre and ambition and the truth
With superstitions and traditions taint,
Left only in those written records pure,
Though not but by the Spirit understood.
Then shall they seek to avail themselves of names,
Places, and titles, and with these to join
Secular power though feigning still to act
By spiritual, to themselves appropriating
The Spirit of God, promised alike and given
To all believers and, from that pretence,
Spiritual laws by carnal power shall force
On every conscience laws which none shall find
Left them inrolled, or what the Spirit within
Shall on the heart engrave.  What will they then
But force the Spirit of Grace itself, and bind
His consort Liberty? what, but unbuild
His living temples, built by faith to stand,
Their own faith, not anothers? for, on earth,
Who against faith and conscience can be heard
Infallible? yet many will presume:
Whence heavy persecution shall arise
On all, who in the worship persevere
Of spirit and truth the rest, far greater part,
Will deem in outward rites and specious forms
Religion satisfied Truth shall retire
Bestuck with slanderous darts, and works of faith
Rarely be found:  So shall the world go on,
To good malignant, to bad men benign
Under her own weight groaning till the day
Appear of respiration to the just,
And vengeance to the wicked, at return
Of him so lately promised to thy aid,
The Womans Seed obscurely then foretold,
Now ampler known thy Saviour and thy Lord
Last, in the clouds, from Heaven to be revealed
In glory of the Father, to dissolve
Satan with his perverted world then raise
From the conflagrant mass, purged and refined,
New Heavens, new Earth, ages of endless date,
Founded in righteousness, and peace, and love
To bring forth fruits, joy and eternal bliss.
He ended and thus Adam last replied.
How soon hath thy prediction, Seer blest,
Measured this transient world, the race of time,
Till time stand fixed!  Beyond is all abyss,
Eternity, whose end no eye can reach.
Greatlyinstructed I shall hence depart
Greatly in peace of thought and have my fill
Of knowledge, what this vessel can contain
Beyond which was my folly to aspire.
Henceforth I learn, that to obey is best,
And love with fear the only God to walk
As in his presence ever to observe
His providence and on him sole depend,
Merciful over all his works, with good
Still overcoming evil, and by small
Accomplishing great things, by things deemed weak
Subverting worldly strong, and worldly wise
By simply meek: that suffering for truths sake
Is fortitude to highest victory,
And, to the faithful, death the gate of life
Taught this by his example, whom I now
Acknowledge my Redeemer ever blest.
To whom thus also the Angel last replied.
This having learned, thou hast attained the sum
Of wisdom hope no higher, though all the stars
Thou knewest by name, and all the ethereal powers,
All secrets of the deep, all Natures works,
Or works of God in Heaven, air, earth, or sea,
And all the riches of this world enjoyedst,
And all the rule, one empire only add
Deeds to thy knowledge answerable add faith,
Add virtue, patience, temperance add love,
By name to come called charity, the soul
Of all the rest: then wilt thou not be loth
To leave this Paradise, but shalt possess
A Paradise within thee, happier far.
Let us descend now therefore from this top
Of speculation for the hour precise
Exacts our parting hence and see!the guards,
By me encamped on yonder hill, expect
Their motion at whose front a flaming sword,
In signal of remove, waves fiercely round:
We may no longer stay: go, waken Eve
Her also I with gentle dreams have calmed
Portending good, and all her spirits composed
To meek submission: thou, at season fit,
Let her with thee partake what thou hast heard
Chiefly what may concern her faith to know,
The great deliverance by her seed to come
For by the Womans seed on all mankind:
That ye may live, which will be many days,
Both in one faith unanimous, though sad,
With cause, for evils past yet much more cheered
With meditation on the happy end.
He ended, and they both descend the hill
Descended, Adam to the bower, where Eve
Lay sleeping, ran before but found her waked
And thus with words not sad she him received.
Whence thou returnest, and whither wentest, I know
For God is also in sleep and dreams advise,
Which he hath sent propitious, some great good
Presaging, since with sorrow and hearts distress
Wearied I fell asleep:  But now lead on
In me is no delay with thee to go,
Is to stay here without thee here to stay,
Is to go hence unwilling thou to me
Art all things under Heaven, all places thou,
Who for my wilful crime art banished hence.
This further consolation yet secure
I carry hence though all by me is lost,
Such favour I unworthy am vouchsafed,
By me the Promised Seed shall all restore.
So spake our mother Eve and Adam heard
Well pleased, but answered not:  For now, too nigh
The ArchAngel stood and, from the other hill
To their fixed station, all in bright array
The Cherubim descended on the ground
Gliding meteorous, as eveningmist
Risen from a river oer the marish glides,
And gathers ground fast at the labourers heel
Homeward returning.  High in front advanced,
The brandished sword of God before them blazed,
Fierce as a comet which with torrid heat,
And vapour as the Libyan air adust,
Began to parch that temperate clime whereat
In either hand the hastening Angel caught
Our lingering parents, and to the eastern gate
Led them direct, and down the cliff as fast
To the subjected plain then disappeared.
They, looking back, all the eastern side beheld
Of Paradise, so late their happy seat,
Waved over by that flaming brand the gate
With dreadful faces thronged, and fiery arms:
Some natural tears they dropt, but wiped them soon
The world was all before them, where to choose
Their place of rest, and Providence their guide:
They, hand in hand, with wandering steps and slow,
Through Eden took their solitary way.

The Project Gutenberg Edition of THE WORLD FACTBOOK 1992
This file should be named world92.zip or world92.txt

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, world921.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, world92a.txt.

Information about Project Gutenberg one page

We produce about one million dollars for each hour we work.  One
hundred hours is a conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar, then we produce a
million dollars per hour next year we will have to do four text
files per month, thus upping our productivity to two millionhr.
The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  10,000 x 100,000,000Trillion
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers.

We need your donations more than ever!

All donations should be made to "Project GutenbergIBC", and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law "IBC" is Illinois
Benedictine College.  Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go
to IBC, too

For these and other matters, please mail to:

David Turner, Project Gutenberg
Illinois  Benedictine  College
5700  College  Road
Lisle, IL 605320900

Email requests to:
Internet:    chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu David Turner
Compuserve:  chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu David Turner
Attmail:     internet!chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu David Turner
MCImail:     David Turner
ADDRESS TYPE: MCI  EMS: INTERNET  MBX:chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu

When all other email fails try our Michael S. Hart, Executive Director:
hartvmd.cso.uiuc.edu internet   hartuiucvmd   bitnet

We would prefer to send you this information by email
Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail.


If you have an FTP program or emulator, please:

FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
ftp mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  yourlogin
cd etextetext91
or cd etext92 for new books  now also cd etextetext92
or cd etextarticles get suggest gut for more information
dir to see files
get or mget to get files. . .set bin for zip files
GET INDEX and AAINDEX
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT for newsletters.

Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor
Three Pages

STARTTHE SMALL PRINT!FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTSSTART

Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if whats wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

BEFORE! YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT

By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERGtm etext,
you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept this
"Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive a
refund of the money if any you paid for this etext by sending
a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person you got
it from.  If you received this etext on a physical medium such
as a disk, you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERGTM ETEXTS

This PROJECT GUTENBERGtm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERGtm
etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association the
"Project".  Among other things, this means that no one owns a
United States copyright on or for this work, so the Project and
you! can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special
rules, set forth below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute
this etext under the Projects "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable efforts
to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain works.
Despite these efforts, the Projects etexts and any medium they
may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other things, Defects
may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data,
transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property
infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other etext medium,
a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be
read by your equipment.

DISCLAIMER

But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
1 the Project and any other party you may receive this etext
from as a PROJECT GUTENBERGtm etext disclaims all liability to
you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees, and
2 YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR UNDER STRICT LIABILI
TY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL
DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money if any you
paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that time to
the person you received it from.  If you received it on a
physical medium, you must return it with your note, and such
person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement copy.
If you received it electronically, such person may choose to
alternatively give you a second opportunity to receive it elec
tronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "ASIS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY

You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise from any
distribution of this etext for which you are responsible, and
from 1 any alteration, modification or addition to the etext
for which you are responsible, or 2 any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERGtm"

You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this "Small
Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg, or:

1  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this re
     quires that you do not remove, alter or modify the etext or
     this "small print!" statement.  You may however, if you
     wish, distribute this etext in machine readable binary,
     compressed, markup, or proprietary form, including any
     form resulting from conversion by word processing or hyper
     text software, but only so long as EITHER:

       The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable.  We
          consider an etext not clearly readable if it
          contains characters other than those intended by the
          author of the work, although tilde ~, asterisk 
          and underline  characters may be used to convey
          punctuation intended by the author, and additional
          characters may be used to indicate hypertext links.

       The etext may be readily converted by the reader at no
          expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent form
          by the program that displays the etext as is the
          case, for instance, with most word processors.

       You provide, or agree to also provide on request at no
          additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the etext
          in its original plain ASCII form or in EBCDIC or
          other equivalent proprietary form.

2   Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

3  Pay a trademark license fee of 20 twenty percent of the
     net profits you derive from distributing this etext under
     the trademark, determined in accordance with generally
     accepted accounting practices.  The license fee:

       Is required only if you derive such profits.  In
          distributing under our trademark, you incur no
          obligation to charge money or earn profits for your
          distribution.

       Shall be paid to "Project Gutenberg Association 
          Illinois Benedictine College" or to such other person
          as the Project Gutenberg Association may direct
          within the 60 days following each date you prepare or
          were legally required to prepare your yearend tax
          return with respect to your income for that year.

WHAT IF YOU WANT TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DONT HAVE TO?

The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association  Illinois Benedictine College".

WRITE TO US!  We can be reached at:

Project Gutenberg Director of Communications PGDIRCOM

Internet:     pgdircomvmd.cso.uiuc.edu
Bitnet:       pgdircomuiucvmd
CompuServe:   >internet:pgdircom.vmd.cso.uiuc.edu
Attmail:      internet!vmd.cso.uiuc.edu!pgdircom

Drafted by CHARLES B. KRAMER, Attorney
CompuServe:  72600,2026
  Internet:  72600.2026compuserve.com
       Tel:  212 2545093
ENDTHE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTSVer.07.02.92END



The Project Gutenberg Edition of THE WORLD FACTBOOK 1992:    January 1, 1993

This edition, as are all Project Gutenberg Editions, is Plain Vanilla ASCII,
meaning there are no characters other than what you would see on paper, thus
no page returns, no markup, nothing but the characters you would type if you
were to copy this from a book on a typewriter.  Repetitive paged headers and
trailing spaces are not present.  Leading spaces have been preserved in fact
sections for readability.

Mail subject headers can be searched with leading :s. . .such as:

:Afghanistan Geography
:Afghanistan People
:Afghanistan Government
:Afghanistan Government
:Afghanistan Economy
:Afghanistan Economy
:Afghanistan Communications
:Afghanistan Defense Forces

To find the beginning of any country, search for :country
To find internal information, search for :country section, as above.


THE WORLD FACTBOOK 1992


:Afghanistan Geography

Total area:
    647,500 km2
Land area:
    647,500 km2
Comparative area:
    slightly smaller than Texas
Land boundaries:
    5,529 km total China 76 km, Iran 936 km, Pakistan 2,430 km, Tajikistan
    1,206 km, Turkmenistan 744 km, Uzbekistan 137 km
Coastline:
    none  landlocked
Maritime claims:
    none  landlocked
Disputes:
    Pashtunistan issue over the NorthWest Frontier Province with Pakistan
    periodic disputes with Iran over Helmand water rights Pakistan, Saudi
    Arabia, and Iran continue to support clients in country power struggles
    among various groups for control of Kabul, regional rivalries among emerging
    warlords, and traditional tribal disputes continue
Climate:
    arid to semiarid cold winters and hot summers
Terrain:
    mostly rugged mountains plains in north and southwest
Natural resources:
    natural gas, crude oil, coal, copper, talc, barites, sulphur, lead, zinc,
    iron ore, salt, precious and semiprecious stones
Land use:
    arable land 12 permanent crops NEGL meadows and pastures 46 forest and
    woodland 3 other 39 includes irrigated NEGL
Environment:
    damaging earthquakes occur in Hindu Kush mountains soil degradation,
    desertification, overgrazing, deforestation, pollution
Note:
    landlocked

:Afghanistan People

Population:
    US Bureau of the Census  16,095,664 July 1992, growth rate 2.4 1992
    and excludes 3,750,796 refugees in Pakistan and 1,607,281 refugees in Iran
    note  another report indicates a July 1990 population of 16,904,904,
    including 3,271,580 refugees in Pakistan and 1,277,700 refugees in Iran
Birth rate:
    44 births1,000 population 1992
Death rate:
    20 deaths1,000 population 1992
Net migration rate:
    0 migrants1,000 population 1992 note  there are flows across the border
    in both directions, but data are fragmentary and unreliable
Infant mortality rate:
    162 deaths1,000 live births 1992
Life expectancy at birth:
    45 years male, 43 years female 1992
Total fertility rate:
    6.4 children bornwoman 1992
Nationality:
    noun  Afghans adjective  Afghan
Ethnic divisions:
    Pashtun 38, Tajik 25, Uzbek 6, Hazara 19 minor ethnic groups include
    Chahar Aimaks, Turkmen, Baloch, and others
Religions:
    Sunni Muslim 84, Shia Muslim 15, other 1
Languages:
    Pashtu 35, Afghan Persian Dari 50, Turkic languages primarily Uzbek and
    Turkmen 11, 30 minor languages primarily Balochi and Pashai 4 much
    bilingualism
Literacy:
    29 male 44, female 14 age 15 and over can read and write 1990 est.
Labor force:
    4,980,000 agriculture and animal husbandry 67.8, industry 10.2,
    construction 6.3, commerce 5.0, services and other 10.7, 1980 est.
Organized labor:
    some small governmentcontrolled unions existed under the former regime but
    probably now have disbanded

:Afghanistan Government

Longform name:
    Islamic State of Afghanistan
Type:
    transitional
Capital:
    Kabul
Administrative divisions:
    30 provinces velayat, singular  velayat Badakhshan, Badghis, Baghlan,
    Balkh, Bamian, Farah, Faryab, Ghazni, Ghowr, Helmand, Herat, Jowzjan, Kabol,
    Kandahar, Kapisa, Konar, Kondoz, Laghman, Lowgar, Nangarhar, Nimruz,
    Oruzgan, Paktia, Paktika, Parvan, Samangan, Sare Pol, Takhar, Vardak,
    Zabol note  there may be a new province of Nurestan Nuristan
Independence:
    19 August 1919 from UK
Constitution:
    the old Communistera constitution probably will be replaced with an Islamic
    constitution
Legal system:
    a new legal system has not been adopted but the transitional government has
    declared it will follow Islamic law Sharia
National holiday:
    28 April, Victory of the Muslim Nation 4 May, Remembrance Day for Martyrs
    and Disabled 19 August, Independence Day
Executive branch:
    a 51member transitional council headed by Sibghatullah MOJADDEDI rules
    Kabul this body is to turn over power to a leadership council, which will
    function as the government and organize elections Burhanuddin RABBANI will
    serve as interim President
Legislative branch:
    previous bicameral legislature has been abolished
Judicial branch:
    an interim Chief Justice of the Supreme Court has been appointed, but a new
    court system has not yet been organized
Leaders:
  Chief of State and Head of Government:
    Interim President Burhanuddin RABBANI First Vice President Abdul Wahed
    SORABI since 7 January 1991 Prime Minister Fazil Haq KHALIQYAR since 21
    May 1990
Political parties and leaders:
    the former resistance parties represent the only current political
    organizations and include JamiatiIslami Islamic Society, Burhanuddin
    RABBANI Hizbi IslamiGulbuddin Islamic Party, Gulbuddin Hikmatyar
    Faction Hizbi IslamiKhalis Islamic Party Yunis Khalis Faction
    IttihadiIslami Barai Azadi Afghanistan Islamic Union for the Liberation
    of Afghanistan, Abdul Rasul SAYYAF HarakatInqilabiIslami Islamic
    Revolutionary Movement, Mohammad Nabi MOHAMMADI JabhaiNajatiMilli
    Afghanistan Afghanistan National Liberation Front, Sibghatullah MOJADDEDI
    MahaziMilliIslami National Islamic Front, Sayed Ahamad GAILANI
    JonbeshiMilli Islami National Islamic Movement, Ahmad Shah MASOOD and
    Rashid DOSTAM Hizbi Wahdat Islamic Unity Party, and a number of minor
    resistance parties the former ruling Watan Party has been disbanded
Suffrage:
    undetermined previously universal, male ages 1550
Elections:
    the transition government has promised elections in October 1992
Communists:
    the former ruling Watan Homeland Party has been disbanded

:Afghanistan Government

Other political or pressure groups:
    the former resistance commanders are the major power brokers in the
    countryside shuras councils of commanders are now administering most
    cities outside Kabul ulema religious scholars tribal elders
Member of:
    Has previously been a member of AsDB, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G77, IAEA, IBRD,
    ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OIC,
    UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTO note  the new
    government has not yet announced whether it will continue to be a member of
    these bodies the former resistance government in exile Afghan Interim
    Government was given membership in the OIC in 1989
Diplomatic representation:
    previous MinisterCounselor, Charge dAffaires Abdul Ghafur JOUSHAN
    Chancery at 2341 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 telephone 202
    2343770 or 3771 a new representative has not yet been named
  US:
    Charge dAffaires vacant Embassy at Ansari Wat, Wazir Akbar Khan Mina,
    Kabul telephone 62230 through 62235 or 62436 note  US Embassy in Kabul
    was closed in January 1989
Flag:
    a new flag of unknown description reportedly has been adopted previous flag
    consisted of three equal horizontal bands of black top, red, and green,
    with the national coat of arms superimposed on the hoist side of the black
    and red bands similar to the flag of Malawi, which is shorter and bears a
    radiant, rising red sun centered in the black band

:Afghanistan Economy

Overview:
    Fundamentally, Afghanistan is an extremely poor, landlocked country, highly
    dependent on farming wheat especially and livestock raising sheep and
    goats. Economic considerations, however, have played second fiddle to
    political and military upheavals during more than 13 years of war, including
    the nearly 10year Soviet military occupation which ended 15 February
    1989. Over the past decade, onethird of the population fled the country,
    with Pakistan sheltering more than 3 million refugees and Iran about 1.3
    million. Another 1 million probably moved into and around urban areas within
    Afghanistan. Although reliable data are unavailable, gross domestic product
    is lower than 12 years ago because of the loss of labor and capital and the
    disruption of trade and transport.
GDP:
    exchange rate conversion  3 billion, per capita 200 real growth rate 0
    1989 est.
Inflation rate consumer prices:
    over 90 1991 est.
Unemployment rate:
    NA
Budget:
    revenues NA expenditures NA, including capital expenditures of NA
Exports:
    236 million f.o.b., FY91 est.
  commodities:
    natural gas 55, fruits and nuts 24, handwoven carpets, wool, cotton,
    hides, and pelts
  partners:
    mostly former USSR
Imports:
    874 million c.i.f., FY91 est.
  commodities:
    food and petroleum products
  partners:
    mostly former USSR
External debt:
    2.3 billion March 1991 est.
Industrial production:
    growth rate 2.3 FY91 est. accounts for about 25 of GDP
Electricity:
    480,000 kW capacity 1,450 million kWh produced, 90 kWh per capita 1991
Industries:
    smallscale production of textiles, soap, furniture, shoes, fertilizer, and
    cement handwoven carpets natural gas, oil, coal, copper
Agriculture:
    largely subsistence farming and nomadic animal husbandry cash products 
    wheat, fruits, nuts, karakul pelts, wool, mutton
Illicit drugs:
    an illicit producer of opium poppy and cannabis for the international drug
    trade worlds secondlargest opium producer after Burma and a major
    source of hashish
Economic aid:
    US commitments, including ExIm FY7089, 380 million Western nonUS
    countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments 197089, 510 million OPEC
    bilateral aid 197989, 57 million Communist countries 197089, 4.1
    billion net official Western disbursements 198589, 270 million
Currency:
    afghani plural  afghanis 1 afghani Af  100 puls

:Afghanistan Economy

Exchange rates:
    afghanis Af per US1  550 May 1992, free market exchange rate, 900
    free market exchange rate as of November 1991, 850 1991, 700 198990,
    220 198889 note  these rates reflect the bazaar rates rather than the
    official exchange rates
Fiscal year:
    21 March  20 March

:Afghanistan Communications

Railroads:
    9.6 km single track 1.524meter gauge from Kushka Turkmenistan to
    Towraghondi and 15.0 km from Termez Uzbekistan to Kheyrabad transshipment
    point on south bank of Amu Darya
Highways:
    21,000 km total 1984 2,800 km hard surface, 1,650 km bituminoustreated
    gravel and improved earth, 16,550 km unimproved earth and tracks
Inland waterways:
    total navigability 1,200 km chiefly Amu Darya, which handles steamers up to
    about 500 metric tons
Pipelines:
    petroleum products  former USSR to Bagram and former USSR to Shindand
    natural gas 180 km
Ports:
    Shir Khan and Kheyrabad river ports
Civil air:
    2 Tu154, 2 Boeing 727, 4 Yak40, assorted smaller transports
Airports:
    41 total, 37 usable 9 with permanentsurface runways none with runways
    over 3,659 m 10 with runways 2,4403,659 m 18 with runways 1,2202,439 m
Telecommunications:
    limited telephone, telegraph, and radiobroadcast services television
    introduced in 1980 31,200 telephones broadcast stations  5 AM, no FM, 1
    TV 1 satellite earth station

:Afghanistan Defense Forces

Branches:
    the military currently is being reorganized by the new government and does
    not yet exist on a national scale some elements of the former Army, Air and
    Air Defense Forces, National Guard, Border Guard Forces, National Police
    Force Sarandoi, and Tribal Militias remain intact and are supporting the
    new government the government has asked all military personnel to return to
    their stations a large number of former resistance groups also field
    irregular military forces the Ministry of State Security WAD has been
    disbanded
Manpower availability:
    males 1549, 3,989,232 2,139,771 fit for military service 150,572 reach
    military age 22 annually
Defense expenditures:
    the new government has not yet adopted a defense budget

:Albania Geography

Total area:
    28,750 km2
Land area:
    27,400 km2
Comparative area:
    slightly larger than Maryland
Land boundaries:
    720 km total Greece 282 km, Macedonia 151 km, Serbia and Montenegro 287 km
    114 km with Serbia, 173 km with Montenegro
Coastline:
    362 km
Maritime claims:
  Continental shelf:
    not specified
  Territorial sea:
    12 nm
Disputes:
    Kosovo question with Serbia and Montenegro Northern Epirus question with
    Greece
Climate:
    mild temperate cool, cloudy, wet winters hot, clear, dry summers interior
    is cooler and wetter
Terrain:
    mostly mountains and hills small plains along coast
Natural resources:
    crude oil, natural gas, coal, chromium, copper, timber, nickel
Land use:
    arable land 21 permanent crops 4 meadows and pastures 15 forest and
    woodland 38 other 22 includes irrigated 1
Environment:
    subject to destructive earthquakes tsunami occur along southwestern coast
Note:
    strategic location along Strait of Otranto links Adriatic Sea to Ionian Sea
    and Mediterranean Sea

:Albania People

Population:
    3,285,224 July 1992, growth rate 1.1 1992
Birth rate:
