

Anne KENNEY, associate director, Department of Preservation and
Conservation, Cornell University, opened her talk by observing that the
Cornell Xerox Project CXP has been guided by the assumption that the
ability to produce printed facsimiles or to replace paper with paper
would be important, at least for the present generation of users and
equipment.  She described three factors that influenced development of
the project:  1 Because the project has emphasized the preservation of
deteriorating brittle books, the quality of what was produced had to be
sufficiently high to return a paper replacement to the shelf.  CXP was
only interested in using:  2 a system that was costeffective, which
meant that it had to be costcompetitive with the processes currently
available, principally photocopy and microfilm, and 3 new or currently
available product hardware and software.

KENNEY described the advantages that using digital technology offers over
both photocopy and microfilm:  1 The potential exists to create a higher
quality reproduction of a deteriorating original than conventional
lightlens technology.  2 Because a digital image is an encoded
representation, it can be reproduced again and again with no resulting
loss of quality, as opposed to the situation with lightlens processes,
in which there is discernible difference between a second and a
subsequent generation of an image.  3 A digital image can be manipulated
in a number of ways to improve image capture for example, Xerox has
developed a windowing application that enables one to capture a page
containing both text and illustrations in a manner that optimizes the
reproduction of both.  With lightlens technology, one must choose which
to optimize, text or the illustration in preservation microfilming, the
current practice is to shoot an illustrated page twice, once to highlight
the text and the second time to provide the best capture for the
illustration.  4 A digital image can also be edited, density levels
adjusted to remove underlining and stains, and to increase legibility for
faint documents.  5 Onscreen inspection can take place at the time of
initial setup and adjustments made prior to scanning, factors that
substantially reduce the number of retakes required in quality control.

A primary goal of CXP has been to evaluate the paper output printed on
the Xerox DocuTech, a highspeed printer that produces 600dpi pages from
scanned images at a rate of 135 pages a minute.  KENNEY recounted several
publishing challenges to represent faithful and legible reproductions of
the originals that the 600dpi copy for the most part successfully
captured.  For example, many of the deteriorating volumes in the project
were heavily illustrated with fine line drawings or halftones or came in
languages such as Japanese, in which the buildup of characters comprised
of varying strokes is difficult to reproduce at lower resolutions a
surprising number of them came with annotations and mathematical
formulas, which it was critical to be able to duplicate exactly.

KENNEY noted that 1 the copies are being printed on paper that meets the
ANSI standards for performance, 2 the DocuTech printer meets the machine
and toner requirements for proper adhesion of print to page, as described
by the National Archives, and thus 3 paper product is considered to be
the archival equivalent of preservation photocopy.

KENNEY then discussed several samples of the quality achieved in the
project that had been distributed in a handout, for example, a copy of a
printondemand version of the 1911 Reed lecture on the steam turbine,
which contains halftones, line drawings, and illustrations embedded in
text the first four loose pages in the volume compared the capture
capabilities of scanning to photocopy for a standard test target, the
IEEE standard 167A 1987 test chart.  In all instances scanning proved
superior to photocopy, though only slightly more so in one.

Conceding the simplistic nature of her review of the quality of scanning
to photocopy, KENNEY described it as one representation of the kinds of
settings that could be used with scanning capabilities on the equipment
CXP uses.  KENNEY also pointed out that CXP investigated the quality
