a pair of the gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when
her eye fell upon a little bottle that stood near the looking
glass.  There was no label this time with the words DRINK ME,
but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips.  I know
SOMETHING interesting is sure to happen, she said to herself,
whenever I eat or drink anything so Ill just see what this
bottle does.  I do hope itll make me grow large again, for
really Im quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!

  It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected:
before she had drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing
against the ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from being
broken.  She hastily put down the bottle, saying to herself
Thats quite enoughI hope I shant grow any moreAs it is, I
cant get out at the doorI do wish I hadnt drunk quite so
much!

  Alas! it was too late to wish that!  She went on growing, and
growing, and very soon had to kneel down on the floor:  in
another minute there was not even room for this, and she tried
the effect of lying down with one elbow against the door, and the
other arm curled round her head.  Still she went on growing, and,
as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one
foot up the chimney, and said to herself Now I can do no more,
whatever happens.  What WILL become of me?

  Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full
effect, and she grew no larger:  still it was very uncomfortable,
and, as there seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting
out of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy.

  It was much pleasanter at home, thought poor Alice, when one
wasnt always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about
by mice and rabbits.  I almost wish I hadnt gone down that
rabbitholeand yetand yetits rather curious, you know,
this sort of life!  I do wonder what CAN have happened to me!
When I used to read fairytales, I fancied that kind of thing
never happened, and now here I am in the middle of one!  There
ought to be a book written about me, that there ought!  And when
I grow up, Ill write onebut Im grown up now, she added in a
sorrowful tone at least theres no room to grow up any more
HERE.

  But then, thought Alice, shall I NEVER get any older than I
am now?  Thatll be a comfort, one waynever to be an old woman
but thenalways to have lessons to learn!  Oh, I shouldnt like
THAT!

  Oh, you foolish Alice! she answered herself.  How can you
learn lessons in here?  Why, theres hardly room for YOU, and no
room at all for any lessonbooks!

  And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other,
and making quite a conversation of it altogether but after a few
minutes she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

  Mary Ann!  Mary Ann! said the voice.  Fetch me my gloves
this moment!  Then came a little pattering of feet on the
stairs.  Alice knew it was the Rabbit coming to look for her, and
she trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she
was now about a thousand times as large as the Rabbit, and had no
reason to be afraid of it.

  Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it
but, as the door opened inwards, and Alices elbow was pressed
hard against it, that attempt proved a failure.  Alice heard it
say to itself Then Ill go round and get in at the window.
