
PHEBE	If sight and shape be true,
	Why then, my love adieu!

ROSALIND	Ill have no father, if you be not he:
	Ill have no husband, if you be not he:
	Nor neer wed woman, if you be not she.

HYMEN	        Peace, ho! I bar confusion:
	Tis I must make conclusion
	Of these most strange events:
	Heres eight that must take hands
	To join in Hymens bands,
	If truth holds true contents.
	You and you no cross shall part:
	You and you are heart in heart
	You to his love must accord,
	Or have a woman to your lord:
	You and you are sure together,
	As the winter to foul weather.
	Whiles a wedlockhymn we sing,
	Feed yourselves with questioning
	That reason wonder may diminish,
	How thus we met, and these things finish.

	SONG.
	Wedding is great Junos crown:
	O blessed bond of board and bed!
	Tis Hymen peoples every town
	High wedlock then be honoured:
	Honour, high honour and renown,
	To Hymen, god of every town!

DUKE SENIOR	O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me!
	Even daughter, welcome, in no less degree.

PHEBE	I will not eat my word, now thou art mine
	Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.

	Enter JAQUES DE BOYS

JAQUES DE BOYS	Let me have audience for a word or two:
	I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
	That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
	Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
	Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
	Addressd a mighty power which were on foot,
	In his own conduct, purposely to take
	His brother here and put him to the sword:
	And to the skirts of this wild wood he came
	Where meeting with an old religious man,
	After some question with him, was converted
	Both from his enterprise and from the world,
	His crown bequeathing to his banishd brother,
	And all their lands restored to them again
	That were with him exiled. This to be true,
	I do engage my life.

DUKE SENIOR	Welcome, young man
	Thou offerst fairly to thy brothers wedding:
	To one his lands withheld, and to the other
	A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.
	First, in this forest, let us do those ends
	That here were well begun and well begot:
	And after, every of this happy number
	That have endured shrewd days and nights with us
	Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
	According to the measure of their states.
	Meantime, forget this newfalln dignity
