must have been a holiday?

  Of course it was, said the Mock Turtle.

  And how did you manage on the twelfth? Alice went on eagerly.

  Thats enough about lessons, the Gryphon interrupted in a
very decided tone:  tell her something about the games now.



                            CHAPTER X

                      The Lobster Quadrille


  The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper
across his eyes.  He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for
a minute or two sobs choked his voice.  Same as if he had a bone
in his throat, said the Gryphon:  and it set to work shaking him
and punching him in the back.  At last the Mock Turtle recovered
his voice, and, with tears running down his cheeks, he went on
again:

  You may not have lived much under the sea I havent,
said Aliceand perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster
Alice began to say I once tasted but checked herself hastily,
and said No, never so you can have no idea what a delightful
thing a Lobster Quadrille is!

  No, indeed, said Alice.  What sort of a dance is it?

  Why, said the Gryphon, you first form into a line along the
seashore

  Two lines! cried the Mock Turtle.  Seals, turtles, salmon,
and so on then, when youve cleared all the jellyfish out of
the way

  THAT generally takes some time, interrupted the Gryphon.

  you advance twice

  Each with a lobster as a partner! cried the Gryphon.

  Of course, the Mock Turtle said:  advance twice, set to
partners

  change lobsters, and retire in same order, continued the
Gryphon.

  Then, you know, the Mock Turtle went on, you throw the

  The lobsters! shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.

  as far out to sea as you can

  Swim after them! screamed the Gryphon.

  Turn a somersault in the sea! cried the Mock Turtle,
capering wildly about.

  Back to land again, and thats all the first figure, said the
Mock Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice and the two creatures,
who had been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat
