	censure worse than drunkards.

JAQUES	Why, tis good to be sad and say nothing.

ROSALIND	Why then, tis good to be a post.

JAQUES	I have neither the scholars melancholy, which is
	emulation, nor the musicians, which is fantastical,
	nor the courtiers, which is proud, nor the
	soldiers, which is ambitious, nor the lawyers,
	which is politic, nor the ladys, which is nice, nor
	the lovers, which is all these: but it is a
	melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples,
	extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundrys
	contemplation of my travels, in which my often
	rumination wraps me m a most humorous sadness.

ROSALIND	A traveller! By my faith, you have great reason to
	be sad: I fear you have sold your own lands to see
	other mens then, to have seen much and to have
	nothing, is to have rich eyes and poor hands.

JAQUES	Yes, I have gained my experience.

ROSALIND	And your experience makes you sad: I had rather have
	a fool to make me merry than experience to make me
	sad and to travel for it too!

	Enter ORLANDO

ORLANDO	Good day and happiness, dear Rosalind!

JAQUES	Nay, then, God be wi you, an you talk in blank verse.

	Exit

ROSALIND	Farewell, Monsieur Traveller: look you lisp and
	wear strange suits, disable all the benefits of your
	own country, be out of love with your nativity and
	almost chide God for making you that countenance you
	are, or I will scarce think you have swam in a
	gondola. Why, how now, Orlando! where have you been
	all this while? You a lover! An you serve me such
	another trick, never come in my sight more.

ORLANDO	My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.

ROSALIND	Break an hours promise in love! He that will
	divide a minute into a thousand parts and break but
	a part of the thousandth part of a minute in the
	affairs of love, it may be said of him that Cupid
	hath clapped him o the shoulder, but Ill warrant
	him heartwhole.

ORLANDO	Pardon me, dear Rosalind.

ROSALIND	Nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight: I
	had as lief be wooed of a snail.

ORLANDO	Of a snail?

ROSALIND	Ay, of a snail for though he comes slowly, he
	carries his house on his head a better jointure,
	I think, than you make a woman: besides he brings
	his destiny with him.

ORLANDO	Whats that?

ROSALIND	Why, horns, which such as you are fain to be
