f.o.b.: free on board

FRG: Federal Republic of Germany West Germany used for information dated
before 3 October 1990 or CY91

FY: fiscal year

GDP: gross domestic product

GDR: German Democratic Republic East Germany used for information dated
before 3 October 1990 or CY91

GNP: gross national product

GRT: gross register ton

km: kilometer

km2: square kilometer

kW: kilowatt

kWh: kilowatt hour

m: meter

NA: not available

NEGL: negligible

nm: nautical mile

NZ: New Zealand

ODA: official development assistance

OOF: other official flows

PDRY: Peoples Democratic Republic of Yemen Yemen Aden or South Yemen
used for information dated before 22 May 1990 or CY91

UAE: United Arab Emirates

UK: United Kingdom

US: United States

USSR: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics Soviet Union used for information
dated before 25 December 1991

YAR: Yemen Arab Republic Yemen Sanaa or North Yemen used for information
dated before 22 May 1990 or CY91

Administrative divisions: The numbers, designatory terms, and firstorder
administrative divisions are generally those approved by the US Board on
Geographic Names BGN. Changes that have been reported but not yet acted on
by BGN are noted.

Area: Total area is the sum of all land and water areas delimited by
international boundaries andor coastlines. Land area is the aggregate of
all surfaces delimited by international boundaries andor coastlines,
excluding inland water bodies lakes, reservoirs, rivers. Comparative areas
are based on total area equivalents. Most entities are compared with the
entire US or one of the 50 states. The smaller entities are compared with
Washington, DC 178 km2, 69 miles2 or the Mall in Washington, DC 0.59 km2,
0.23 miles2, 146 acres.

Birth rate: The average annual number of births during a year per 1,000
population at midyear also known as crude birth rate.

Dates of information: In general, information available as of 1 January 1992
was used in the preparation of this edition. Population figures are estimates
for 1 July 1992, with population growth rates estimated for mid1992 through
mid1993. Major political events have been updated through 30 June 1992.
Military age figures are for 1992.

Death rate: The average annual number of deaths during a year per l,000
population at midyear also known as crude death rate.

Diplomatic representation: The US Government has diplomatic relations with
176 nations the US has not yet established full diplomatic relations with
Bosnia and Hercegovina, Croatia, and Slovenia. The US has diplomatic
relations with 167 of the 178 UN members  the exceptions are Angola, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Hercegovina, Croatia, Cuba, Iran, Iraq, North Korea, Slovenia,
and Vietnam. In addition, the US has diplomatic relations with 9 nations
that are not in the UN  Andorra, Kiribati, Monaco, Nauru, San Marino,
Switzerland, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vatican City.

Disputes: This category includes a wide variety of situations that range from
traditional bilateral boundary disputes to unilateral claims of one sort or
another. Every international land boundary dispute in the Guide to Interna
tional Boundaries, a map published by the Department of State, is included.
References to other situations may also be included that are border or
frontier relevant, such as maritime disputes, geopolitical questions, or
irredentist issues. However, inclusion does not necessarily constitute
official acceptance or recognition by the US Government.

Economic aid: This entry refers to bilateral commitments of official develop
ment assistance ODA, which is defined as government grants that are
administered with the promotion of economic development and welfare of LDCs
as their main objective and are concessional in character and contain a
grant element of at least 25, and other official flows OOF or transactions
by the official sector whose main objective is other than development
motivated or whose grant element is below the 25 threshold for ODA. OOF
transactions include official export credits such as Eximbank credits,
official equity and portfolio investment, and debt reorganization by the
official sector that does not meet concessional terms. Aid is considered to
have been committed when agreements are initialed by the parties involved and
constitute a formal declaration of intent.

Entities: Some of the nations, dependent areas, areas of special sovereignty,
and governments included in this publication are not independent, and others
are not officially recognized by the US Government. Nation refers to a
people politically organized into a sovereign state with a definite territory.
Dependent area refers to a broad category of political entities that are
associated in some way with a nation. Names used for page headings are usually
the shortform names as approved by the US Board on Geographic Names. The
longform name is included in the Government section, and an entry of
none indicates a longform name does not exist. In some instances, no
shortform name exists  then the longform name must serve for all usages.
There are 264 entities in The World Factbook that may be categorized as
follows:

NATIONS

177 UN members excluding Yugoslavia

11 nations that are not members of the UN  Andorra, Georgia, Kiribati,
Macedonia, Monaco, Nauru, Serbia and Montenegro, Switzerland, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Vatican City Holy See

OTHER

1 Taiwan

DEPENDENT AREAS

6 Australia  Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Christmas Island, Cocos Keeling
Islands, Coral Sea Islands, Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Norfolk Island

2 Denmark  Faroe Islands, Greenland

16 France  Bassas da India, Clipperton Island, Europa Island, French Guiana,
French Polynesia, French Southern and Antarctic Lands, Glorioso Islands,
Guadeloupe, Juan de Nova Island, Martinique, Mayotte, New Caledonia, Reunion,
Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Tromelin Island, Wallis and Futuna

2 Netherlands  Aruba, Netherlands Antilles

3 New Zealand  Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau

3 Norway  Bouvet Island, Jan Mayen, Svalbard

1 Portugal  Macau

16 United Kingdom  Anguilla, Bermuda, British Indian Ocean Territory, British
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, Gibraltar, Guernsey,
Hong Kong, Isle of Man, Jersey, Montserrat, Pitcairn Islands, Saint Helena,
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands

15 United States  American Samoa, Baker Island, Guam, Howland Island, Jarvis
Island, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Midway Islands, Navassa Island, Northern
Mariana Islands, Palmyra Atoll, Puerto Rico, Trust Territory of the Pacific
Islands Palau, Virgin Islands, Wake Island

MISCELLANEOUS

6 Antarctica, Gaza Strip, Paracel Islands, Spratly Islands, West Bank, Western
Sahara

OTHER ENTITIES

4 oceans  Arctic Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, Indian Ocean, Pacific Ocean

1 World

264 total

note: The US Government does not recognize the four socalled independent
homelands of Bophuthatswana, Ciskei, Transkei, and Venda in South Africa.

Gross domestic product GDP: The value of all goods and services produced
domestically.

Gross national product GNP: The value of all goods and services produced
domestically plus income earned abroad, minus income earned by foreigners
from domestic production.

GNPGDP methodology: In the Economy section, GNPGDP dollar estimates for
the OECD countries, the former Soviet republics, and the East European
