	Left and abandond of his velvet friends,
	Tis right: quoth he thus misery doth part
	The flux of company: anon a careless herd,
	Full of the pasture, jumps along by him
	And never stays to greet him Ay quoth Jaques,
	Sweep on, you fat and greasy citizens
	Tis just the fashion: wherefore do you look
	Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?
	Thus most invectively he pierceth through
	The body of the country, city, court,
	Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we
	Are mere usurpers, tyrants and whats worse,
	To fright the animals and to kill them up
	In their assignd and native dwellingplace.

DUKE SENIOR	And did you leave him in this contemplation?

Second Lord	We did, my lord, weeping and commenting
	Upon the sobbing deer.

DUKE SENIOR	Show me the place:
	I love to cope him in these sullen fits,
	For then hes full of matter.

First Lord	Ill bring you to him straight.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT II



SCENE II	A room in the palace.


	Enter DUKE FREDERICK, with Lords

DUKE FREDERICK	Can it be possible that no man saw them?
	It cannot be: some villains of my court
	Are of consent and sufferance in this.

First Lord	I cannot hear of any that did see her.
	The ladies, her attendants of her chamber,
	Saw her abed, and in the morning early
	They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.

Second Lord	My lord, the roynish clown, at whom so oft
	Your grace was wont to laugh, is also missing.
	Hisperia, the princess gentlewoman,
	Confesses that she secretly oerheard
	Your daughter and her cousin much commend
	The parts and graces of the wrestler
	That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles
	And she believes, wherever they are gone,
	That youth is surely in their company.

DUKE FREDERICK	Send to his brother fetch that gallant hither
	If he be absent, bring his brother to me
	Ill make him find him: do this suddenly,
	And let not search and inquisition quail
	To bring again these foolish runaways.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT II



SCENE III	Before OLIVERS house.


	Enter ORLANDO and ADAM, meeting

ORLANDO	Whos there?

ADAM	What, my young master? O, my gentle master!
	O my sweet master! O you memory
	Of old Sir Rowland! why, what make you here?
	Why are you virtuous? why do people love you?
	And wherefore are you gentle, strong and valiant?
	Why would you be so fond to overcome
	The bonny priser of the humorous duke?
	Your praise is come too swiftly home before you.
	Know you not, master, to some kind of men
	Their graces serve them but as enemies?
	No more do yours: your virtues, gentle master,
	Are sanctified and holy traitors to you.
	O, what a world is this, when what is comely
	Envenoms him that bears it!

ORLANDO	Why, whats the matter?

ADAM	O unhappy youth!
	Come not within these doors within this roof
	The enemy of all your graces lives:
	Your brotherno, no brother yet the son
	Yet not the son, I will not call him son
	Of him I was about to call his father
	Hath heard your praises, and this night he means
	To burn the lodging where you use to lie
	And you within it: if he fail of that,
	He will have other means to cut you off.
	I overheard him and his practises.
	This is no place this house is but a butchery:
	Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.

ORLANDO	Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?

ADAM	No matter whither, so you come not here.

ORLANDO	What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food?
	Or with a base and boisterous sword enforce
	A thievish living on the common road?
	This I must do, or know not what to do:
	Yet this I will not do, do how I can
	I rather will subject me to the malice
	Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.

ADAM	But do not so. I have five hundred crowns,
	The thrifty hire I saved under your father,
	Which I did store to be my fosternurse
	When service should in my old limbs lie lame
	And unregarded age in corners thrown:
	Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed,
	Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,
	Be comfort to my age! Here is the gold
	And all this I give you. Let me be your servant:
	Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty
	For in my youth I never did apply
	Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood,
	Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo
	The means of weakness and debility
	Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
	Frosty, but kindly: let me go with you
	Ill do the service of a younger man
	In all your business and necessities.

ORLANDO	O good old man, how well in thee appears
	The constant service of the antique world,
	When service sweat for duty, not for meed!
	Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
	Where none will sweat but for promotion,
