with the Arpanet and Internet.  Recalling the days demonstrations of
CDROM and optical disk material, he went on to ask if the field has yet
learned how to scale new systems to enable delivery and dissemination
across largescale networks.

LARSEN focused on the geometric growth of the Internet from its inception
circa 1969 to the present, and the adjustments required to respond to
that rapid growth.  To illustrate the issue of scalability, LARSEN
considered computer networks as including three generic components:
computers, network communication nodes, and communication media.  Each
component scales e.g., computers range from PCs to supercomputers
network nodes scale from interface cards in a PC through sophisticated
routers and gateways and communication media range from 2,400baud
dialup facilities through 4.5Mbps backbone links, and eventually to
multigigabitpersecond communication lines, and architecturally, the
components are organized to scale hierarchically from local area networks
to internationalscale networks.  Such growth is made possible by
building layers of communication protocols, as BESSER pointed out.
By layering both physically and logically, a sense of scalability is
maintained from local area networks in offices, across campuses, through
bridges, routers, campus backbones, fiberoptic links, etc., up into
regional networks and ultimately into national and international
networks.

LARSEN then illustrated the geometric growth over a twoyear period
through September 1991of the number of networks that comprise the
Internet.  This growth has been sustained largely by the availability of
three basic functions:  electronic mail, file transfer ftp, and remote
logon telnet.  LARSEN also reviewed the growth in the kind of traffic
that occurs on the network.  Network traffic reflects the joint contributions
of a larger population of users and increasing use per user.  Today one sees
serious applications involving moving images across the networka rarity
ten years ago.  LARSEN recalled and concurred with BESSERs main point
