thought Alice, Well, I hardly knowNo more, thank ye Im
better nowbut Im a deal too flustered to tell youall I know
is, something comes at me like a Jackinthebox, and up I goes
like a skyrocket!

  So you did, old fellow! said the others.

  We must burn the house down! said the Rabbits voice and
Alice called out as loud as she could, If you do.  Ill set
Dinah at you!

  There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to
herself, I wonder what they WILL do next!  If they had any
sense, theyd take the roof off.  After a minute or two, they
began moving about again, and Alice heard the Rabbit say, A
barrowful will do, to begin with.

  A barrowful of WHAT? thought Alice but she had not long to
doubt, for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came
rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face.
Ill put a stop to this, she said to herself, and shouted out,
Youd better not do that again! which produced another dead
silence.

  Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all
turning into little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright
idea came into her head.  If I eat one of these cakes, she
thought, its sure to make SOME change in my size and as it
cant possibly make me larger, it must make me smaller, I
suppose.

  So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find
that she began shrinking directly.  As soon as she was small
enough to get through the door, she ran out of the house, and
found quite a crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside.
The poor little Lizard, Bill, was in the middle, being held up by
two guineapigs, who were giving it something out of a bottle.
They all made a rush at Alice the moment she appeared but she
ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself safe in a
thick wood.

  The first thing Ive got to do, said Alice to herself, as she
wandered about in the wood, is to grow to my right size again
and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden.
I think that will be the best plan.

  It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and
simply arranged the only difficulty was, that she had not the
smallest idea how to set about it and while she was peering
about anxiously among the trees, a little sharp bark just over
her head made her look up in a great hurry.

  An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round
eyes, and feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her.
Poor little thing! said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried
hard to whistle to it but she was terribly frightened all the
time at the thought that it might be hungry, in which case it
would be very likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing.

  Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of
stick, and held it out to the puppy whereupon the puppy jumped
into the air off all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight,
