In open show and, with ascension bright,
Captivity led captive through the air,
The realm itself of Satan, long usurped
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet
Even he, who now foretold his fatal bruise
And to the Woman thus his sentence turned.
Thy sorrow I will greatly multiply
By thy conception children thou shalt bring
In sorrow forth and to thy husbands will
Thine shall submit he over thee shall rule.
On Adam last thus judgement he pronounced.
Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife,
And eaten of the tree, concerning which
I charged thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat thereof:
Cursed is the ground for thy sake thou in sorrow
Shalt eat thereof, all the days of thy life
Thorns also and thistles it shall bring thee forth
Unbid and thou shalt eat the herb of the field
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,
Till thou return unto the ground for thou
Out of the ground wast taken, know thy birth,
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust return.
So judged he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent
And the instant stroke of death, denounced that day,
Removed far off then, pitying how they stood
Before him naked to the air, that now
Must suffer change, disdained not to begin
Thenceforth the form of servant to assume
As when he washed his servants feet so now,
As father of his family, he clad
Their nakedness with skins of beasts, or slain,
Or as the snake with youthful coat repaid
And thought not much to clothe his enemies
Nor he their outward only with the skins
Of beasts, but inward nakedness, much more.
Opprobrious, with his robe of righteousness,
Arraying, covered from his Fathers sight.
To him with swift ascent he up returned,
Into his blissful bosom reassumed
In glory, as of old to him appeased
All, though allknowing, what had passed with Man
Recounted, mixing intercession sweet.
Mean while, ere thus was sinned and judged on Earth,
Within the gates of Hell sat Sin and Death,
In counterview within the gates, that now
Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame
Far into Chaos, since the Fiend passed through,
Sin opening who thus now to Death began.
O Son, why sit we here each other viewing
Idly, while Satan, our great author, thrives
In other worlds, and happier seat provides
For us, his offspring dear?  It cannot be
But that success attends him if mishap,
Ere this he had returned, with fury driven
By his avengers since no place like this
Can fit his punishment, or their revenge.
Methinks I feel new strength within me rise,
Wings growing, and dominion given me large
Beyond this deep whatever draws me on,
Or sympathy, or some connatural force,
Powerful at greatest distance to unite,
With secret amity, things of like kind,
By secretest conveyance.  Thou, my shade
Inseparable, must with me along
For Death from Sin no power can separate.
But, lest the difficulty of passing back
Stay his return perhaps over this gulf
