Can sort, what harmony, or true delight?
Which must be mutual, in proportion due
Given and received but, in disparity
The one intense, the other still remiss,
Cannot well suit with either, but soon prove
Tedious alike:  Of fellowship I speak
Such as I seek, fit to participate
All rational delight: wherein the brute
Cannot be human consort:  They rejoice
Each with their kind, lion with lioness
So fitly them in pairs thou hast combined:
Much less can bird with beast, or fish with fowl
So well converse, nor with the ox the ape
Worse then can man with beast, and least of all.
Whereto the Almighty answered, not displeased.
A nice and subtle happiness, I see,
Thou to thyself proposest, in the choice
Of thy associates, Adam! and wilt taste
No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitary.
What thinkest thou then of me, and this my state?
Seem I to thee sufficiently possessed
Of happiness, or not? who am alone
From all eternity for none I know
Second to me or like, equal much less.
How have I then with whom to hold converse,
Save with the creatures which I made, and those
To me inferiour, infinite descents
Beneath what other creatures are to thee?
He ceased I lowly answered.  To attain
The highth and depth of thy eternal ways
All human thoughts come short, Supreme of things!
Thou in thyself art perfect, and in thee
Is no deficience found:  Not so is Man,
But in degree the cause of his desire
By conversation with his like to help
Or solace his defects.  No need that thou
Shouldst propagate, already Infinite
And through all numbers absolute, though One:
But Man by number is to manifest
His single imperfection, and beget
Like of his like, his image multiplied,
In unity defective which requires
Collateral love, and dearest amity.
Thou in thy secresy although alone,
Best with thyself accompanied, seekest not
Social communication yet, so pleased,
Canst raise thy creature to what highth thou wilt
Of union or communion, deified:
I, by conversing, cannot these erect
From prone nor in their ways complacence find.
Thus I emboldened spake, and freedom used
Permissive, and acceptance found which gained
This answer from the gracious Voice Divine.
Thus far to try thee, Adam, I was pleased
And find thee knowing, not of beasts alone,
Which thou hast rightly named, but of thyself
Expressing well the spirit within thee free,
My image, not imparted to the brute
Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee
Good reason was thou freely shouldst dislike
And be so minded still:  I, ere thou spakest,
Knew it not good for Man to be alone
And no such company as then thou sawest
Intended thee for trial only brought,
To see how thou couldest judge of fit and meet:
What next I bring shall please thee, be assured,
Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,
Thy wish exactly to thy hearts desire.
He ended, or I heard no more for now
My earthly by his heavenly overpowered,
Which it had long stood under, strained to the highth
In that celestial colloquy sublime,
As with an object that excels the sense
Dazzled and spent, sunk down and sought repair
Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, called
By Nature as in aid, and closed mine eyes.
Mine eyes he closed, but open left the cell
Of fancy, my internal sight by which,
Abstract as in a trance, methought I saw,
Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape
Still glorious before whom awake I stood:
Who stooping opened my left side, and took
From thence a rib, with cordial spirits warm,
And lifeblood streaming fresh wide was the wound,
But suddenly with flesh filled up and healed:
The rib he formed and fashioned with his hands
Under his forming hands a creature grew,
Manlike, but different sex so lovely fair,
That what seemed fair in all the world, seemed now
Mean, or in her summed up, in her contained
And in her looks which from that time infused
Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before,
And into all things from her air inspired
The spirit of love and amorous delight.
She disappeared, and left me dark I waked
To find her, or for ever to deplore
Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure:
When out of hope, behold her, not far off,
Such as I saw her in my dream, adorned
With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow
To make her amiable:  On she came,
Led by her heavenly Maker, though unseen,
And guided by his voice nor uninformed
Of nuptial sanctity, and marriage rites:
Grace was in all her steps, Heaven in her eye,
In every gesture dignity and love.
I, overjoyed, could not forbear aloud.
This turn hath made amends thou hast fulfilled
Thy words, Creator bounteous and benign,
Giver of all things fair! but fairest this
Of all thy gifts! nor enviest.  I now see
Bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh, myself
Before me:  Woman is her nameof Man
Extracted: for this cause he shall forego
Father and mother, and to his wife adhere
And they shall be one flesh, one heart, one soul.
She heard me thus and though divinely brought,
Yet innocence, and virgin modesty,
Her virtue, and the conscience of her worth,
That would be wooed, and not unsought be won,
Not obvious, not obtrusive, but, retired,
The more desirable or, to say all,
Nature herself, though pure of sinful thought,
Wrought in her so, that, seeing me, she turned:
I followed her she what was honour knew,
And with obsequious majesty approved
My pleaded reason.  To the nuptial bower
I led her blushing like the morn: All Heaven,
And happy constellations, on that hour
Shed their selectest influence the Earth
Gave sign of gratulation, and each hill
Joyous the birds fresh gales and gentle airs
Whispered it to the woods, and from their wings
Flung rose, flung odours from the spicy shrub,
Disporting, till the amorous bird of night
Sung spousal, and bid haste the eveningstar
On his hill top, to light the bridal lamp.
Thus have I told thee all my state, and brought
My story to the sum of earthly bliss,
Which I enjoy and must confess to find
In all things else delight indeed, but such
As, used or not, works in the mind no change,
Nor vehement desire these delicacies
I mean of taste, sight, smell, herbs, fruits, and flowers,
Walks, and the melody of birds: but here
Far otherwise, transported I behold,
Transported touch here passion first I felt,
Commotion strange! in all enjoyments else
Superiour and unmoved here only weak
Against the charm of Beautys powerful glance.
Or Nature failed in me, and left some part
Not proof enough such object to sustain
Or, from my side subducting, took perhaps
More than enough at least on her bestowed
Too much of ornament, in outward show
Elaborate, of inward less exact.
For well I understand in the prime end
Of Nature her the inferiour, in the mind
And inward faculties, which most excel
In outward also her resembling less
His image who made both, and less expressing
The character of that dominion given
Oer other creatures:  Yet when I approach
Her loveliness, so absolute she seems
And in herself complete, so well to know
Her own, that what she wills to do or say,
Seems wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best:
All higher knowledge in her presence falls
Degraded  Wisdom in discourse with her
Loses discountenanced, and like Folly shows
Authority and Reason on her wait,
As one intended first, not after made
Occasionally and, to consummate all,
Greatness of mind and Nobleness their seat
Build in her loveliest, and create an awe
About her, as a guard angelick placed.
To whom the Angel with contracted brow.
Accuse not Nature, she hath done her part
Do thou but thine and be not diffident
Of Wisdom she deserts thee not, if thou
Dismiss not her, when most thou needest her nigh,
By attributing overmuch to things
Less excellent, as thou thyself perceivest.
For, what admirest thou, what transports thee so,
An outside? fair, no doubt, and worthy well
Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love
Not thy subjection:  Weigh with her thyself
Then value:  Ofttimes nothing profits more
Than selfesteem, grounded on just and right
Well managed of that skill the more thou knowest,
The more she will acknowledge thee her head,
And to realities yield all her shows:
Made so adorn for thy delight the more,
So awful, that with honour thou mayest love
Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise.
But if the sense of touch, whereby mankind
Is propagated, seem such dear delight
Beyond all other think the same vouchsafed
To cattle and each beast which would not be
To them made common and divulged, if aught
Therein enjoyed were worthy to subdue
The soul of man, or passion in him move.
What higher in her society thou findest
Attractive, human, rational, love still
In loving thou dost well, in passion not,
Wherein true love consists not:  Love refines
The thoughts, and heart enlarges hath his seat
In reason, and is judicious is the scale
By which to heavenly love thou mayest ascend,
Not sunk in carnal pleasure for which cause,
Among the beasts no mate for thee was found.
To whom thus, half abashed, Adam replied.
Neither her outside formed so fair, nor aught
In procreation common to all kinds,
Though higher of the genial bed by far,
And with mysterious reverence I deem,
So much delights me, as those graceful acts,
Those thousand decencies, that daily flow
From all her words and actions mixed with love
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned
Union of mind, or in us both one soul
Harmony to behold in wedded pair
More grateful than harmonious sound to the ear.
Yet these subject not I to thee disclose
What inward thence I feel, not therefore foiled,
Who meet with various objects, from the sense
Variously representing yet, still free,
Approve the best, and follow what I approve.
To love, thou blamest me not for Love, thou sayest,
Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask:
Love not the heavenly Spirits, and how their love
Express they? by looks only? or do they mix
Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch?
To whom the Angel, with a smile that glowed
Celestial rosy red, Loves proper hue,
Answered.  Let it suffice thee that thou knowest
Us happy, and without love no happiness.
Whatever pure thou in the body enjoyest,
And pure thou wert created we enjoy
In eminence and obstacle find none
Of membrane, joint, or limb, exclusive bars
Easier than air with air, if Spirits embrace,
Total they mix, union of pure with pure
Desiring, nor restrained conveyance need,
As flesh to mix with flesh, or soul with soul.
But I can now no more the parting sun
Beyond the Earths green Cape and verdant Isles
Hesperian sets, my signal to depart.
Be strong, live happy, and love!  But, first of all,
Him, whom to love is to obey, and keep
His great command take heed lest passion sway
Thy judgement to do aught, which else free will
Would not admit: thine, and of all thy sons,
The weal or woe in thee is placed beware!
I in thy persevering shall rejoice,
And all the Blest:  Stand fastto stand or fall
Free in thine own arbitrement it lies.
Perfect within, no outward aid require
And all temptation to transgress repel.
So saying, he arose whom Adam thus
Followed with benediction.  Since to part,
Go, heavenly guest, ethereal Messenger,
Sent from whose sovran goodness I adore!
Gentle to me and affable hath been
Thy condescension, and shall be honoured ever
With grateful memory:  Thou to mankind
Be good and friendly still, and oft return!
So parted they the Angel up to Heaven
From the thick shade, and Adam to his bower.



Book IX


No more of talk where God or Angel guest
With Man, as with his friend, familiar usd,
To sit indulgent, and with him partake
Rural repast permitting him the while
Venial discourse unblamd. I now must change
Those notes to tragick foul distrust, and breach
Disloyal on the part of Man, revolt,
And disobedience: on the part of Heaven
Now alienated, distance and distaste,
Anger and just rebuke, and judgement given,
That brought into this world a world of woe,
Sin and her shadow Death, and Misery
Deaths harbinger: Sad talk!yet argument
Not less but more heroick than the wrath
Of stern Achilles on his foe pursued
Thrice fugitive about Troy wall or rage
Of Turnus for Lavinia disespousd
Or Neptunes ire, or Junos, that so long
Perplexed the Greek, and Cythereas son:

   00482129
If answerable style I can obtain
Of my celestial patroness, who deigns
Her nightly visitation unimplord,
And dictates to me slumbering or inspires
Easy my unpremeditated verse:
Since first this subject for heroick song
Pleasd me long choosing, and beginning late
Not sedulous by nature to indite
Wars, hitherto the only argument
Heroick deemd chief mastery to dissect
With long and tedious havock fabled knights
In battles feignd the better fortitude
Of patience and heroick martyrdom
Unsung or to describe races and games,
Or tilting furniture, imblazond shields,
Impresses quaint, caparisons and steeds,
Bases and tinsel trappings, gorgeous knights
At joust and tournament then marshalld feast
Servd up in hall with sewers and seneshals
The skill of artifice or office mean,
Not that which justly gives heroick name
To person, or to poem.  Me, of these
Nor skilld nor studious, higher argument
Remains sufficient of itself to raise
That name, unless an age too late, or cold
Climate, or years, damp my intended wing
Depressd and much they may, if all be mine,
Not hers, who brings it nightly to my ear.
The sun was sunk, and after him the star
Of Hesperus, whose office is to bring
Twilight upon the earth, short arbiter
"twixt day and night, and now from end to end
Nights hemisphere had veild the horizon round:
When satan, who late fled before the threats
Of Gabriel out of Eden, now improvd
In meditated fraud and malice, bent
On Mans destruction, maugre what might hap
Of heavier on himself, fearless returned
From compassing the earth cautious of day,
Since Uriel, regent of the sun, descried
His entrance, and foreworned the Cherubim
That kept their watch thence full of anguish driven,
The space of seven continued nights he rode
With darkness thrice the equinoctial line
He circled four times crossed the car of night
From pole to pole, traversing each colure
On the eighth returned and, on the coast averse
From entrance or Cherubick watch, by stealth
Found unsuspected way.  There was a place,
Now not, though sin, not time, first wrought the change,
Where Tigris, at the foot of Paradise,
Into a gulf shot under ground, till part
Rose up a fountain by the tree of life:
In with the river sunk, and with it rose
Satan, involved in rising mist then sought
Where to lie hid sea he had searched, and land,
From Eden over Pontus and the pool
Maeotis, up beyond the river Ob
Downward as far antarctick and in length,
West from Orontes to the ocean barred
At Darien  thence to the land where flows
Ganges and Indus: Thus the orb he roamed
With narrow search and with inspection deep
Considered every creature, which of all
Most opportune might serve his wiles and found
The Serpent subtlest beast of all the field.
Him after long debate, irresolute
Of thoughts revolved, his final sentence chose
Fit vessel, fittest imp of fraud, in whom
To enter, and his dark suggestions hide
From sharpest sight: for, in the wily snake
Whatever sleights, none would suspicious mark,
As from his wit and native subtlety
Proceeding which, in other beasts observed,
Doubt might beget of diabolick power
Active within, beyond the sense of brute.
Thus he resolved, but first from inward grief
His bursting passion into plaints thus poured.
More justly, seat worthier of Gods, as built
With second thoughts, reforming what was old!
O Earth, how like to Heaven, if not preferred
For what God, after better, worse would build?
Terrestrial Heaven, danced round by other Heavens
That shine, yet bear their bright officious lamps,
Light above light, for thee alone, as seems,
In thee concentring all their precious beams
Of sacred influence!  As God in Heaven
Is center, yet extends to all so thou,
Centring, receivest from all those orbs: in thee,
Not in themselves, all their known virtue appears
Productive in herb, plant, and nobler birth
Of creatures animate with gradual life
Of growth, sense, reason, all summed up in Man.
With what delight could I have walked thee round,
If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange
Of hill, and valley, rivers, woods, and plains,
Now land, now sea and shores with forest crowned,
Rocks, dens, and caves!  But I in none of these
Find place or refuge and the more I see
Pleasures about me, so much more I feel
Torment within me, as from the hateful siege
Of contraries: all good to me becomes
Bane, and in Heaven much worse would be my state.
But neither here seek I, no nor in Heaven
To dwell, unless by mastering Heavens Supreme
Nor hope to be myself less miserable
By what I seek, but others to make such
As I, though thereby worse to me redound:
For only in destroying I find ease
To my relentless thoughts and, him destroyed,
Or won to what may work his utter loss,
For whom all this was made, all this will soon
Follow, as to him linked in weal or woe
In woe then that destruction wide may range:
To me shall be the glory sole among
The infernal Powers, in one day to have marred
What he, Almighty styled, six nights and days
Continued making and who knows how long
Before had been contriving? though perhaps
Not longer than since I, in one night, freed
From servitude inglorious well nigh half
The angelick name, and thinner left the throng
Of his adorers: He, to be avenged,
And to repair his numbers thus impaired,
Whether such virtue spent of old now failed
More Angels to create, if they at least
Are his created, or, to spite us more,
Determined to advance into our room
A creature formed of earth, and him endow,
Exalted from so base original,
With heavenly spoils, our spoils: What he decreed,
He effected Man he made, and for him built
Magnificent this world, and earth his seat,
Him lord pronounced and, O indignity!
Subjected to his service angelwings,
And flaming ministers to watch and tend
Their earthly charge: Of these the vigilance
I dread and, to elude, thus wrapt in mist
Of midnight vapour glide obscure, and pry
In every bush and brake, where hap may find
The serpent sleeping in whose mazy folds
To hide me, and the dark intent I bring.
O foul descent! that I, who erst contended
With Gods to sit the highest, am now constrained
Into a beast and, mixed with bestial slime,
This essence to incarnate and imbrute,
That to the highth of Deity aspired!
But what will not ambition and revenge
Descend to?  Who aspires, must down as low
As high he soared obnoxious, first or last,
To basest things.  Revenge, at first though sweet,
Bitter ere long, back on itself recoils:
Let it I reck not, so it light well aimed,
Since higher I fall short, on him who next
Provokes my envy, this new favourite
Of Heaven, this man of clay, son of despite,
Whom, us the more to spite, his Maker raised
From dust: Spite then with spite is best repaid.
So saying, through each thicket dank or dry,
Like a black mist lowcreeping, he held on
His midnightsearch, where soonest he might find
The serpent him fastsleeping soon he found
In labyrinth of many a round selfrolled,
His head the midst, well stored with subtile wiles:
Not yet in horrid shade or dismal den,
Nor nocent yet but, on the grassy herb,
Fearless unfeared he slept: in at his mouth
The Devil entered and his brutal sense,
In heart or head, possessing, soon inspired
With act intelligential but his sleep
Disturbed not, waiting close the approach of morn.
Now, when as sacred light began to dawn
In Eden on the humid flowers, that breathed
Their morning incense, when all things, that breathe,
From the Earths great altar send up silent praise
To the Creator, and his nostrils fill
With grateful smell, forth came the human pair,
And joined their vocal worship to the quire
Of creatures wanting voice that done, partake
The season prime for sweetest scents and airs:
Then commune, how that day they best may ply
Their growing work: for much their work outgrew
The hands dispatch of two gardening so wide,
And Eve first to her husband thus began.
Adam, well may we labour still to dress
This garden, still to tend plant, herb, and flower,
Our pleasant task enjoined but, till more hands
Aid us, the work under our labour grows,
Luxurious by restraint what we by day
Lop overgrown, or prune, or prop, or bind,
One night or two with wanton growth derides
Tending to wild.  Thou therefore now advise,
Or bear what to my mind first thoughts present:
Let us divide our labours thou, where choice
Leads thee, or where most needs, whether to wind
The woodbine round this arbour, or direct
The clasping ivy where to climb while I,
In yonder spring of roses intermixed
With myrtle, find what to redress till noon:
For, while so near each other thus all day
Our task we choose, what wonder if so near
Looks intervene and smiles, or object new
Casual discourse draw on which intermits
Our days work, brought to little, though begun
Early, and the hour of supper comes unearned?
To whom mild answer Adam thus returned.
Sole Eve, associate sole, to me beyond
Compare above all living creatures dear!
Well hast thou motioned, well thy thoughts employed,
How we might best fulfil the work which here
God hath assigned us nor of me shalt pass
Unpraised: for nothing lovelier can be found
In woman, than to study houshold good,
And good works in her husband to promote.
Yet not so strictly hath our Lord imposed
Labour, as to debar us when we need
Refreshment, whether food, or talk between,
Food of the mind, or this sweet intercourse
Of looks and smiles for smiles from reason flow,
To brute denied, and are of love the food
Love, not the lowest end of human life.
For not to irksome toil, but to delight,
He made us, and delight to reason joined.
These paths and bowers doubt not but our joint hands
Will keep from wilderness with ease, as wide
As we need walk, till younger hands ere long
Assist us But, if much converse perhaps
Thee satiate, to short absence I could yield:
For solitude sometimes is best society,
And short retirement urges sweet return.
But other doubt possesses me, lest harm
Befall thee severed from me for thou knowest
What hath been warned us, what malicious foe
Envying our happiness, and of his own
Despairing, seeks to work us woe and shame
By sly assault and somewhere nigh at hand
Watches, no doubt, with greedy hope to find
His wish and best advantage, us asunder
Hopeless to circumvent us joined, where each
To other speedy aid might lend at need:
Whether his first design be to withdraw
Our fealty from God, or to disturb
Conjugal love, than which perhaps no bliss
Enjoyed by us excites his envy more
Or this, or worse, leave not the faithful side
That gave thee being, still shades thee, and protects.
The wife, where danger or dishonour lurks,
Safest and seemliest by her husband stays,
Who guards her, or with her the worst endures.
To whom the virgin majesty of Eve,
As one who loves, and some unkindness meets,
With sweet austere composure thus replied.
Offspring of Heaven and Earth, and all Earths Lord!
That such an enemy we have, who seeks
Our ruin, both by thee informed I learn,
And from the parting Angel overheard,
As in a shady nook I stood behind,
Just then returned at shut of evening flowers.
But, that thou shouldst my firmness therefore doubt
To God or thee, because we have a foe
May tempt it, I expected not to hear.
His violence thou fearest not, being such
As we, not capable of death or pain,
Can either not receive, or can repel.
His fraud is then thy fear which plain infers
Thy equal fear, that my firm faith and love
Can by his fraud be shaken or seduced
Thoughts, which how found they harbour in thy breast,
Adam, misthought of her to thee so dear?
To whom with healing words Adam replied.
Daughter of God and Man, immortal Eve!
For such thou art from sin and blame entire:
Not diffident of thee do I dissuade
Thy absence from my sight, but to avoid
The attempt itself, intended by our foe.
For he who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses
The tempted with dishonour foul supposed
Not incorruptible of faith, not proof
Against temptation: Thou thyself with scorn
And anger wouldst resent the offered wrong,
Though ineffectual found: misdeem not then,
If such affront I labour to avert
From thee alone, which on us both at once
The enemy, though bold, will hardly dare
Or daring, first on me the assault shall light.
Nor thou his malice and false guile contemn
Subtle he needs must be, who could seduce
Angels nor think superfluous others aid.
I, from the influence of thy looks, receive
Access in every virtue in thy sight
More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were
Of outward strength while shame, thou looking on,
Shame to be overcome or overreached,
Would utmost vigour raise, and raised unite.
Why shouldst not thou like sense within thee feel
When I am present, and thy trial choose
With me, best witness of thy virtue tried?
So spake domestick Adam in his care
And matrimonial love but Eve, who thought
Less attributed to her faith sincere,
Thus her reply with accent sweet renewed.
If this be our condition, thus to dwell
In narrow circuit straitened by a foe,
Subtle or violent, we not endued
Single with like defence, wherever met
How are we happy, still in fear of harm?
But harm precedes not sin: only our foe,
Tempting, affronts us with his foul esteem
Of our integrity: his foul esteem
Sticks no dishonour on our front, but turns
Foul on himself then wherefore shunned or feared
By us? who rather double honour gain
From his surmise proved false find peace within,
Favour from Heaven, our witness, from the event.
And what is faith, love, virtue, unassayed
Alone, without exteriour help sustained?
Let us not then suspect our happy state
Left so imperfect by the Maker wise,
As not secure to single or combined.
Frail is our happiness, if this be so,
And Eden were no Eden, thus exposed.
To whom thus Adam fervently replied.
O Woman, best are all things as the will
Of God ordained them: His creating hand
Nothing imperfect or deficient left
Of all that he created, much less Man,
Or aught that might his happy state secure,
Secure from outward force within himself
The danger lies, yet lies within his power:
Against his will he can receive no harm.
But God left free the will for what obeys
Reason, is free and Reason he made right,
But bid her well be ware, and still erect
Lest, by some fairappearing good surprised,
She dictate false and misinform the will
To do what God expressly hath forbid.
Not then mistrust, but tender love, enjoins,
That I should mind thee oft and mind thou me.
Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve
Since Reason not impossibly may meet
Some specious object by the foe suborned,
And fall into deception unaware,
Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warned.
Seek not temptation then, which to avoid
Were better, and most likely if from me
Thou sever not: Trial will come unsought.
Wouldst thou approve thy constancy, approve
First thy obedience the other who can know,
Not seeing thee attempted, who attest?
But, if thou think, trial unsought may find
Us both securer than thus warned thou seemest,
Go for thy stay, not free, absents thee more
Go in thy native innocence, rely
On what thou hast of virtue summon all!
For God towards thee hath done his part, do thine.
So spake the patriarch of mankind but Eve
Persisted yet submiss, though last, replied.
With thy permission then, and thus forewarned
Chiefly by what thy own last reasoning words
Touched only that our trial, when least sought,
May find us both perhaps far less prepared,
The willinger I go, nor much expect
A foe so proud will first the weaker seek
So bent, the more shall shame him his repulse.
Thus saying, from her husbands hand her hand
Soft she withdrew and, like a WoodNymph light,
Oread or Dryad, or of Delias train,
Betook her to the groves but Delias self
In gait surpassed, and Goddesslike deport,
Though not as she with bow and quiver armed,
But with such gardening tools as Art yet rude,
Guiltless of fire, had formed, or Angels brought.
To Pales, or Pomona, thus adorned,
Likest she seemed, Pomona when she fled
Vertumnus, or to Ceres in her prime,
Yet virgin of Proserpina from Jove.
Her long with ardent look his eye pursued
Delighted, but desiring more her stay.
Oft he to her his charge of quick return
Repeated she to him as oft engaged
To be returned by noon amid the bower,
And all things in best order to invite
Noontide repast, or afternoons repose.
O much deceived, much failing, hapless Eve,
Of thy presumed return! event perverse!
Thou never from that hour in Paradise
Foundst either sweet repast, or sound repose
Such ambush, hid among sweet flowers and shades,
Waited with hellish rancour imminent
To intercept thy way, or send thee back
Despoiled of innocence, of faith, of bliss!
For now, and since first break of dawn, the Fiend,
Mere serpent in appearance, forth was come
And on his quest, where likeliest he might find
The only two of mankind, but in them
The whole included race, his purposed prey.
In bower and field he sought, where any tuft
Of grove or gardenplot more pleasant lay,
Their tendance, or plantation for delight
By fountain or by shady rivulet
He sought them both, but wished his hap might find
Eve separate he wished, but not with hope
Of what so seldom chanced when to his wish,
Beyond his hope, Eve separate he spies,
Veiled in a cloud of fragrance, where she stood,
Half spied, so thick the roses blushing round
About her glowed, oft stooping to support
Each flower of slender stalk, whose head, though gay
Carnation, purple, azure, or specked with gold,
Hung drooping unsustained them she upstays
Gently with myrtle band, mindless the while
Herself, though fairest unsupported flower,
From her best prop so far, and storm so nigh.
Nearer he drew, and many a walk traversed
Of stateliest covert, cedar, pine, or palm
Then voluble and bold, now hid, now seen,
Among thickwoven arborets, and flowers
Imbordered on each bank, the hand of Eve:
Spot more delicious than those gardens feigned
Or of revived Adonis, or renowned
Alcinous, host of old Laertes son
Or that, not mystick, where the sapient king
Held dalliance with his fair Egyptian spouse.
Much he the place admired, the person more.
As one who long in populous city pent,
Where houses thick and sewers annoy the air,
Forth issuing on a summers morn, to breathe
Among the pleasant villages and farms
Adjoined, from each thing met conceives delight
The smell of grain, or tedded grass, or kine,
Or dairy, each rural sight, each rural sound
If chance, with nymphlike step, fair virgin pass,
What pleasing seemed, for her now pleases more
She most, and in her look sums all delight:
Such pleasure took the Serpent to behold
This flowery plat, the sweet recess of Eve
Thus early, thus alone: Her heavenly form
Angelick, but more soft, and feminine,
Her graceful innocence, her every air
Of gesture, or least action, overawed
His malice, and with rapine sweet bereaved
His fierceness of the fierce intent it brought:
That space the Evilone abstracted stood
From his own evil, and for the time remained
Stupidly good of enmity disarmed,
Of guile, of hate, of envy, of revenge:
But the hot Hell that always in him burns,
Though in mid Heaven, soon ended his delight,
And tortures him now more, the more he sees
Of pleasure, not for him ordained: then soon
Fierce hate he recollects, and all his thoughts
Of mischief, gratulating, thus excites.
Thoughts, whither have ye led me! with what sweet
Compulsion thus transported, to forget
What hither brought us! hate, not lovenor hope
Of Paradise for Hell, hope here to taste
Of pleasure but all pleasure to destroy,
Save what is in destroying other joy
To me is lost.  Then, let me not let pass
Occasion which now smiles behold alone
The woman, opportune to all attempts,
Her husband, for I view far round, not nigh,
Whose higher intellectual more I shun,
And strength, of courage haughty, and of limb
Heroick built, though of terrestrial mould
Foe not informidable! exempt from wound,
I not so much hath Hell debased, and pain
Enfeebled me, to what I was in Heaven.
She fair, divinely fair, fit love for Gods!
Not terrible, though terrour be in love
And beauty, not approached by stronger hate,
Hate stronger, under show of love well feigned
The way which to her ruin now I tend.
So spake the enemy of mankind, enclosed
In serpent, inmate bad! and toward Eve
Addressed his way: not with indented wave,
Prone on the ground, as since but on his rear,
Circular base of rising folds, that towered
Fold above fold, a surging maze! his head
Crested aloft, and carbuncle his eyes
With burnished neck of verdant gold, erect
Amidst his circling spires, that on the grass
Floated redundant: pleasing was his shape
And lovely never since of serpentkind
Lovelier, not those that in Illyria changed,
Hermione and Cadmus, or the god
In Epidaurus nor to which transformed
Ammonian Jove, or Capitoline, was seen
He with Olympias this with her who bore
Scipio, the highth of Rome.  With tract oblique
At first, as one who sought access, but feared
To interrupt, sidelong he works his way.
As when a ship, by skilful steersmen wrought
Nigh rivers mouth or foreland, where the wind
Veers oft, as oft so steers, and shifts her sail:
So varied he, and of his tortuous train
Curled many a wanton wreath in sight of Eve,
To lure her eye she, busied, heard the sound
Of rusling leaves, but minded not, as used
To such disport before her through the field,
From every beast more duteous at her call,
Than at Circean call the herd disguised.
He, bolder now, uncalled before her stood,
But as in gaze admiring: oft he bowed
His turret crest, and sleek enamelled neck,
Fawning and licked the ground whereon she trod.
His gentle dumb expression turned at length
The eye of Eve to mark his play he, glad
Of her attention gained, with serpenttongue
Organick, or impulse of vocal air,
His fraudulent temptation thus began.
Wonder not, sovran Mistress, if perhaps
Thou canst, who art sole wonder! much less arm
Thy looks, the Heaven of mildness, with disdain,
Displeased that I approach thee thus, and gaze
Insatiate I thus singlenor have feared
Thy awful brow, more awful thus retired.
Fairest resemblance of thy Maker fair,
Thee all things living gaze on, all things thine
By gift, and thy celestial beauty adore
With ravishment beheld! there best beheld,
Where universally admired but here
In this enclosure wild, these beasts among,
Beholders rude, and shallow to discern
Half what in thee is fair, one man except,
Who sees thee? and what is one? who should be seen
A Goddess among Gods, adored and served
By Angels numberless, thy daily train.
So glozed the Tempter, and his proem tuned:
Into the heart of Eve his words made way,
Though at the voice much marvelling at length,
Not unamazed, she thus in answer spake.
What may this mean? language of man pronounced
By tongue of brute, and human sense expressed?
The first, at least, of these I thought denied
To beasts whom God, on their creationday,
Created mute to all articulate sound:
The latter I demur for in their looks
Much reason, and in their actions, oft appears.
Thee, Serpent, subtlest beast of all the field
I knew, but not with human voice endued
Redouble then this miracle, and say,
How camest thou speakable of mute, and how
To me so friendly grown above the rest
Of brutal kind, that daily are in sight?
Say, for such wonder claims attention due.
To whom the guileful Tempter thus replied.
Empress of this fair world, resplendent Eve!
Easy to me it is to tell thee all
What thou commandest and right thou shouldst be obeyed:
I was at first as other beasts that graze
The trodden herb, of abject thoughts and low,
As was my food nor aught but food discerned
Or sex, and apprehended nothing high:
Till, on a day roving the field, I chanced
A goodly tree far distant to behold
Loaden with fruit of fairest colours mixed,
Ruddy and gold: I nearer drew to gaze
When from the boughs a savoury odour blown,
Grateful to appetite, more pleased my sense
Than smell of sweetest fennel, or the teats
Of ewe or goat dropping with milk at even,
Unsucked of lamb or kid, that tend their play.
To satisfy the sharp desire I had
Of tasting those fair apples, I resolved
Not to defer hunger and thirst at once,
Powerful persuaders, quickened at the scent
Of that alluring fruit, urged me so keen.
About the mossy trunk I wound me soon
For, high from ground, the branches would require
Thy utmost reach or Adams: Round the tree
All other beasts that saw, with like desire
Longing and envying stood, but could not reach.
Amid the tree now got, where plenty hung
Tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill
I spared not for, such pleasure till that hour,
At feed or fountain, never had I found.
Sated at length, ere long I might perceive
Strange alteration in me, to degree
Of reason in my inward powers and speech
Wanted not long though to this shape retained.
Thenceforth to speculations high or deep
I turned my thoughts, and with capacious mind
Considered all things visible in Heaven,
Or Earth, or Middle all things fair and good:
But all that fair and good in thy divine
Semblance, and in thy beautys heavenly ray,
United I beheld no fair to thine
Equivalent or second! which compelled
Me thus, though importune perhaps, to come
And gaze, and worship thee of right declared
Sovran of creatures, universal Dame!
So talked the spirited sly Snake and Eve,
Yet more amazed, unwary thus replied.
Serpent, thy overpraising leaves in doubt
The virtue of that fruit, in thee first proved:
But say, where grows the tree? from hence how far?
For many are the trees of God that grow
In Paradise, and various, yet unknown
To us in such abundance lies our choice,
As leaves a greater store of fruit untouched,
Still hanging incorruptible, till men
Grow up to their provision, and more hands
Help to disburden Nature of her birth.
To whom the wily Adder, blithe and glad.
Empress, the way is ready, and not long
Beyond a row of myrtles, on a flat,
Fast by a fountain, one small thicket past
Of blowing myrrh and balm: if thou accept
My conduct, I can bring thee thither soon
Lead then, said Eve.  He, leading, swiftly rolled
In tangles, and made intricate seem straight,
To mischief swift.  Hope elevates, and joy
Brightens his crest as when a wandering fire,
Compact of unctuous vapour, which the night
Condenses, and the cold environs round,
Kindled through agitation to a flame,
Which oft, they say, some evil Spirit attends,
Hovering and blazing with delusive light,
Misleads the amazed nightwanderer from his way
To bogs and mires, and oft through pond or pool
There swallowed up and lost, from succour far.
So glistered the dire Snake, and into fraud
Led Eve, our credulous mother, to the tree
Of prohibition, root of all our woe
Which when she saw, thus to her guide she spake.
Serpent, we might have spared our coming hither,
Fruitless to me, though fruit be here to excess,
The credit of whose virtue rest with thee
Wonderous indeed, if cause of such effects.
But of this tree we may not taste nor touch
God so commanded, and left that command
Sole daughter of his voice the rest, we live
Law to ourselves our reason is our law.
To whom the Tempter guilefully replied.
Indeed! hath God then said that of the fruit
Of all these gardentrees ye shall not eat,
Yet Lords declared of all in earth or air?
To whom thus Eve, yet sinless.  Of the fruit
Of each tree in the garden we may eat
But of the fruit of this fair tree amidst
The garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat
Thereof, nor shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
She scarce had said, though brief, when now more bold
The Tempter, but with show of zeal and love
To Man, and indignation at his wrong,
New part puts on and, as to passion moved,
Fluctuates disturbed, yet comely and in act
Raised, as of some great matter to begin.
As when of old some orator renowned,
In Athens or free Rome, where eloquence
Flourished, since mute! to some great cause addressed,
Stood in himself collected while each part,
Motion, each act, won audience ere the tongue
Sometimes in highth began, as no delay
Of preface brooking, through his zeal of right:
So standing, moving, or to highth up grown,
The Tempter, all impassioned, thus began.
O sacred, wise, and wisdomgiving Plant,
Mother of science! now I feel thy power
Within me clear not only to discern
Things in their causes, but to trace the ways
Of highest agents, deemed however wise.
Queen of this universe! do not believe
Those rigid threats of death: ye shall not die:
How should you? by the fruit? it gives you life
To knowledge by the threatener? look on me,
Me, who have touched and tasted yet both live,
And life more perfect have attained than Fate
Meant me, by venturing higher than my lot.
Shall that be shut to Man, which to the Beast
Is open? or will God incense his ire
For such a petty trespass? and not praise
Rather your dauntless virtue, whom the pain
Of death denounced, whatever thing death be,
Deterred not from achieving what might lead
To happier life, knowledge of good and evil
Of good, how just? of evil, if what is evil
Be real, why not known, since easier shunned?
God therefore cannot hurt ye, and be just
Not just, not God not feared then, nor obeyed:
Your fear itself of death removes the fear.
Why then was this forbid?  Why, but to awe
Why, but to keep ye low and ignorant,
His worshippers?  He knows that in the day
Ye eat thereof, your eyes that seem so clear,
Yet are but dim, shall perfectly be then
Opened and cleared, and ye shall be as Gods,
Knowing both good and evil, as they know.
That ye shall be as Gods, since I as Man,
Internal Man, is but proportion meet
I, of brute, human ye, of human, Gods.
So ye shall die perhaps, by putting off
Human, to put on Gods death to be wished,
Though threatened, which no worse than this can bring.
And what are Gods, that Man may not become
As they, participating Godlike food?
The Gods are first, and that advantage use
On our belief, that all from them proceeds:
I question it for this fair earth I see,
Warmed by the sun, producing every kind
Them, nothing: if they all things, who enclosed
Knowledge of good and evil in this tree,
That whoso eats thereof, forthwith attains
Wisdom without their leave? and wherein lies
The offence, that Man should thus attain to know?
What can your knowledge hurt him, or this tree
Impart against his will, if all be his?
Or is it envy? and can envy dwell
In heavenly breasts?  These, these, and many more
Causes import your need of this fair fruit.
Goddess humane, reach then, and freely taste!
He ended and his words, replete with guile,
Into her heart too easy entrance won:
Fixed on the fruit she gazed, which to behold
Might tempt alone and in her ears the sound
Yet rung of his persuasive words, impregned
With reason, to her seeming, and with truth:
Mean while the hour of noon drew on, and waked
An eager appetite, raised by the smell
So savoury of that fruit, which with desire,
Inclinable now grown to touch or taste,
Solicited her longing eye yet first
Pausing a while, thus to herself she mused.
Great are thy virtues, doubtless, best of fruits,
Though kept from man, and worthy to be admired
Whose taste, too long forborn, at first assay
Gave elocution to the mute, and taught
The tongue not made for speech to speak thy praise:
Thy praise he also, who forbids thy use,
Conceals not from us, naming thee the tree
Of knowledge, knowledge both of good and evil
Forbids us then to taste! but his forbidding
Commends thee more, while it infers the good
By thee communicated, and our want:
For good unknown sure is not had or, had
And yet unknown, is as not had at all.
In plain then, what forbids he but to know,
Forbids us good, forbids us to be wise?
Such prohibitions bind not.  But, if death
Bind us with afterbands, what profits then
Our inward freedom?  In the day we eat
Of this fair fruit, our doom is, we shall die!
How dies the Serpent? he hath eaten and lives,
And knows, and speaks, and reasons, and discerns,
Irrational till then.  For us alone
Was death invented? or to us denied
This intellectual food, for beasts reserved?
For beasts it seems: yet that one beast which first
Hath tasted envies not, but brings with joy
The good befallen him, author unsuspect,
Friendly to man, far from deceit or guile.
What fear I then? rather, what know to fear
Under this ignorance of good and evil,
Of God or death, of law or penalty?
Here grows the cure of all, this fruit divine,
Fair to the eye, inviting to the taste,
Of virtue to make wise:  What hinders then
To reach, and feed at once both body and mind?
So saying, her rash hand in evil hour
Forth reaching to the fruit, she plucked, she eat!
Earth felt the wound and Nature from her seat,
Sighing through all her works, gave signs of woe,
That all was lost.  Back to the thicket slunk
The guilty Serpent and well mightfor Eve,
Intent now wholly on her taste, nought else
Regarded such delight till then, as seemed,
In fruit she never tasted, whether true
Or fancied so, through expectation high
Of knowledge not was Godhead from her thought.
Greedily she ingorged without restraint,
And knew not eating death:  Satiate at length,
And hightened as with wine, jocund and boon,
Thus to herself she pleasingly began.
O sovran, virtuous, precious of all trees
In Paradise! of operation blest
To sapience, hitherto obscured, infamed.
And thy fair fruit let hang, as to no end
Created but henceforth my early care,
Not without song, each morning, and due praise,
Shall tend thee, and the fertile burden ease
Of thy full branches offered free to all
Till, dieted by thee, I grow mature
In knowledge, as the Gods, who all things know
Though others envy what they cannot give:
For, had the gift been theirs, it had not here
Thus grown.  Experience, next, to thee I owe,
Best guide not following thee, I had remained
In ignorance thou openest wisdoms way,
And givest access, though secret she retire.
And I perhaps am secret: Heaven is high,
High, and remote to see from thence distinct
Each thing on Earth and other care perhaps
May have diverted from continual watch
Our great Forbidder, safe with all his spies
About him.  But to Adam in what sort
Shall I appear? shall I to him make known
As yet my change, and give him to partake
Full happiness with me, or rather not,
But keeps the odds of knowledge in my power
Without copartner? so to add what wants
In female sex, the more to draw his love,
And render me more equal and perhaps,
A thing not undesirable, sometime
Superiour for, inferiour, who is free
This may be well:  But what if God have seen,
And death ensue? then I shall be no more!
And Adam, wedded to another Eve,
Shall live with her enjoying, I extinct
A death to think!  Confirmed then I resolve,
Adam shall share with me in bliss or woe:
So dear I love him, that with him all deaths
I could endure, without him live no life.
So saying, from the tree her step she turned
But first low reverence done, as to the Power
That dwelt within, whose presence had infused
Into the plant sciential sap, derived
From nectar, drink of Gods.  Adam the while,
Waiting desirous her return, had wove
Of choicest flowers a garland, to adorn
Her tresses, and her rural labours crown
As reapers oft are wont their harvestqueen.
Great joy he promised to his thoughts, and new
Solace in her return, so long delayed:
Yet oft his heart, divine of something ill,
Misgave him he the faltering measure felt
And forth to meet her went, the way she took
That morn when first they parted: by the tree
Of knowledge he must pass there he her met,
Scarce from the tree returning in her hand
A bough of fairest fruit, that downy smiled,
New gathered, and ambrosial smell diffused.
To him she hasted in her face excuse
Came prologue, and apology too prompt
Which, with bland words at will, she thus addressed.
Hast thou not wondered, Adam, at my stay?
Thee I have missed, and thought it long, deprived
Thy presence agony of love till now
Not felt, nor shall be twice for never more
Mean I to try, what rash untried I sought,
The pain of absence from thy sight.  But strange
Hath been the cause, and wonderful to hear:
This tree is not, as we are told, a tree
Of danger tasted, nor to evil unknown
Opening the way, but of divine effect
To open eyes, and make them Gods who taste
And hath been tasted such:  The serpent wise,
Or not restrained as we, or not obeying,
Hath eaten of the fruit and is become,
Not dead, as we are threatened, but thenceforth
Endued with human voice and human sense,
Reasoning to admiration and with me
Persuasively hath so prevailed, that I
Have also tasted, and have also found
The effects to correspond opener mine eyes,
Dim erst, dilated spirits, ampler heart,
And growing up to Godhead which for thee
Chiefly I sought, without thee can despise.
For bliss, as thou hast part, to me is bliss
Tedious, unshared with thee, and odious soon.
Thou therefore also taste, that equal lot
May join us, equal joy, as equal love
Lest, thou not tasting, different degree
Disjoin us, and I then too late renounce
Deity for thee, when Fate will not permit.
Thus Eve with countenance blithe her story told
But in her cheek distemper flushing glowed.
On the other side Adam, soon as he heard
The fatal trespass done by Eve, amazed,
Astonied stood and blank, while horrour chill
Ran through his veins, and all his joints relaxed
From his slack hand the garland wreathed for Eve
Down dropt, and all the faded roses shed:
Speechless he stood and pale, till thus at length
First to himself he inward silence broke.
O fairest of Creation, last and best
Of all Gods works, Creature in whom excelled
Whatever can to sight or thought be formed,
Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet!
How art thou lost! how on a sudden lost,
Defaced, deflowered, and now to death devote!
Rather, how hast thou yielded to transgress
The strict forbiddance, how to violate
The sacred fruit forbidden!  Some cursed fraud
Of enemy hath beguiled thee, yet unknown,
And me with thee hath ruined for with thee
Certain my resolution is to die:
How can I live without thee! how forego
Thy sweet converse, and love so dearly joined,
To live again in these wild woods forlorn!
Should God create another Eve, and I
Another rib afford, yet loss of thee
Would never from my heart: no, no!I feel
The link of Nature draw me: flesh of flesh,
Bone of my bone thou art, and from thy state
Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe.
So having said, as one from sad dismay
Recomforted, and after thoughts disturbed
Submitting to what seemed remediless,
Thus in calm mood his words to Eve he turned.
Bold deed thou hast presumed, adventurous Eve,
And peril great provoked, who thus hast dared,
Had it been only coveting to eye
That sacred fruit, sacred to abstinence,
Much more to taste it under ban to touch.
But past who can recall, or done undo?
Not God Omnipotent, nor Fate yet so
Perhaps thou shalt not die, perhaps the fact
Is not so heinous now, foretasted fruit,
Profaned first by the serpent, by him first
Made common, and unhallowed, ere our taste
Nor yet on him found deadly yet he lives
Lives, as thou saidst, and gains to live, as Man,
Higher degree of life inducement strong
To us, as likely tasting to attain
Proportional ascent which cannot be
But to be Gods, or Angels, demiGods.
Nor can I think that God, Creator wise,
Though threatening, will in earnest so destroy
Us his prime creatures, dignified so high,
Set over all his works which in our fall,
For us created, needs with us must fail,
Dependant made so God shall uncreate,
Be frustrate, do, undo, and labour lose
Not well conceived of God, who, though his power
Creation could repeat, yet would be loth
Us to abolish, lest the Adversary
Triumph, and say "Fickle their state whom God
"Most favours who can please him long? Me first
"He ruined, now Mankind whom will he next?"
Matter of scorn, not to be given the Foe.
However I with thee have fixed my lot,
Certain to undergo like doom:  If death
Consort with thee, death is to me as life
So forcible within my heart I feel
The bond of Nature draw me to my own
My own in thee, for what thou art is mine
Our state cannot be severed we are one,
One flesh to lose thee were to lose myself.
So Adam and thus Eve to him replied.
O glorious trial of exceeding love,
Illustrious evidence, example high!
Engaging me to emulate but, short
Of thy perfection, how shall I attain,
Adam, from whose dear side I boast me sprung,
And gladly of our union hear thee speak,
One heart, one soul in both whereof good proof
This day affords, declaring thee resolved,
Rather than death, or aught than death more dread,
Shall separate us, linked in love so dear,
To undergo with me one guilt, one crime,
If any be, of tasting this fair fruit
Whose virtue for of good still good proceeds,
Direct, or by occasion, hath presented
This happy trial of thy love, which else
So eminently never had been known?
Were it I thought death menaced would ensue
This my attempt, I would sustain alone
The worst, and not persuade thee, rather die
Deserted, than oblige thee with a fact
Pernicious to thy peace chiefly assured
Remarkably so late of thy so true,
So faithful, love unequalled: but I feel
Far otherwise the event not death, but life
Augmented, opened eyes, new hopes, new joys,
Taste so divine, that what of sweet before
Hath touched my sense, flat seems to this, and harsh.
On my experience, Adam, freely taste,
And fear of death deliver to the winds.
So saying, she embraced him, and for joy
Tenderly wept much won, that he his love
Had so ennobled, as of choice to incur
Divine displeasure for her sake, or death.
In recompence for such compliance bad
Such recompence best merits from the bough
She gave him of that fair enticing fruit
With liberal hand: he scrupled not to eat,
Against his better knowledge not deceived,
But fondly overcome with female charm.
Earth trembled from her entrails, as again
In pangs and Nature gave a second groan
Sky loured and, muttering thunder, some sad drops
Wept at completing of the mortal sin
Original: while Adam took no thought,
Eating his fill nor Eve to iterate
Her former trespass feared, the more to sooth
Him with her loved society that now,
As with new wine intoxicated both,
They swim in mirth, and fancy that they feel
Divinity within them breeding wings,
Wherewith to scorn the earth:  But that false fruit
Far other operation first displayed,
Carnal desire inflaming he on Eve
Began to cast lascivious eyes she him
As wantonly repaid in lust they burn:
Till Adam thus gan Eve to dalliance move.
Eve, now I see thou art exact of taste,
And elegant, of sapience no small part
Since to each meaning savour we apply,
And palate call judicious I the praise
Yield thee, so well this day thou hast purveyed.
Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstained
From this delightful fruit, nor known till now
True relish, tasting if such pleasure be
In things to us forbidden, it might be wished,
For this one tree had been forbidden ten.
But come, so well refreshed, now let us play,
As meet is, after such delicious fare
For never did thy beauty, since the day
I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorned
With all perfections, so inflame my sense
With ardour to enjoy thee, fairer now
Than ever bounty of this virtuous tree!
So said he, and forbore not glance or toy
Of amorous intent well understood
Of Eve, whose eye darted contagious fire.
Her hand he seised and to a shady bank,
Thick overhead with verdant roof imbowered,
He led her nothing loth flowers were the couch,
Pansies, and violets, and asphodel,
And hyacinth  Earths freshest softest lap.
There they their fill of love and loves disport
Took largely, of their mutual guilt the seal,
The solace of their sin till dewy sleep
Oppressed them, wearied with their amorous play,
Soon as the force of that fallacious fruit,
That with exhilarating vapour bland
About their spirits had played, and inmost powers
Made err, was now exhaled and grosser sleep,
Bred of unkindly fumes, with conscious dreams
Incumbered, now had left them up they rose
As from unrest and, each the other viewing,
Soon found their eyes how opened, and their minds
How darkened innocence, that as a veil
Had shadowed them from knowing ill, was gone
Just confidence, and native righteousness,
And honour, from about them, naked left
To guilty Shame he covered, but his robe
Uncovered more.  So rose the Danite strong,
Herculean Samson, from the harlotlap
Of Philistean Dalilah, and waked
Shorn of his strength.  They destitute and bare
Of all their virtue:  Silent, and in face
Confounded, long they sat, as strucken mute:
Till Adam, though not less than Eve abashed,
At length gave utterance to these words constrained.
O Eve, in evil hour thou didst give ear
To that false worm, of whomsoever taught
To counterfeit Mans voice true in our fall,
False in our promised rising since our eyes
Opened we find indeed, and find we know
Both good and evil good lost, and evil got
Bad fruit of knowledge, if this be to know
Which leaves us naked thus, of honour void,
Of innocence, of faith, of purity,
Our wonted ornaments now soiled and stained,
And in our faces evident the signs
Of foul concupiscence whence evil store
Even shame, the last of evils of the first
Be sure then.How shall I behold the face
Henceforth of God or Angel, erst with joy
And rapture so oft beheld?  Those heavenly shapes
Will dazzle now this earthly with their blaze
Insufferably bright.  O! might I here
In solitude live savage in some glade
Obscured, where highest woods, impenetrable
To star or sunlight, spread their umbrage broad
And brown as evening:  Cover me, ye Pines!
Ye Cedars, with innumerable boughs
Hide me, where I may never see them more!
But let us now, as in bad plight, devise
What best may for the present serve to hide
The parts of each from other, that seem most
To shame obnoxious, and unseemliest seen
Some tree, whose broad smooth leaves together sewed,
And girded on our loins, may cover round
Those middle parts that this new comer, Shame,
There sit not, and reproach us as unclean.
So counselled he, and both together went
Into the thickest wood there soon they chose
The figtree not that kind for fruit renowned,
But such as at this day, to Indians known,
In Malabar or Decan spreads her arms
Branching so broad and long, that in the ground
The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow
About the mother tree, a pillared shade
High overarched, and echoing walks between:
There oft the Indian herdsman, shunning heat,
Shelters in cool, and tends his pasturing herds
At loopholes cut through thickest shade:  Those leaves
They gathered, broad as Amazonian targe
And, with what skill they had, together sewed,
To gird their waist vain covering, if to hide
Their guilt and dreaded shame!  O, how unlike
To that first naked glory!  Such of late
Columbus found the American, so girt
With feathered cincture naked else, and wild
Among the trees on isles and woody shores.
Thus fenced, and, as they thought, their shame in part
Covered, but not at rest or ease of mind,
They sat them down to weep nor only tears
Rained at their eyes, but high winds worse within
Began to rise, high passions, anger, hate,
Mistrust, suspicion, discord and shook sore
Their inward state of mind, calm region once
And full of peace, now tost and turbulent:
For Understanding ruled not, and the Will
Heard not her lore both in subjection now
To sensual Appetite, who from beneath
Usurping over sovran Reason claimed
Superiour sway: From thus distempered breast,
Adam, estranged in look and altered style,
Speech intermitted thus to Eve renewed.
Would thou hadst hearkened to my words, and staid
With me, as I besought thee, when that strange
Desire of wandering, this unhappy morn,
I know not whence possessed thee we had then
Remained still happy not, as now, despoiled
Of all our good shamed, naked, miserable!
Let none henceforth seek needless cause to approve
The faith they owe when earnestly they seek
Such proof, conclude, they then begin to fail.
To whom, soon moved with touch of blame, thus Eve.
What words have passed thy lips, Adam severe!
Imputest thou that to my default, or will
Of wandering, as thou callest it, which who knows
But might as ill have happened thou being by,
Or to thyself perhaps?  Hadst thou been there,
Or here the attempt, thou couldst not have discerned
Fraud in the Serpent, speaking as he spake
No ground of enmity between us known,
Why he should mean me ill, or seek to harm.
Was I to have never parted from thy side?
As good have grown there still a lifeless rib.
Being as I am, why didst not thou, the head,
Command me absolutely not to go,
Going into such danger, as thou saidst?
Too facile then, thou didst not much gainsay
Nay, didst permit, approve, and fair dismiss.
Hadst thou been firm and fixed in thy dissent,
Neither had I transgressed, nor thou with me.
To whom, then first incensed, Adam replied.
Is this the love, is this the recompence
Of mine to thee, ingrateful Eve! expressed
Immutable, when thou wert lost, not I
Who might have lived, and joyed immortal bliss,
Yet willingly chose rather death with thee?
And am I now upbraided as the cause
Of thy transgressing?  Not enough severe,
It seems, in thy restraint:  What could I more
I warned thee, I admonished thee, foretold
The danger, and the lurking enemy
That lay in wait beyond this, had been force
And force upon free will hath here no place.
But confidence then bore thee on secure
Either to meet no danger, or to find
Matter of glorious trial and perhaps
I also erred, in overmuch admiring
What seemed in thee so perfect, that I thought
No evil durst attempt thee but I rue
The errour now, which is become my crime,
And thou the accuser.  Thus it shall befall
Him, who, to worth in women overtrusting,
Lets her will rule: restraint she will not brook
And, left to herself, if evil thence ensue,
She first his weak indulgence will accuse.
Thus they in mutual accusation spent
The fruitless hours, but neither selfcondemning
And of their vain contest appeared no end.



Book X


Mean while the heinous and despiteful act
Of Satan, done in Paradise and how
He, in the serpent, had perverted Eve,
Her husband she, to taste the fatal fruit,
Was known in Heaven for what can scape the eye
Of God allseeing, or deceive his heart
Omniscient? who, in all things wise and just,
Hindered not Satan to attempt the mind
Of Man, with strength entire and free will armed,
Complete to have discovered and repulsed
Whatever wiles of foe or seeming friend.
For still they knew, and ought to have still remembered,
The high injunction, not to taste that fruit,
Whoever tempted which they not obeying,
Incurred what could they less? the penalty
And, manifold in sin, deserved to fall.
Up into Heaven from Paradise in haste
The angelick guards ascended, mute, and sad,
For Man for of his state by this they knew,
Much wondering how the subtle Fiend had stolen
Entrance unseen.  Soon as the unwelcome news
From Earth arrived at Heavengate, displeased
All were who heard dim sadness did not spare
That time celestial visages, yet, mixed
With pity, violated not their bliss.
About the newarrived, in multitudes
The ethereal people ran, to hear and know
How all befel:  They towards the throne supreme,
Accountable, made haste, to make appear,
With righteous plea, their utmost vigilance
And easily approved when the Most High
Eternal Father, from his secret cloud,
Amidst in thunder uttered thus his voice.
Assembled Angels, and ye Powers returned
From unsuccessful charge be not dismayed,
Nor troubled at these tidings from the earth,
Which your sincerest care could not prevent
Foretold so lately what would come to pass,
When first this tempter crossed the gulf from Hell.
I told ye then he should prevail, and speed
On his bad errand Man should be seduced,
And flattered out of all, believing lies
Against his Maker no decree of mine
Concurring to necessitate his fall,
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse
His free will, to her own inclining left
In even scale.  But fallen he is and now
What rests, but that the mortal sentence pass
On his transgression,death denounced that day?
Which he presumes already vain and void,
Because not yet inflicted, as he feared,
By some immediate stroke but soon shall find
Forbearance no acquittance, ere day end.
Justice shall not return as bounty scorned.
But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee,
Vicegerent Son?  To thee I have transferred
All judgement, whether in Heaven, or Earth, or Hell.
Easy it may be seen that I intend
Mercy colleague with justice, sending thee
Mans friend, his Mediator, his designed
Both ransom and Redeemer voluntary,
And destined Man himself to judge Man fallen.
So spake the Father and, unfolding bright
Toward the right hand his glory, on the Son
Blazed forth unclouded Deity: He full
Resplendent all his Father manifest
Expressed, and thus divinely answered mild.
Father Eternal, thine is to decree
Mine, both in Heaven and Earth, to do thy will
Supreme that thou in me, thy Son beloved,
Mayest ever rest well pleased.  I go to judge
On earth these thy transgressours but thou knowest,
Whoever judged, the worst on me must light,
When time shall be for so I undertook
Before thee and, not repenting, this obtain
Of right, that I may mitigate their doom
On me derived yet I shall temper so
Justice with mercy, as may illustrate most
Them fully satisfied, and thee appease.
Attendance none shall need, nor train, where none
Are to behold the judgement, but the judged,
Those two the third best absent is condemned,
Convict by flight, and rebel to all law:
Conviction to the serpent none belongs.
Thus saying, from his radiant seat he rose
Of high collateral glory: Him Thrones, and Powers,
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant,
Accompanied to Heavengate from whence
Eden, and all the coast, in prospect lay.
Down he descended straight the speed of Gods
Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes winged.
Now was the sun in western cadence low
From noon, and gentle airs, due at their hour,
To fan the earth now waked, and usher in
The evening cool when he, from wrath more cool,
Came the mild Judge, and Intercessour both,
To sentence Man:  The voice of God they heard
Now walking in the garden, by soft winds
Brought to their ears, while day declined they heard,
And from his presence hid themselves among
The thickest trees, both man and wife till God,
Approaching, thus to Adam called aloud.
Where art thou, Adam, wont with joy to meet
My coming seen far off?  I miss thee here,
Not pleased, thus entertained with solitude,
Where obvious duty ere while appeared unsought:
Or come I less conspicuous, or what change
Absents thee, or what chance detains?Come forth!
He came and with him Eve, more loth, though first
To offend discountenanced both, and discomposed
Love was not in their looks, either to God,
Or to each other but apparent guilt,
And shame, and perturbation, and despair,
Anger, and obstinacy, and hate, and guile.
Whence Adam, faltering long, thus answered brief.
I heard thee in the garden, and of thy voice
Afraid, being naked, hid myself.  To whom
The gracious Judge without revile replied.
My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not feared,
But still rejoiced how is it now become
So dreadful to thee?  That thou art naked, who
Hath told thee?  Hast thou eaten of the tree,
Whereof I gave thee charge thou shouldst not eat?
To whom thus Adam sore beset replied.
O Heaven! in evil strait this day I stand
Before my Judge either to undergo
Myself the total crime, or to accuse
My other self, the partner of my life
Whose failing, while her faith to me remains,
I should conceal, and not expose to blame
By my complaint: but strict necessity
Subdues me, and calamitous constraint
Lest on my head both sin and punishment,
However insupportable, be all
Devolved though should I hold my peace, yet thou
Wouldst easily detect what I conceal.
This Woman, whom thou madest to be my help,
And gavest me as thy perfect gift, so good,
So fit, so acceptable, so divine,
That from her hand I could suspect no ill,
And what she did, whatever in itself,
Her doing seemed to justify the deed
She gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
To whom the Sovran Presence thus replied.
Was she thy God, that her thou didst obey
Before his voice? or was she made thy guide,
Superiour, or but equal, that to her
Thou didst resign thy manhood, and the place
Wherein God set thee above her made of thee,
And for thee, whose perfection far excelled
Hers in all real dignity?  Adorned
She was indeed, and lovely, to attract
Thy love, not thy subjection and her gifts
Were such, as under government well seemed
Unseemly to bear rule which was thy part
And person, hadst thou known thyself aright.
So having said, he thus to Eve in few.
Say, Woman, what is this which thou hast done?
To whom sad Eve, with shame nigh overwhelmed,
Confessing soon, yet not before her Judge
Bold or loquacious, thus abashed replied.
The Serpent me beguiled, and I did eat.
Which when the Lord God heard, without delay
To judgement he proceeded on the accused
Serpent, though brute unable to transfer
The guilt on him, who made him instrument
Of mischief, and polluted from the end
Of his creation justly then accursed,
As vitiated in nature:  More to know
Concerned not Man, since he no further knew
Nor altered his offence yet God at last
To Satan first in sin his doom applied,
Though in mysterious terms, judged as then best:
And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall.
Because thou hast done this, thou art accursed
Above all cattle, each beast of the field
Upon thy belly groveling thou shalt go,
And dust shalt eat all the days of thy life.
Between thee and the woman I will put
Enmity, and between thine and her seed
Her seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel.
So spake this oracle, then verified
When Jesus, Son of Mary, second Eve,
Saw Satan fall, like lightning, down from Heaven,
Prince of the air then, rising from his grave
Spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphed
In open show and, with ascension bright,
Captivity led captive through the air,
The realm itself of Satan, long usurped
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet
Even he, who now foretold his fatal bruise
And to the Woman thus his sentence turned.
Thy sorrow I will greatly multiply
By thy conception children thou shalt bring
In sorrow forth and to thy husbands will
Thine shall submit he over thee shall rule.
On Adam last thus judgement he pronounced.
Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife,
And eaten of the tree, concerning which
I charged thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat thereof:
Cursed is the ground for thy sake thou in sorrow
Shalt eat thereof, all the days of thy life
Thorns also and thistles it shall bring thee forth
Unbid and thou shalt eat the herb of the field
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,
Till thou return unto the ground for thou
Out of the ground wast taken, know thy birth,
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust return.
So judged he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent
And the instant stroke of death, denounced that day,
Removed far off then, pitying how they stood
Before him naked to the air, that now
Must suffer change, disdained not to begin
Thenceforth the form of servant to assume
As when he washed his servants feet so now,
As father of his family, he clad
Their nakedness with skins of beasts, or slain,
Or as the snake with youthful coat repaid
And thought not much to clothe his enemies
Nor he their outward only with the skins
Of beasts, but inward nakedness, much more.
Opprobrious, with his robe of righteousness,
Arraying, covered from his Fathers sight.
To him with swift ascent he up returned,
Into his blissful bosom reassumed
In glory, as of old to him appeased
All, though allknowing, what had passed with Man
Recounted, mixing intercession sweet.
Mean while, ere thus was sinned and judged on Earth,
Within the gates of Hell sat Sin and Death,
In counterview within the gates, that now
Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame
Far into Chaos, since the Fiend passed through,
Sin opening who thus now to Death began.
O Son, why sit we here each other viewing
Idly, while Satan, our great author, thrives
In other worlds, and happier seat provides
For us, his offspring dear?  It cannot be
But that success attends him if mishap,
Ere this he had returned, with fury driven
By his avengers since no place like this
Can fit his punishment, or their revenge.
Methinks I feel new strength within me rise,
Wings growing, and dominion given me large
Beyond this deep whatever draws me on,
Or sympathy, or some connatural force,
Powerful at greatest distance to unite,
With secret amity, things of like kind,
By secretest conveyance.  Thou, my shade
Inseparable, must with me along
For Death from Sin no power can separate.
But, lest the difficulty of passing back
Stay his return perhaps over this gulf
Impassable, impervious let us try
Adventurous work, yet to thy power and mine
Not unagreeable, to found a path
Over this main from Hell to that new world,
Where Satan now prevails a monument
Of merit high to all the infernal host,
Easing their passage hence, for intercourse,
Or transmigration, as their lot shall lead.
Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn
By this newfelt attraction and instinct.
Whom thus the meager Shadow answered soon.
Go, whither Fate, and inclination strong,
Leads thee I shall not lag behind, nor err
The way, thou leading such a scent I draw
Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste
The savour of death from all things there that live:
Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest
Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid.
So saying, with delight he snuffed the smell
Of mortal change on earth.  As when a flock
Of ravenous fowl, though many a league remote,
Against the day of battle, to a field,
Where armies lie encamped, come flying, lured
With scent of living carcasses designed
For death, the following day, in bloody fight:
So scented the grim Feature, and upturned
His nostril wide into the murky air
Sagacious of his quarry from so far.
Then both from out Hellgates, into the waste
Wide anarchy of Chaos, damp and dark,
Flew diverse and with power their power was great
Hovering upon the waters, what they met
Solid or slimy, as in raging sea
Tost up and down, together crouded drove,
From each side shoaling towards the mouth of Hell
As when two polar winds, blowing adverse
Upon the Cronian sea, together drive
Mountains of ice, that stop the imagined way
Beyond Petsora eastward, to the rich
Cathaian coast.  The aggregated soil
Death with his mace petrifick, cold and dry,
As with a trident, smote and fixed as firm
As Delos, floating once the rest his look
Bound with Gorgonian rigour not to move
And with Asphaltick slime, broad as the gate,
Deep to the roots of Hell the gathered beach
They fastened, and the mole immense wrought on
Over the foaming deep higharched, a bridge
Of length prodigious, joining to the wall
Immoveable of this now fenceless world,
Forfeit to Death from hence a passage broad,
Smooth, easy, inoffensive, down to Hell.
So, if great things to small may be compared,
Xerxes, the liberty of Greece to yoke,
From Susa, his Memnonian palace high,
Came to the sea: and, over Hellespont
Bridging his way, Europe with Asia joined,
And scourged with many a stroke the indignant waves.
Now had they brought the work by wonderous art
Pontifical, a ridge of pendant rock,
Over the vexed abyss, following the track
Of Satan to the selfsame place where he
First lighted from his wing, and landed safe
From out of Chaos, to the outside bare
Of this round world:  With pins of adamant
And chains they made all fast, too fast they made
And durable!  And now in little space
The confines met of empyrean Heaven,
And of this World and, on the left hand, Hell
With long reach interposed three several ways
In sight, to each of these three places led.
And now their way to Earth they had descried,
To Paradise first tending when, behold!
Satan, in likeness of an Angel bright,
Betwixt the Centaur and the Scorpion steering
His zenith, while the sun in Aries rose:
Disguised he came but those his children dear
Their parent soon discerned, though in disguise.
He, after Eve seduced, unminded slunk
Into the wood fast by and, changing shape,
To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act
By Eve, though all unweeting, seconded
Upon her husband saw their shame that sought
Vain covertures but when he saw descend
The Son of God to judge them, terrified
He fled not hoping to escape, but shun
The present fearing, guilty, what his wrath
Might suddenly inflict that past, returned
By night, and listening where the hapless pair
Sat in their sad discourse, and various plaint,
Thence gathered his own doom which understood
Not instant, but of future time, with joy
And tidings fraught, to Hell he now returned
And at the brink of Chaos, near the foot
Of this new wonderous pontifice, unhoped
Met, who to meet him came, his offspring dear.
Great joy was at their meeting, and at sight
Of that stupendious bridge his joy encreased.
Long he admiring stood, till Sin, his fair
Enchanting daughter, thus the silence broke.
O Parent, these are thy magnifick deeds,
Thy trophies! which thou viewest as not thine own
Thou art their author, and prime architect:
For I no sooner in my heart divined,
My heart, which by a secret harmony
Still moves with thine, joined in connexion sweet,
That thou on earth hadst prospered, which thy looks
Now also evidence, but straight I felt,
Though distant from thee worlds between, yet felt,
That I must after thee, with this thy son
Such fatal consequence unites us three!
Hell could no longer hold us in our bounds,
Nor this unvoyageable gulf obscure
Detain from following thy illustrious track.
Thou hast achieved our liberty, confined
Within Hellgates till now thou us impowered
To fortify thus far, and overlay,
With this portentous bridge, the dark abyss.
Thine now is all this world thy virtue hath won
What thy hands builded not thy wisdom gained
With odds what war hath lost, and fully avenged
Our foil in Heaven here thou shalt monarch reign,
There didst not there let him still victor sway,
As battle hath adjudged from this new world
Retiring, by his own doom alienated
And henceforth monarchy with thee divide
Of all things, parted by the empyreal bounds,
His quadrature, from thy orbicular world
Or try thee now more dangerous to his throne.
Whom thus the Prince of darkness answered glad.
Fair Daughter, and thou Son and Grandchild both
High proof ye now have given to be the race
Of Satan for I glory in the name,
Antagonist of Heavens Almighty King,
Amply have merited of me, of all
The infernal empire, that so near Heavens door
Triumphal with triumphal act have met,
Mine, with this glorious work and made one realm,
Hell and this world, one realm, one continent
Of easy thoroughfare.  Therefore, while I
Descend through darkness, on your road with ease,
To my associate Powers, them to acquaint
With these successes, and with them rejoice
You two this way, among these numerous orbs,
All yours, right down to Paradise descend
There dwell, and reign in bliss thence on the earth
Dominion exercise and in the air,
Chiefly on Man, sole lord of all declared
Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill.
My substitutes I send ye, and create
Plenipotent on earth, of matchless might
Issuing from me: on your joint vigour now
My hold of this new kingdom all depends,
Through Sin to Death exposed by my exploit.
If your joint power prevail, the affairs of Hell
No detriment need fear go, and be strong!
So saying he dismissed them they with speed
Their course through thickest constellations held,
Spreading their bane the blasted stars looked wan,
And planets, planetstruck, real eclipse
Then suffered.  The other way Satan went down
The causey to Hellgate:  On either side
Disparted Chaos overbuilt exclaimed,
And with rebounding surge the bars assailed,
That scorned his indignation:  Through the gate,
Wide open and unguarded, Satan passed,
And all about found desolate for those,
Appointed to sit there, had left their charge,
Flown to the upper world the rest were all
Far to the inland retired, about the walls
Of Pandemonium city and proud seat
Of Lucifer, so by allusion called
Of that bright star to Satan paragoned
There kept their watch the legions, while the Grand
In council sat, solicitous what chance
Might intercept their emperour sent so he
Departing gave command, and they observed.
As when the Tartar from his Russian foe,
By Astracan, over the snowy plains,
Retires or Bactrin Sophi, from the horns
Of Turkish crescent, leaves all waste beyond
The realm of Aladule, in his retreat
To Tauris or Casbeen:  So these, the late
Heavenbanished host, left desart utmost Hell
Many a dark league, reduced in careful watch
Round their metropolis and now expecting
Each hour their great adventurer, from the search
Of foreign worlds:  He through the midst unmarked,
In show plebeian Angel militant
Of lowest order, passed and from the door
Of that Plutonian hall, invisible
Ascended his high throne which, under state
Of richest texture spread, at the upper end
Was placed in regal lustre.  Down a while
He sat, and round about him saw unseen:
At last, as from a cloud, his fulgent head
And shape starbright appeared, or brighter clad
With what permissive glory since his fall
Was left him, or false glitter:  All amazed
At that so sudden blaze the Stygian throng
Bent their aspect, and whom they wished beheld,
Their mighty Chief returned: loud was the acclaim:
Forth rushed in haste the great consulting peers,
Raised from their dark Divan, and with like joy
Congratulant approached him who with hand
Silence, and with these words attention, won.
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers
For in possession such, not only of right,
I call ye, and declare ye now returned
Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth
Triumphant out of this infernal pit
Abominable, accursed, the house of woe,
And dungeon of our tyrant:  Now possess,
As Lords, a spacious world, to our native Heaven
Little inferiour, by my adventure hard
With peril great achieved.  Long were to tell
What I have done what sufferedwith what pain
Voyaged th unreal, vast, unbounded deep
Of horrible confusion over which
By Sin and Death a broad way now is paved,
To expedite your glorious march but I
Toiled out my uncouth passage, forced to ride
The untractable abyss, plunged in the womb
Of unoriginal Night and Chaos wild
That, jealous of their secrets, fiercely opposed
My journey strange, with clamorous uproar
Protesting Fate supreme thence how I found
The new created world, which fame in Heaven
Long had foretold, a fabrick wonderful
Of absolute perfection! therein Man
Placed in a Paradise, by our exile
Made happy:  Him by fraud I have seduced
From his Creator and, the more to encrease
Your wonder, with an apple he, thereat
Offended, worth your laughter! hath given up
Both his beloved Man, and all his world,
To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us,
Without our hazard, labour, or alarm
To range in, and to dwell, and over Man
To rule, as over all he should have ruled.
True is, me also he hath judged, or rather
Me not, but the brute serpent in whose shape
Man I deceived: that which to me belongs,
Is enmity which he will put between
Me and mankind I am to bruise his heel
His seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head:
A world who would not purchase with a bruise,
Or much more grievous pain?Ye have the account
Of my performance:  What remains, ye Gods,
But up, and enter now into full bliss?
So having said, a while he stood, expecting
Their universal shout, and high applause,
To fill his ear when, contrary, he hears
On all sides, from innumerable tongues,
A dismal universal hiss, the sound
Of publick scorn he wondered, but not long
Had leisure, wondering at himself now more,
His visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare
His arms clung to his ribs his legs entwining
Each other, till supplanted down he fell
A monstrous serpent on his belly prone,
Reluctant, but in vain a greater power
Now ruled him, punished in the shape he sinned,
According to his doom: he would have spoke,
But hiss for hiss returned with forked tongue
To forked tongue for now were all transformed
Alike, to serpents all, as accessories
To his bold riot:  Dreadful was the din
Of hissing through the hall, thick swarming now
With complicated monsters head and tail,
Scorpion, and Asp, and Amphisbaena dire,
Cerastes horned, Hydrus, and Elops drear,
And Dipsas not so thick swarmed once the soil
Bedropt with blood of Gorgon, or the isle
Ophiusa, but still greatest he the midst,
Now Dragon grown, larger than whom the sun
Ingendered in the Pythian vale or slime,
Huge Python, and his power no less he seemed
Above the rest still to retain they all
Him followed, issuing forth to the open field,
Where all yet left of that revolted rout,
Heavenfallen, in station stood or just array
Sublime with expectation when to see
In triumph issuing forth their glorious Chief
They saw, but other sight instead! a croud
Of ugly serpents horrour on them fell,
And horrid sympathy for, what they saw,
They felt themselves, now changing down their arms,
Down fell both spear and shield down they as fast
And the dire hiss renewed, and the dire form
Catched, by contagion like in punishment,
As in their crime.  Thus was the applause they meant,
Turned to exploding hiss, triumph to shame
Cast on themselves from their own mouths.  There stood
A grove hard by, sprung up with this their change,
His will who reigns above, to aggravate
Their penance, laden with fair fruit, like that
Which grew in Paradise, the bait of Eve
Used by the Tempter: on that prospect strange
Their earnest eyes they fixed, imagining
For one forbidden tree a multitude
Now risen, to work them further woe or shame
Yet, parched with scalding thirst and hunger fierce,
Though to delude them sent, could not abstain
But on they rolled in heaps, and, up the trees
Climbing, sat thicker than the snaky locks
That curled Megaera: greedily they plucked
The fruitage fair to sight, like that which grew
Near that bituminous lake where Sodom flamed
This more delusive, not the touch, but taste
Deceived they, fondly thinking to allay
Their appetite with gust, instead of fruit
Chewed bitter ashes, which the offended taste
With spattering noise rejected: oft they assayed,
Hunger and thirst constraining drugged as oft,
With hatefullest disrelish writhed their jaws,
With soot and cinders filled so oft they fell
Into the same illusion, not as Man
Whom they triumphed once lapsed.  Thus were they plagued
And worn with famine, long and ceaseless hiss,
Till their lost shape, permitted, they resumed
Yearly enjoined, some say, to undergo,
This annual humbling certain numbered days,
To dash their pride, and joy, for Man seduced.
However, some tradition they dispersed
Among the Heathen, of their purchase got,
And fabled how the Serpent, whom they called
Ophion, with Eurynome, the wide
Encroaching Eve perhaps, had first the rule
Of high Olympus thence by Saturn driven
And Ops, ere yet Dictaean Jove was born.
Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair
Too soon arrived Sin, there in power before,
Once actual now in body, and to dwell
Habitual habitant behind her Death,
Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet
On his pale horse: to whom Sin thus began.
Second of Satan sprung, allconquering Death!
What thinkest thou of our empire now, though earned
With travel difficult, not better far
Than still at Hells dark threshold to have sat watch,
Unnamed, undreaded, and thyself half starved?
Whom thus the Sinborn monster answered soon.
To me, who with eternal famine pine,
Alike is Hell, or Paradise, or Heaven
There best, where most with ravine I may meet
Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems
To stuff this maw, this vast unhidebound corps.
To whom the incestuous mother thus replied.
Thou therefore on these herbs, and fruits, and flowers,
Feed first on each beast next, and fish, and fowl
No homely morsels! and, whatever thing
The sithe of Time mows down, devour unspared
Till I, in Man residing, through the race,
His thoughts, his looks, words, actions, all infect
And season him thy last and sweetest prey.
This said, they both betook them several ways,
Both to destroy, or unimmortal make
All kinds, and for destruction to mature
Sooner or later which the Almighty seeing,
From his transcendent seat the Saints among,
To those bright Orders uttered thus his voice.
See, with what heat these dogs of Hell advance
To waste and havock yonder world, which I
So fair and good created and had still
Kept in that state, had not the folly of Man
Let in these wasteful furies, who impute
Folly to me so doth the Prince of Hell
And his adherents, that with so much ease
I suffer them to enter and possess
A place so heavenly and, conniving, seem
To gratify my scornful enemies,
That laugh, as if, transported with some fit
Of passion, I to them had quitted all,
At random yielded up to their misrule
And know not that I called, and drew them thither,
My Hellhounds, to lick up the draff and filth
Which Mans polluting sin with taint hath shed
On what was pure til, crammed and gorged, nigh burst
With sucked and glutted offal, at one sling
Of thy victorious arm, wellpleasing Son,
Both Sin, and Death, and yawning Grave, at last,
Through Chaos hurled, obstruct the mouth of Hell
For ever, and seal up his ravenous jaws.
Then Heaven and Earth renewed shall be made pure
To sanctity, that shall receive no stain:
Till then, the curse pronounced on both precedes.
He ended, and the heavenly audience loud
Sung Halleluiah, as the sound of seas,
Through multitude that sung:  Just are thy ways,
Righteous are thy decrees on all thy works
Who can extenuate thee?  Next, to the Son,
Destined Restorer of mankind, by whom
New Heaven and Earth shall to the ages rise,
Or down from Heaven descend.Such was their song
While the Creator, calling forth by name
His mighty Angels, gave them several charge,
As sorted best with present things.  The sun
Had first his precept so to move, so shine,
As might affect the earth with cold and heat
Scarce tolerable and from the north to call
Decrepit winter from the south to bring
Solstitial summers heat.  To the blanc moon
Her office they prescribed to the other five
Their planetary motions, and aspects,
In sextile, square, and trine, and opposite,
Of noxious efficacy, and when to join
In synod unbenign and taught the fixed
Their influence malignant when to shower,
Which of them rising with the sun, or falling,
Should prove tempestuous:  To the winds they set
Their corners, when with bluster to confound
Sea, air, and shore the thunder when to roll
With terrour through the dark aereal hall.
Some say, he bid his Angels turn ascanse
The poles of earth, twice ten degrees and more,
From the suns axle they with labour pushed
Oblique the centrick globe:  Some say, the sun
Was bid turn reins from the equinoctial road
Like distant breadth to Taurus with the seven
Atlantick Sisters, and the Spartan Twins,
Up to the Tropick Crab: thence down amain
By Leo, and the Virgin, and the Scales,
As deep as Capricorn to bring in change
Of seasons to each clime else had the spring
Perpetual smiled on earth with vernant flowers,
Equal in days and nights, except to those
Beyond the polar circles to them day
Had unbenighted shone, while the low sun,
To recompense his distance, in their sight
Had rounded still the horizon, and not known
Or east or west which had forbid the snow
From cold Estotiland, and south as far
Beneath Magellan.  At that tasted fruit
The sun, as from Thyestean banquet, turned
His course intended else, how had the world
Inhabited, though sinless, more than now,
Avoided pinching cold and scorching heat?
These changes in the Heavens, though slow, produced
Like change on sea and land sideral blast,
Vapour, and mist, and exhalation hot,
Corrupt and pestilent:  Now from the north
Of Norumbega, and the Samoed shore,
Bursting their brazen dungeon, armed with ice,
And snow, and hail, and stormy gust and flaw,
Boreas, and Caecias, and Argestes loud,
And Thrascias, rend the woods, and seas upturn
With adverse blast upturns them from the south
Notus, and Afer black with thunderous clouds
From Serraliona thwart of these, as fierce,
Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent winds,
Eurus and Zephyr, with their lateral noise,
Sirocco and Libecchio.  Thus began
Outrage from lifeless things but Discord first,
Daughter of Sin, among the irrational
Death introduced, through fierce antipathy:
Beast now with beast gan war, and fowl with fowl,
And fish with fish to graze the herb all leaving,
Devoured each other nor stood much in awe
Of Man, but fled him or, with countenance grim,
Glared on him passing.  These were from without
The growing miseries, which Adam saw
Already in part, though hid in gloomiest shade,
To sorrow abandoned, but worse felt within
And, in a troubled sea of passion tost,
Thus to disburden sought with sad complaint.
O miserable of happy!  Is this the end
Of this new glorious world, and me so late
The glory of that glory, who now become
Accursed, of blessed? hide me from the face
Of God, whom to behold was then my highth
Of happiness!Yet well, if here would end
The misery I deserved it, and would bear
My own deservings but this will not serve:
All that I eat or drink, or shall beget,
Is propagated curse.  O voice, once heard
Delightfully, Encrease and multiply
Now death to hear! for what can I encrease,
Or multiply, but curses on my head?
Who of all ages to succeed, but, feeling
The evil on him brought by me, will curse
My head?  Ill fare our ancestor impure,
For this we may thank Adam! but his thanks
Shall be the execration: so, besides
Mine own that bide upon me, all from me
Shall with a fierce reflux on me rebound
On me, as on their natural center, light
Heavy, though in their place.  O fleeting joys
Of Paradise, dear bought with lasting woes!
Did I request thee, Maker, from my clay
To mould me Man? did I solicit thee
From darkness to promote me, or here place
In this delicious garden?  As my will
Concurred not to my being, it were but right
And equal to reduce me to my dust
Desirous to resign and render back
All I received unable to perform
Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold
The good I sought not.  To the loss of that,
Sufficient penalty, why hast thou added
The sense of endless woes?  Inexplicable
Why am I mocked with death, and lengthened out
To deathless pain?  How gladly would I meet
Mortality my sentence, and be earth
Insensible!  How glad would lay me down
As in my mothers lap!  There I should rest,
And sleep secure his dreadful voice no more
Would thunder in my ears no fear of worse
To me, and to my offspring, would torment me
With cruel expectation.  Yet one doubt
Pursues me still, lest all I cannot die
Lest that pure breath of life, the spirit of Man
Which God inspired, cannot together perish
With this corporeal clod then, in the grave,
Or in some other dismal place, who knows
But I shall die a living death?  O thought
Horrid, if true!  Yet why? It was but breath
Of life that sinned what dies but what had life
And sin?  The body properly had neither,
All of me then shall die: let this appease
The doubt, since human reach no further knows.
For though the Lord of all be infinite,
Is his wrath also?  Be it, Man is not so,
But mortal doomed.  How can he exercise
Wrath without end on Man, whom death must end?
Can he make deathless death?  That were to make
Strange contradiction, which to God himself
Impossible is held as argument
Of weakness, not of power.  Will he draw out,
For angers sake, finite to infinite,
In punished Man, to satisfy his rigour,
Satisfied never?  That were to extend
His sentence beyond dust and Natures law
By which all causes else, according still
To the reception of their matter, act
Not to the extent of their own sphere.  But say
That death be not one stroke, as I supposed,
Bereaving sense, but endless misery
From this day onward which I feel begun
Both in me, and without me and so last
To perpetuityAy me!that fear
Comes thundering back with dreadful revolution
On my defenceless head both Death and I
Am found eternal, and incorporate both
Nor I on my part single in me all
Posterity stands cursed:  Fair patrimony
That I must leave ye, Sons!  O, were I able
To waste it all myself, and leave ye none!
So disinherited, how would you bless
Me, now your curse!  Ah, why should all mankind,
For one mans fault, thus guiltless be condemned,
It guiltless?  But from me what can proceed,
But all corrupt both mind and will depraved
Not to do only, but to will the same
With me?  How can they then acquitted stand
In sight of God?  Him, after all disputes,
Forced I absolve: all my evasions vain,
And reasonings, though through mazes, lead me still
But to my own conviction: first and last
On me, me only, as the source and spring
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due
So might the wrath!  Fond wish!couldst thou support
That burden, heavier than the earth to bear
Than all the world much heavier, though divided
With that bad Woman?  Thus, what thou desirest,
And what thou fearest, alike destroys all hope
Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable
Beyond all past example and future
To Satan only like both crime and doom.
O Conscience! into what abyss of fears
And horrours hast thou driven me out of which
I find no way, from deep to deeper plunged!
Thus Adam to himself lamented loud,
Through the still night not now, as ere Man fell,
Wholesome, and cool, and mild, but with black air
Accompanied with damps, and dreadful gloom
Which to his evil conscience represented
All things with double terrour:  On the ground
Outstretched he lay, on the cold ground and oft
Cursed his creation  Death as oft accused
Of tardy execution, since denounced
The day of his offence.  Why comes not Death,
Said he, with one thriceacceptable stroke
To end me?  Shall Truth fail to keep her word,
Justice Divine not hasten to be just?
But Death comes not at call Justice Divine
Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries,
O woods, O fountains, hillocks, dales, and bowers!
With other echo late I taught your shades
To answer, and resound far other song.
Whom thus afflicted when sad Eve beheld,
Desolate where she sat, approaching nigh,
Soft words to his fierce passion she assayed:
But her with stern regard he thus repelled.
Out of my sight, thou Serpent!  That name best
Befits thee with him leagued, thyself as false
And hateful nothing wants, but that thy shape,
Like his, and colour serpentine, may show
Thy inward fraud to warn all creatures from thee
Henceforth lest that too heavenly form, pretended
To hellish falshood, snare them!  But for thee
I had persisted happy had not thy pride
And wandering vanity, when least was safe,
Rejected my forewarning, and disdained
Not to be trusted longing to be seen,
Though by the Devil himself him overweening
To overreach but, with the serpent meeting,
Fooled and beguiled by him thou, I by thee
To trust thee from my side imagined wise,
Constant, mature, proof against all assaults
And understood not all was but a show,
Rather than solid virtue all but a rib
Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears,
More to the part sinister, from me drawn
Well if thrown out, as supernumerary
To my just number found.  O! why did God,
Creator wise, that peopled highest Heaven
With Spirits masculine, create at last
This novelty on earth, this fair defect
Of nature, and not fill the world at once
With Men, as Angels, without feminine
Or find some other way to generate
Mankind?  This mischief had not been befallen,
And more that shall befall innumerable
Disturbances on earth through female snares,
And strait conjunction with this sex: for either
He never shall find out fit mate, but such
As some misfortune brings him, or mistake
Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain
Through her perverseness, but shall see her gained
By a far worse or, if she love, withheld
By parents or his happiest choice too late
Shall meet, already linked and wedlockbound
To a fell adversary, his hate or shame:
Which infinite calamity shall cause
To human life, and houshold peace confound.
He added not, and from her turned but Eve,
Not so repulsed, with tears that ceased not flowing
And tresses all disordered, at his feet
Fell humble and, embracing them, besought
His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint.
Forsake me not thus, Adam! witness Heaven
What love sincere, and reverence in my heart
I bear thee, and unweeting have offended,
Unhappily deceived!  Thy suppliant
I beg, and clasp thy knees bereave me not,
Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid,
Thy counsel, in this uttermost distress,
My only strength and stay:  Forlorn of thee,
Whither shall I betake me, where subsist?
While yet we live, scarce one short hour perhaps,
Between us two let there be peace both joining,
As joined in injuries, one enmity
Against a foe by doom express assigned us,
That cruel Serpent:  On me exercise not
Thy hatred for this misery befallen
On me already lost, me than thyself
More miserable!  Both have sinnedbut thou
Against God only I against God and thee
And to the place of judgement will return,
There with my cries importune Heaven that all
The sentence, from thy head removed, may light
On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe
Me, me only, just object of his ire!
She ended weeping and her lowly plight,
Immoveable, till peace obtained from fault
Acknowledged and deplored, in Adam wrought
Commiseration:  Soon his heart relented
Towards her, his life so late, and sole delight,
Now at his feet submissive in distress
Creature so fair his reconcilement seeking,
His counsel, whom she had displeased, his aid:
As one disarmed, his anger all he lost,
And thus with peaceful words upraised her soon.
Unwary, and too desirous, as before,
So now of what thou knowest not, who desirest
The punishment all on thyself alas!
Bear thine own first, ill able to sustain
His full wrath, whose thou feelest as yet least part,
And my displeasure bearest so ill.  If prayers
Could alter high decrees, I to that place
Would speed before thee, and be louder heard,
That on my head all might be visited
Thy frailty and infirmer sex forgiven,
To me committed, and by me exposed.
But riselet us no more contend, nor blame
Each other, blamed enough elsewhere but strive
In offices of love, how we may lighten
Each others burden, in our share of woe
Since this days death denounced, if aught I see,
Will prove no sudden, but a slowpaced evil
A long days dying, to augment our pain
And to our seed O hapless seed! derived.
To whom thus Eve, recovering heart, replied.
Adam, by sad experiment I know
How little weight my words with thee can find,
Found so erroneous thence by just event
Found so unfortunate:  Nevertheless,
Restored by thee, vile as I am, to place
Of new acceptance, hopeful to regain
Thy love, the sole contentment of my heart
Living or dying, from thee I will not hide
What thoughts in my unquiet breast are risen,
Tending to some relief of our extremes,
Or end though sharp and sad, yet tolerable,
As in our evils, and of easier choice.
If care of our descent perplex us most,
Which must be born to certain woe, devoured
By Death at last and miserable it is
To be to others cause of misery,
Our own begotten, and of our loins to bring
Into this cursed world a woeful race,
That after wretched life must be at last
Food for so foul a monster in thy power
It lies, yet ere conception to prevent
The race unblest, to being yet unbegot.
Childless thou art, childless remain: so Death
Shall be deceived his glut, and with us two
Be forced to satisfy his ravenous maw.
But if thou judge it hard and difficult,
Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain
From loves due rights, nuptial embraces sweet
And with desire to languish without hope,
Before the present object languishing
With like desire which would be misery
And torment less than none of what we dread
Then, both ourselves and seed at once to free
From what we fear for both, let us make short, 
Let us seek Death  or, he not found, supply
With our own hands his office on ourselves:
Why stand we longer shivering under fears,
That show no end but death, and have the power,
Of many ways to die the shortest choosing,
Destruction with destruction to destroy? 
She ended here, or vehement despair
Broke off the rest: so much of death her thoughts
Had entertained, as dyed her cheeks with pale.
But Adam, with such counsel nothing swayed,
To better hopes his more attentive mind
Labouring had raised and thus to Eve replied.
Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems
To argue in thee something more sublime
And excellent, than what thy mind contemns
But selfdestruction therefore sought, refutes
That excellence thought in thee and implies,
Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret
For loss of life and pleasure overloved.
Or if thou covet death, as utmost end
Of misery, so thinking to evade
The penalty pronounced doubt not but God
Hath wiselier armed his vengeful ire, than so
To be forestalled much more I fear lest death,
So snatched, will not exempt us from the pain
We are by doom to pay rather, such acts
Of contumacy will provoke the Highest
To make death in us live:  Then let us seek
Some safer resolution, which methinks
I have in view, calling to mind with heed
Part of our sentence, that thy seed shall bruise
The Serpents head piteous amends! unless
Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand foe,
Satan who, in the serpent, hath contrived
Against us this deceit:  To crush his head
Would be revenge indeed! which will be lost
By death brought on ourselves, or childless days
Resolved, as thou proposest so our foe
Shal scape his punishment ordained, and we
Instead shall double ours upon our heads.
No more be mentioned then of violence
Against ourselves and wilful barrenness,
That cuts us off from hope and savours only
Rancour and pride, impatience and despite,
Reluctance against God and his just yoke
Laid on our necks.  Remember with what mild
And gracious temper he both heard, and judged,
Without wrath or reviling we expected
Immediate dissolution, which we thought
Was meant by death that day when lo!to thee
Pains only in childbearing were foretold,
And bringing forth soon recompensed with joy,
Fruit of thy womb:  On me the curse aslope
Glanced on the ground with labour I must earn
My bread what harm? Idleness had been worse
My labour will sustain me and, lest cold
Or heat should injure us, his timely care
Hath, unbesought, provided and his hands
Clothed us unworthy, pitying while he judged
How much more, if we pray him, will his ear
Be open, and his heart to pity incline,
And teach us further by what means to shun
The inclement seasons, rain, ice, hail, and snow!
Which now the sky, with various face, begins
To show us in this mountain while the winds
Blow moist and keen, shattering the graceful locks
Of these fair spreading trees which bids us seek
Some better shroud, some better warmth to cherish
Our limbs benummed, ere this diurnal star
Leave cold the night, how we his gathered beams
Reflected may with matter sere foment
Or, by collision of two bodies, grind
The air attrite to fire as late the clouds
Justling, or pushed with winds, rude in their shock,
Tine the slant lightning whose thwart flame, driven down
Kindles the gummy bark of fir or pine
And sends a comfortable heat from far,
Which might supply the sun:  Such fire to use,
And what may else be remedy or cure
To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought,
He will instruct us praying, and of grace
Beseeching him so as we need not fear
To pass commodiously this life, sustained
By him with many comforts, till we end
In dust, our final rest and native home.
What better can we do, than, to the place
Repairing where he judged us, prostrate fall
Before him reverent and there confess
Humbly our faults, and pardon beg with tears
Watering the ground, and with our sighs the air
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek



Book XI


Undoubtedly he will relent, and turn
From his displeasure in whose look serene,
When angry most he seemed and most severe,
What else but favour, grace, and mercy, shone?
So spake our father penitent nor Eve
Felt less remorse: they, forthwith to the place
Repairing where he judged them, prostrate fell
Before him reverent and both confessed
Humbly their faults, and pardon begged with tears
Watering the ground, and with their sighs the air
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek.
Thus they, in lowliest plight, repentant stood
Praying for from the mercyseat above
Prevenient grace descending had removed
The stony from their hearts, and made new flesh
Regenerate grow instead that sighs now breathed
Unutterable which the Spirit of prayer
Inspired, and winged for Heaven with speedier flight
Than loudest oratory:  Yet their port
Not of mean suitors nor important less
Seemed their petition, than when the ancient pair
In fables old, less ancient yet than these,
Deucalion and chaste Pyrrha, to restore
The race of mankind drowned, before the shrine
Of Themis stood devout.  To Heaven their prayers
Flew up, nor missed the way, by envious winds
Blown vagabond or frustrate: in they passed
Dimensionless through heavenly doors then clad
With incense, where the golden altar fumed,
By their great intercessour, came in sight
Before the Fathers throne: them the glad Son
Presenting, thus to intercede began.
See Father, what firstfruits on earth are sprung
From thy implanted grace in Man these sighs
And prayers, which in this golden censer mixed
With incense, I thy priest before thee bring
Fruits of more pleasing savour, from thy seed
Sown with contrition in his heart, than those
Which, his own hand manuring, all the trees
Of Paradise could have produced, ere fallen
From innocence.  Now therefore, bend thine ear
To supplication hear his sighs, though mute
Unskilful with what words to pray, let me
Interpret for him me, his advocate
And propitiation all his works on me,
Good, or not good, ingraft my merit those
Shall perfect, and for these my death shall pay.
Accept me and, in me, from these receive
The smell of peace toward mankind: let him live
Before thee reconciled, at least his days
Numbered, though sad till death, his doom, which I
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse,
To better life shall yield him: where with me
All my redeemed may dwell in joy and bliss
Made one with me, as I with thee am one.
To whom the Father, without cloud, serene.
All thy request for Man, accepted Son,
Obtain all thy request was my decree:
But, longer in that Paradise to dwell,
The law I gave to Nature him forbids:
Those pure immortal elements, that know,
No gross, no unharmonious mixture foul,
Eject him, tainted now and purge him off,
As a distemper, gross, to air as gross,
And mortal food as may dispose him best
For dissolution wrought by sin, that first
Distempered all things, and of incorrupt
Corrupted.  I, at first, with two fair gifts
Created him endowed with happiness,
And immortality: that fondly lost,
This other served but to eternize woe
Till I provided death: so death becomes
His final remedy and, after life,
Tried in sharp tribulation, and refined
By faith and faithful works, to second life,
Waked in the renovation of the just,
Resigns him up with Heaven and Earth renewed.
But let us call to synod all the Blest,
Through Heavens wide bounds: from them I will not hide
My judgements how with mankind I proceed,
As how with peccant Angels late they saw,
And in their state, though firm, stood more confirmed.
He ended, and the Son gave signal high
To the bright minister that watched he blew
His trumpet, heard in Oreb since perhaps
When God descended, and perhaps once more
To sound at general doom.  The angelick blast
Filled all the regions: from their blisful bowers
Of amarantine shade, fountain or spring,
By the waters of life, whereer they sat
In fellowships of joy, the sons of light
Hasted, resorting to the summons high
And took their seats till from his throne supreme
The Almighty thus pronounced his sovran will.
O Sons, like one of us Man is become
To know both good and evil, since his taste
Of that defended fruit but let him boast
His knowledge of good lost, and evil got
Happier! had it sufficed him to have known
Good by itself, and evil not at all.
He sorrows now, repents, and prays contrite,
My motions in him longer than they move,
His heart I know, how variable and vain,
Selfleft.  Lest therefore his now bolder hand
Reach also of the tree of life, and eat,
And live for ever, dream at least to live
For ever, to remove him I decree,
And send him from the garden forth to till
The ground whence he was taken, fitter soil.
Michael, this my behest have thou in charge
Take to thee from among the Cherubim
Thy choice of flaming warriours, lest the Fiend,
Or in behalf of Man, or to invade
Vacant possession, some new trouble raise:
Haste thee, and from the Paradise of God
Without remorse drive out the sinful pair
From hallowed ground the unholy and denounce
To them, and to their progeny, from thence
Perpetual banishment.  Yet, lest they faint
At the sad sentence rigorously urged,
For I behold them softened, and with tears
Bewailing their excess, all terrour hide.
If patiently thy bidding they obey,
Dismiss them not disconsolate reveal
To Adam what shall come in future days,
As I shall thee enlighten intermix
My covenant in the Womans seed renewed
So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace:
And on the east side of the garden place,
Where entrance up from Eden easiest climbs,
Cherubick watch and of a sword the flame
Widewaving all approach far off to fright,
And guard all passage to the tree of life:
Lest Paradise a receptacle prove
To Spirits foul, and all my trees their prey
With whose stolen fruit Man once more to delude.
He ceased and the archangelick Power prepared
For swift descent with him the cohort bright
Of watchful Cherubim: four faces each
Had, like a double Janus all their shape
Spangled with eyes more numerous than those
Of Argus, and more wakeful than to drouse,
Charmed with Arcadian pipe, the pastoral reed
Of Hermes, or his opiate rod.  Mean while,
To resalute the world with sacred light,
Leucothea waked and with fresh dews imbalmed
The earth when Adam and first matron Eve
Had ended now their orisons, and found
Strength added from above new hope to spring
Out of despair joy, but with fear yet linked
Which thus to Eve his welcome words renewed.
Eve, easily my faith admit, that all
The good which we enjoy from Heaven descends
But, that from us aught should ascend to Heaven
So prevalent as to concern the mind
Of God highblest, or to incline his will,
Hard to belief may seem yet this will prayer
Or one short sigh of human breath, upborne
Even to the seat of God.  For since I sought
By prayer the offended Deity to appease
Kneeled, and before him humbled all my heart
Methought I saw him placable and mild,
Bending his ear persuasion in me grew
That I was heard with favour peace returned
Home to my breast, and to my memory
His promise, that thy seed shall bruise our foe
Which, then not minded in dismay, yet now
Assures me that the bitterness of death
Is past, and we shall live.  Whence hail to thee,
Eve rightly called, mother of all mankind,
Mother of all things living, since by thee
Man is to live and all things live for Man.
To whom thus Eve with sad demeanour meek.
Illworthy I such title should belong
To me transgressour who, for thee ordained
A help, became thy snare to me reproach
Rather belongs, distrust, and all dispraise:
But infinite in pardon was my Judge,
That I, who first brought death on all, am graced
The source of life next favourable thou,
Who highly thus to entitle me vouchsafst,
Far other name deserving.  But the field
To labour calls us, now with sweat imposed,
Though after sleepless night for see!the morn,
All unconcerned with our unrest, begins
Her rosy progress smiling: let us forth
I never from thy side henceforth to stray,
Whereer our days work lies, though now enjoined
Laborious, till day droop while here we dwell,
What can be toilsome in these pleasant walks?
Here let us live, though in fallen state, content.
So spake, so wished much humbled Eve but Fate
Subscribed not:  Nature first gave signs, impressed
On bird, beast, air air suddenly eclipsed,
After short blush of morn nigh in her sight
The bird of Jove, stooped from his aery tour,
Two birds of gayest plume before him drove
Down from a hill the beast that reigns in woods,
First hunter then, pursued a gentle brace,
Goodliest of all the forest, hart and hind
Direct to the eastern gate was bent their flight.
Adam observed, and with his eye the chase
Pursuing, not unmoved, to Eve thus spake.
O Eve, some further change awaits us nigh,
Which Heaven, by these mute signs in Nature, shows
Forerunners of his purpose or to warn
Us, haply too secure, of our discharge
From penalty, because from death released
Some days: how long, and what till then our life,
Who knows? or more than this, that we are dust,
And thither must return, and be no more?
Why else this double object in our sight
Of flight pursued in the air, and oer the ground,
One way the selfsame hour? why in the east
Darkness ere days midcourse, and morninglight
More orient in yon western cloud, that draws
Oer the blue firmament a radiant white,
And slow descends with something heavenly fraught?
He erred not for by this the heavenly bands
Down from a sky of jasper lighted now
In Paradise, and on a hill made halt
A glorious apparition, had not doubt
And carnal fear that day dimmed Adams eye.
Not that more glorious, when the Angels met
Jacob in Mahanaim, where he saw
The field pavilioned with his guardians bright
Nor that, which on the flaming mount appeared
In Dothan, covered with a camp of fire,
Against the Syrian king, who to surprise
One man, assassinlike, had levied war,
War unproclaimed.  The princely Hierarch
In their bright stand there left his Powers, to seise
Possession of the garden he alone,
To find where Adam sheltered, took his way,
Not unperceived of Adam who to Eve,
While the great visitant approached, thus spake.
Eve now expect great tidings, which perhaps
Of us will soon determine, or impose
New laws to be observed for I descry,
From yonder blazing cloud that veils the hill,
One of the heavenly host and, by his gait,
None of the meanest some great Potentate
Or of the Thrones above such majesty
Invests him coming! yet not terrible,
That I should fear nor sociably mild,
As Raphael, that I should much confide
But solemn and sublime whom not to offend,
With reverence I must meet, and thou retire.
He ended: and the ArchAngel soon drew nigh,
Not in his shape celestial, but as man
Clad to meet man over his lucid arms
A military vest of purple flowed,
Livelier than Meliboean, or the grain
Of Sarra, worn by kings and heroes old
In time of truce Iris had dipt the woof
His starry helm unbuckled showed him prime
In manhood where youth ended by his side,
As in a glistering zodiack, hung the sword,
Satans dire dread and in his hand the spear.
Adam bowed low he, kingly, from his state
Inclined not, but his coming thus declared.
Adam, Heavens high behest no preface needs:
Sufficient that thy prayers are heard and Death,
Then due by sentence when thou didst transgress,
Defeated of his seisure many days
Given thee of grace wherein thou mayest repent,
And one bad act with many deeds well done
Mayest cover:  Well may then thy Lord, appeased,
Redeem thee quite from Deaths rapacious claim
But longer in this Paradise to dwell
Permits not: to remove thee I am come,
And send thee from the garden forth to till
The ground whence thou wast taken, fitter soil.
He added not for Adam at the news
Heartstruck with chilling gripe of sorrow stood,
That all his senses bound Eve, who unseen
Yet all had heard, with audible lament
Discovered soon the place of her retire.
O unexpected stroke, worse than of Death!
Must I thus leave thee Paradise? thus leave
Thee, native soil! these happy walks and shades,
Fit haunt of Gods? where I had hope to spend,
Quiet though sad, the respite of that day
That must be mortal to us both.  O flowers,
That never will in other climate grow,
My early visitation, and my last
 t even, which I bred up with tender hand
From the first opening bud, and gave ye names!
Who now shall rear ye to the sun, or rank
Your tribes, and water from the ambrosial fount?
Thee lastly, nuptial bower! by me adorned
With what to sight or smell was sweet! from thee
How shall I part, and whither wander down
Into a lower world to this obscure
And wild? how shall we breathe in other air
Less pure, accustomed to immortal fruits?
Whom thus the Angel interrupted mild.
Lament not, Eve, but patiently resign
What justly thou hast lost, nor set thy heart,
Thus overfond, on that which is not thine:
Thy going is not lonely with thee goes
Thy husband whom to follow thou art bound
Where he abides, think there thy native soil.
Adam, by this from the cold sudden damp
Recovering, and his scattered spirits returned,
To Michael thus his humble words addressed.
Celestial, whether among the Thrones, or named
Of them the highest for such of shape may seem
Prince above princes! gently hast thou told
Thy message, which might else in telling wound,
And in performing end us what besides
Of sorrow, and dejection, and despair,
Our frailty can sustain, thy tidings bring,
Departure from this happy place, our sweet
Recess, and only consolation left
Familiar to our eyes! all places else
Inhospitable appear, and desolate
Nor knowing us, nor known:  And, if by prayer
Incessant I could hope to change the will
Of Him who all things can, I would not cease
To weary him with my assiduous cries:
But prayer against his absolute decree
No more avails than breath against the wind,
Blown stifling back on him that breathes it forth:
Therefore to his great bidding I submit.
This most afflicts me, that, departing hence,
As from his face I shall be hid, deprived
His blessed countenance:  Here I could frequent
With worship place by place where he vouchsafed
Presence Divine and to my sons relate,
On this mount he appeared under this tree
Stood visible among these pines his voice
I heard here with him at this fountain talked:
So many grateful altars I would rear
Of grassy turf, and pile up every stone
Of lustre from the brook, in memory,
Or monument to ages and theron
Offer sweetsmelling gums, and fruits, and flowers:
In yonder nether world where shall I seek
His bright appearances, or footstep trace?
For though I fled him angry, yet recalled
To life prolonged and promised race, I now
Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts
Of glory and far off his steps adore.
To whom thus Michael with regard benign.
Adam, thou knowest Heaven his, and all the Earth
Not this rock only his Omnipresence fills
Land, sea, and air, and every kind that lives,
Fomented by his virtual power and warmed:
All the earth he gave thee to possess and rule,
No despicable gift surmise not then
His presence to these narrow bounds confined
Of Paradise, or Eden: this had been
Perhaps thy capital seat, from whence had spread
All generations and had hither come
From all the ends of the earth, to celebrate
And reverence thee, their great progenitor.
But this preeminence thou hast lost, brought down
To dwell on even ground now with thy sons:
Yet doubt not but in valley, and in plain,
God is, as here and will be found alike
Present and of his presence many a sign
Still following thee, still compassing thee round
With goodness and paternal love, his face
Express, and of his steps the track divine.
Which that thou mayest believe, and be confirmed
Ere thou from hence depart know, I am sent
To show thee what shall come in future days
To thee, and to thy offspring: good with bad
Expect to hear supernal grace contending
With sinfulness of men thereby to learn
True patience, and to temper joy with fear
And pious sorrow equally inured
By moderation either state to bear,
Prosperous or adverse: so shalt thou lead
Safest thy life, and best prepared endure
Thy mortal passage when it comes.Ascend
This hill let Eve for I have drenched her eyes
Here sleep below while thou to foresight wakest
As once thou sleptst, while she to life was formed.
To whom thus Adam gratefully replied.
Ascend, I follow thee, safe Guide, the path
Thou leadest me and to the hand of Heaven submit,
However chastening to the evil turn
My obvious breast arming to overcome
By suffering, and earn rest from labour won,
If so I may attain.  So both ascend
In the visions of God.  It was a hill,
Of Paradise the highest from whose top
The hemisphere of earth, in clearest ken,
Stretched out to the amplest reach of prospect lay.
Not higher that hill, nor wider looking round,
Whereon, for different cause, the Tempter set
Our second Adam, in the wilderness
To show him all Earths kingdoms, and their glory.
His eye might there command wherever stood
City of old or modern fame, the seat
Of mightiest empire, from the destined walls
Of Cambalu, seat of Cathaian Can,
And Samarchand by Oxus, Temirs throne,
To Paquin of Sinaean kings and thence
To Agra and Lahor of great Mogul,
Down to the golden Chersonese or where
The Persian in Ecbatan sat, or since
In Hispahan or where the Russian Ksar
In Mosco or the Sultan in Bizance,
Turchestanborn nor could his eye not ken
The empire of Negus to his utmost port
Ercoco, and the less maritim kings
Mombaza, and Quiloa, and Melind,
And Sofala, thought Ophir, to the realm
Of Congo, and Angola farthest south
Or thence from Niger flood to Atlas mount
The kingdoms of Almansor, Fez and Sus,
Morocco, and Algiers, and Tremisen
On Europe thence, and where Rome was to sway
The world: in spirit perhaps he also saw
Rich Mexico, the seat of Montezume,
And Cusco in Peru, the richer seat
Of Atabalipa and yet unspoiled
Guiana, whose great city Geryons sons
Call El Dorado.  But to nobler sights
Michael from Adams eyes the film removed,
Which that false fruit that promised clearer sight
Had bred then purged with euphrasy and rue
The visual nerve, for he had much to see
And from the well of life three drops instilled.
So deep the power of these ingredients pierced,
Even to the inmost seat of mental sight,
That Adam, now enforced to close his eyes,
Sunk down, and all his spirits became entranced
But him the gentle Angel by the hand
Soon raised, and his attention thus recalled.
Adam, now ope thine eyes and first behold
The effects, which thy original crime hath wrought
In some to spring from thee who never touched
The excepted tree nor with the snake conspired
Nor sinned thy sin yet from that sin derive
Corruption, to bring forth more violent deeds.
His eyes he opened, and beheld a field,
Part arable and tilth, whereon were sheaves
New reaped the other part sheepwalks and folds
I the midst an altar as the landmark stood,
Rustick, of grassy sord thither anon
A sweaty reaper from his tillage brought
First fruits, the green ear, and the yellow sheaf,
Unculled, as came to hand a shepherd next,
More meek, came with the firstlings of his flock,
Choicest and best then, sacrificing, laid
The inwards and their fat, with incense strowed,
On the cleft wood, and all due rights performed:
His offering soon propitious fire from Heaven
Consumed with nimble glance, and grateful steam
The others not, for his was not sincere
Whereat he inly raged, and, as they talked,
Smote him into the midriff with a stone
That beat out life he felland, deadly pale,
Groaned out his soul with gushing blood effused.
Much at that sight was Adam in his heart
Dismayed, and thus in haste to the Angel cried.
O Teacher, some great mischief hath befallen
To that meek man, who well had sacrificed
Is piety thus and pure devotion paid?
To whom Michael thus, he also moved, replied.
These two are brethren, Adam, and to come
Out of thy loins the unjust the just hath slain,
For envy that his brothers offering found
From Heaven acceptance but the bloody fact
Will be avenged and the others faith, approved,
Lose no reward though here thou see him die,
Rolling in dust and gore.  To which our sire.
Alas! both for the deed, and for the cause!
But have I now seen Death?  Is this the way
I must return to native dust?  O sight
Of terrour, foul and ugly to behold,
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!
To whom thus Michael.  Death thou hast seen
In his first shape on Man but many shapes
Of Death, and many are the ways that lead
To his grim cave, all dismal yet to sense
More terrible at the entrance, than within.
Some, as thou sawest, by violent stroke shall die
By fire, flood, famine, by intemperance more
In meats and drinks, which on the earth shall bring
Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew
Before thee shall appear that thou mayest know
What misery the inabstinence of Eve
Shall bring on Men.  Immediately a place
Before his eyes appeared, sad, noisome, dark
A lazarhouse it seemed wherein were laid
Numbers of all diseased all maladies
Of ghastly spasm, or racking torture, qualms
Of heartsick agony, all feverous kinds,
Convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs,
Intestine stone and ulcer, colickpangs,
Demoniack phrenzy, moaping melancholy,
And moonstruck madness, pining atrophy,
Marasmus, and widewasting pestilence,
Dropsies, and asthmas, and jointracking rheums.
Dire was the tossing, deep the groans Despair
Tended the sick busiest from couch to couch
And over them triumphant Death his dart
Shook, but delayed to strike, though oft invoked
With vows, as their chief good, and final hope.
Sight so deform what heart of rock could long
Dryeyed behold?  Adam could not, but wept,
Though not of woman born compassion quelled
His best of man, and gave him up to tears
A space, till firmer thoughts restrained excess
And, scarce recovering words, his plaint renewed.
O miserable mankind, to what fall
Degraded, to what wretched state reserved!
Better end here unborn.  Why is life given
To be thus wrested from us? rather, why
Obtruded on us thus? who, if we knew
What we receive, would either no accept
Life offered, or soon beg to lay it down
Glad to be so dismissed in peace.  Can thus
The image of God in Man, created once
So goodly and erect, though faulty since,
To such unsightly sufferings be debased
Under inhuman pains?  Why should not Man,
Retaining still divine similitude
In part, from such deformities be free,
And, for his Makers image sake, exempt?
Their Makers image, answered Michael, then
Forsook them, when themselves they vilified
To serve ungoverned Appetite and took
His image whom they served, a brutish vice,
Inductive mainly to the sin of Eve.
Therefore so abject is their punishment,
Disfiguring not Gods likeness, but their own
Or if his likeness, by themselves defaced
While they pervert pure Natures healthful rules
To loathsome sickness worthily, since they
Gods image did not reverence in themselves.
I yield it just, said Adam, and submit.
But is there yet no other way, besides
These painful passages, how we may come
To death, and mix with our connatural dust?
There is, said Michael, if thou well observe
The rule of Not too much by temperance taught,
In what thou eatest and drinkest seeking from thence
Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight,
Till many years over thy head return:
So mayest thou live till, like ripe fruit, thou drop
Into thy mothers lap or be with ease
Gathered, nor harshly plucked for death mature:
This is Old Age but then, thou must outlive
Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty which will change
To withered, weak, and gray thy senses then,
Obtuse, all taste of pleasure must forego,
To what thou hast and, for the air of youth,
Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reign
A melancholy damp of cold and dry
To weigh thy spirits down, and last consume
The balm of life.  To whom our ancestor.
Henceforth I fly not death, nor would prolong
Life much bent rather, how I may be quit,
Fairest and easiest, of this cumbrous charge
Which I must keep till my appointed day
Of rendering up, and patiently attend
My dissolution.  Michael replied.
Nor love thy life, nor hate but what thou livest
Live well how long, or short, permit to Heaven:
And now prepare thee for another sight.
He looked, and saw a spacious plain, whereon
Were tents of various hue by some, were herds
Of cattle grazing others, whence the sound
Of instruments, that made melodious chime,
Was heard, of harp and organ and, who moved
Their stops and chords, was seen his volant touch,
Instinct through all proportions, low and high,
Fled and pursued transverse the resonant fugue.
In other part stood one who, at the forge
Labouring, two massy clods of iron and brass
Had melted, whether found where casual fire
Had wasted woods on mountain or in vale,
Down to the veins of earth thence gliding hot
To some caves mouth or whether washed by stream
From underground the liquid ore he drained
Into fit moulds prepared from which he formed
First his own tools then, what might else be wrought
Fusil or graven in metal.  After these,
But on the hither side, a different sort
From the high neighbouring hills, which was their seat,
Down to the plain descended by their guise
Just men they seemed, and all their study bent
To worship God aright, and know his works
Not hid nor those things last, which might preserve
Freedom and peace to Men they on the plain
Long had not walked, when from the tents, behold!
A bevy of fair women, richly gay
In gems and wanton dress to the harp they sung
Soft amorous ditties, and in dance came on:
The men, though grave, eyed them and let their eyes
Rove without rein till, in the amorous net
Fast caught, they liked and each his liking chose
And now of love they treat, till the eveningstar,
Loves harbinger, appeared then, all in heat
They light the nuptial torch, and bid invoke
Hymen, then first to marriage rites invoked:
With feast and musick all the tents resound.
Such happy interview, and fair event
Of love and youth not lost, songs, garlands, flowers,
And charming symphonies, attached the heart
Of Adam, soon inclined to admit delight,
The bent of nature which he thus expressed.
True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blest
Much better seems this vision, and more hope
Of peaceful days portends, than those two past
Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse
Here Nature seems fulfilled in all her ends.
To whom thus Michael.  Judge not what is best
By pleasure, though to nature seeming meet
Created, as thou art, to nobler end
Holy and pure, conformity divine.
Those tents thou sawest so pleasant, were the tents
Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his race
Who slew his brother studious they appear
Of arts that polish life, inventers rare
Unmindful of their Maker, though his Spirit
Taught them but they his gifts acknowledged none.
Yet they a beauteous offspring shall beget
For that fair female troop thou sawest, that seemed
Of Goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay,
Yet empty of all good wherein consists
Womans domestick honour and chief praise
Bred only and completed to the taste
Of lustful appetence, to sing, to dance,
To dress, and troll the tongue, and roll the eye:
To these that sober race of men, whose lives
Religious titled them the sons of God,
Shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame
Ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles
Of these fair atheists and now swim in joy,
Erelong to swim at large and laugh, for which
The world erelong a world of tears must weep.
To whom thus Adam, of short joy bereft.
O pity and shame, that they, who to live well
Entered so fair, should turn aside to tread
Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint!
But still I see the tenour of Mans woe
Holds on the same, from Woman to begin.
From Mans effeminate slackness it begins,
Said the Angel, who should better hold his place
By wisdom, and superiour gifts received.
But now prepare thee for another scene.
He looked, and saw wide territory spread
Before him, towns, and rural works between
Cities of men with lofty gates and towers,
Concourse in arms, fierce faces threatening war,
Giants of mighty bone and bold emprise
Part wield their arms, part curb the foaming steed,
Single or in array of battle ranged
Both horse and foot, nor idly mustering stood
One way a band select from forage drives
A herd of beeves, fair oxen and fair kine,
From a fat meadow ground or fleecy flock,
Ewes and their bleating lambs over the plain,
Their booty scarce with life the shepherds fly,
But call in aid, which makes a bloody fray
With cruel tournament the squadrons join
Where cattle pastured late, now scattered lies
With carcasses and arms the ensanguined field,
Deserted:  Others to a city strong
Lay siege, encamped by battery, scale, and mine,
Assaulting others from the wall defend
With dart and javelin, stones, and sulphurous fire
On each hand slaughter, and gigantick deeds.
In other part the sceptered heralds call
To council, in the citygates anon
Grayheaded men and grave, with warriours mixed,
Assemble, and harangues are heard but soon,
In factious opposition till at last,
Of middle age one rising, eminent
In wise deport, spake much of right and wrong,
Of justice, or religion, truth, and peace,
And judgement from above: him old and young
Exploded, and had seized with violent hands,
Had not a cloud descending snatched him thence
Unseen amid the throng: so violence
Proceeded, and oppression, and swordlaw,
Through all the plain, and refuge none was found.
Adam was all in tears, and to his guide
Lamenting turned full sad O!what are these,
Deaths ministers, not men? who thus deal death
Inhumanly to men, and multiply
Ten thousandfold the sin of him who slew
His brother: for of whom such massacre
Make they, but of their brethren men of men
But who was that just man, whom had not Heaven
Rescued, had in his righteousness been lost?
To whom thus Michael.  These are the product
Of those illmated marriages thou sawest
Where good with bad were matched, who of themselves
Abhor to join and, by imprudence mixed,
Produce prodigious births of body or mind.
Such were these giants, men of high renown
For in those days might only shall be admired,
And valour and heroick virtue called
To overcome in battle, and subdue
Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite
Manslaughter, shall be held the highest pitch
Of human glory and for glory done
Of triumph, to be styled great conquerours
Patrons of mankind, Gods, and sons of Gods
Destroyers rightlier called, and plagues of men.
Thus fame shall be achieved, renown on earth
And what most merits fame, in silence hid.
But he, the seventh from thee, whom thou beheldst
The only righteous in a world preverse,
And therefore hated, therefore so beset
With foes, for daring single to be just,
And utter odious truth, that God would come
To judge them with his Saints him the Most High
Rapt in a balmy cloud with winged steeds
Did, as thou sawest, receive, to walk with God
High in salvation and the climes of bliss,
Exempt from death to show thee what reward
Awaits the good the rest what punishment
Which now direct thine eyes and soon behold.
He looked, and saw the face of things quite changed
The brazen throat of war had ceased to roar
All now was turned to jollity and game,
To luxury and riot, feast and dance
Marrying or prostituting, as befel,
Rape or adultery, where passing fair
Allured them thence from cups to civil broils.
At length a reverend sire among them came,
And of their doings great dislike declared,
And testified against their ways he oft
Frequented their assemblies, whereso met,
Triumphs or festivals and to them preached
Conversion and repentance, as to souls
In prison, under judgements imminent:
But all in vain: which when he saw, he ceased
Contending, and removed his tents far off
Then, from the mountain hewing timber tall,
Began to build a vessel of huge bulk
Measured by cubit, length, and breadth, and highth
Smeared round with pitch and in the side a door
Contrived and of provisions laid in large,
For man and beast: when lo, a wonder strange!
Of every beast, and bird, and insect small,
Came sevens, and pairs and entered in as taught
Their order: last the sire and his three sons,
With their four wives and God made fast the door.
Mean while the southwind rose, and, with black wings
Widehovering, all the clouds together drove
From under Heaven the hills to their supply
Vapour, and exhalation dusk and moist,
Sent up amain and now the thickened sky
Like a dark cieling stood down rushed the rain
Impetuous and continued, till the earth
No more was seen: the floating vessel swum
Uplifted, and secure with beaked prow
Rode tilting oer the waves all dwellings else
Flood overwhelmed, and them with all their pomp
Deep under water rolled sea covered sea,
Sea without shore and in their palaces,
Where luxury late reigned, seamonsters whelped
And stabled of mankind, so numerous late,
All left, in one small bottom swum imbarked.
How didst thou grieve then, Adam, to behold
The end of all thy offspring, end so sad,
Depopulation!  Thee another flood,
Of tears and sorrow a flood, thee also drowned,
And sunk thee as thy sons till, gently reared
By the Angel, on thy feet thou stoodest at last,
Though comfortless as when a father mourns
His children, all in view destroyed at once
And scarce to the Angel utterdst thus thy plaint.
O visions ill foreseen!  Better had I
Lived ignorant of future! so had borne
My part of evil only, each days lot
Enough to bear those now, that were dispensed
The burden of many ages, on me light
At once, by my foreknowledge gaining birth
Abortive, to torment me ere their being,
With thought that they must be.  Let no man seek
Henceforth to be foretold, what shall befall
Him or his children evil he may be sure,
Which neither his foreknowing can prevent
And he the future evil shall no less
In apprehension than in substance feel,
Grievous to bear: but that care now is past,
Man is not whom to warn: those few escaped
Famine and anguish will at last consume,
Wandering that watery desart:  I had hope,
When violence was ceased, and war on earth,
All would have then gone well peace would have crowned
With length of happy days the race of Man
But I was far deceived for now I see
Peace to corrupt no less than war to waste.
How comes it thus? unfold, celestial Guide,
And whether here the race of Man will end.
To whom thus Michael.  Those, whom last thou sawest
In triumph and luxurious wealth, are they
First seen in acts of prowess eminent
And great exploits, but of true virtue void
Who, having spilt much blood, and done much wast
Subduing nations, and achieved thereby
Fame in the world, high titles, and rich prey
Shall change their course to pleasure, ease, and sloth,
Surfeit, and lust till wantonness and pride
Raise out of friendship hostile deeds in peace.
The conquered also, and enslaved by war,
Shall, with their freedom lost, all virtue lose
And fear of God from whom their piety feigned
In sharp contest of battle found no aid
Against invaders therefore, cooled in zeal,
Thenceforth shall practice how to live secure,
Worldly or dissolute, on what their lords
Shall leave them to enjoy for the earth shall bear
More than enough, that temperance may be tried:
So all shall turn degenerate, all depraved
Justice and temperance, truth and faith, forgot
One man except, the only son of light
In a dark age, against example good,
Against allurement, custom, and a world
Offended: fearless of reproach and scorn,
The grandchild, with twelve sons encreased, departs
From Canaan, to a land hereafter called
Egypt, divided by the river Nile
See where it flows, disgorging at seven mouths
Into the sea:  To sojourn in that land
He comes, invited by a younger son
In time of dearth a son, whose worthy deeds
Raise him to be the second in that realm
Of Pharaoh:  There he dies, and leaves his race
Growing into a nation, and now grown
Suspected to a sequent king, who seeks
To stop their overgrowth, as inmate guests
Or violence, he of their wicked ways
Shall them admonish and before them set
The paths of righteousness, how much more safe
And full of peace denouncing wrath to come
On their impenitence and shall return
Of them derided, but of God observed
The one just man alive by his command
Shall build a wonderous ark, as thou beheldst,
To save himself, and houshold, from amidst
A world devote to universal wrack.
No sooner he, with them of man and beast
Select for life, shall in the ark be lodged,
And sheltered round but all the cataracts
Of Heaven set open on the Earth shall pour
Rain, day and night all fountains of the deep,
Broke up, shall heave the ocean to usurp
Beyond all bounds till inundation rise
Above the highest hills:  Then shall this mount
Of Paradise by might of waves be moved
Out of his place, pushed by the horned flood,
With all his verdure spoiled, and trees adrift,
Down the great river to the opening gulf,
And there take root an island salt and bare,
The haunt of seals, and orcs, and seamews clang:
To teach thee that God attributes to place
No sanctity, if none be thither brought
By men who there frequent, or therein dwell.
And now, what further shall ensue, behold.
He looked, and saw the ark hull on the flood,
Which now abated for the clouds were fled,
Driven by a keen northwind, that, blowing dry,
Wrinkled the face of deluge, as decayed
And the clear sun on his wide watery glass
Gazed hot, and of the fresh wave largely drew,
As after thirst which made their flowing shrink
From standing lake to tripping ebb, that stole
With soft foot towards the deep who now had stopt
His sluces, as the Heaven his windows shut.
The ark no more now floats, but seems on ground,
Fast on the top of some high mountain fixed.
And now the tops of hills, as rocks, appear
With clamour thence the rapid currents drive,
Towards the retreating sea, their furious tide.
Forthwith from out the ark a raven flies,
And after him, the surer messenger,
A dove sent forth once and again to spy
Green tree or ground, whereon his foot may light:
The second time returning, in his bill
An oliveleaf he brings, pacifick sign:
Anon dry ground appears, and from his ark
The ancient sire descends, with all his train
Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout,
Grateful to Heaven, over his head beholds
A dewy cloud, and in the cloud a bow
Conspicuous with three lifted colours gay,
Betokening peace from God, and covenant new.
Whereat the heart of Adam, erst so sad,
Greatly rejoiced and thus his joy broke forth.
O thou, who future things canst represent
As present, heavenly Instructer!  I revive
At this last sight assured that Man shall live,
With all the creatures, and their seed preserve.
Far less I now lament for one whole world
Of wicked sons destroyed, than I rejoice
For one man found so perfect, and so just,
That God vouchsafes to raise another world
From him, and all his anger to forget.
But say, what mean those coloured streaks in Heaven
Distended, as the brow of God appeased?
Or serve they, as a flowery verge, to bind
The fluid skirts of that same watery cloud,
Lest it again dissolve, and shower the earth?
To whom the ArchAngel.  Dextrously thou aimest
So willingly doth God remit his ire,
Though late repenting him of Man depraved
Grieved at his heart, when looking down he saw
The whole earth filled with violence, and all flesh
Corrupting each their way yet, those removed,
Such grace shall one just man find in his sight,
That he relents, not to blot out mankind
And makes a covenant never to destroy
The earth again by flood nor let the sea
Surpass his bounds nor rain to drown the world,
With man therein or beast but, when he brings
Over the earth a cloud, will therein set
His triplecoloured bow, whereon to look,
And call to mind his covenant: Day and night,
Seedtime and harvest, heat and hoary frost,
Shall hold their course till fire purge all things new,
Both Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell.



Book XII


As one who in his journey bates at noon,
Though bent on speed so here the ArchAngel paused
Betwixt the world destroyed and world restored,
If Adam aught perhaps might interpose
Then, with transition sweet, new speech resumes.
Thus thou hast seen one world begin, and end
And Man, as from a second stock, proceed.
Much thou hast yet to see but I perceive
Thy mortal sight to fail objects divine
Must needs impair and weary human sense:
Henceforth what is to come I will relate
Thou therefore give due audience, and attend.
This second source of Men, while yet but few,
And while the dread of judgement past remains
Fresh in their minds, fearing the Deity,
With some regard to what is just and right
Shall lead their lives, and multiply apace
Labouring the soil, and reaping plenteous crop,
Corn, wine, and oil and, from the herd or flock,
Oft sacrificing bullock, lamb, or kid,
With large wineofferings poured, and sacred feast,
Shall spend their days in joy unblamed and dwell
Long time in peace, by families and tribes,
Under paternal rule: till one shall rise
Of proud ambitious heart who, not content
With fair equality, fraternal state,
Will arrogate dominion undeserved
Over his brethren, and quite dispossess
Concord and law of nature from the earth
Hunting and men not beasts shall be his game
With war, and hostile snare, such as refuse
Subjection to his empire tyrannous:
A mighty hunter thence he shall be styled
Before the Lord as in despite of Heaven,
Or from Heaven, claiming second sovranty
And from rebellion shall derive his name,
Though of rebellion others he accuse.
He with a crew, whom like ambition joins
With him or under him to tyrannize,
Marching from Eden towards the west, shall find
The plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge
Boils out from under ground, the mouth of Hell:
Of brick, and of that stuff, they cast to build
A city and tower, whose top may reach to Heaven
And get themselves a name lest, far dispersed
In foreign lands, their memory be lost
Regardless whether good or evil fame.
But God, who oft descends to visit men
Unseen, and through their habitations walks
To mark their doings, them beholding soon,
Comes down to see their city, ere the tower
Obstruct Heaventowers, and in derision sets
Upon their tongues a various spirit, to rase
Quite out their native language and, instead,
To sow a jangling noise of words unknown:
Forthwith a hideous gabble rises loud,
Among the builders each to other calls
Not understood till hoarse, and all in rage,
As mocked they storm: great laughter was in Heaven,
And looking down, to see the hubbub strange,
And hear the din:  Thus was the building left
Ridiculous, and the work Confusion named.
Whereto thus Adam, fatherly displeased.
O execrable son! so to aspire
Above his brethren to himself assuming
Authority usurped, from God not given:
He gave us only over beast, fish, fowl,
Dominion absolute that right we hold
By his donation but man over men
He made not lord such title to himself
Reserving, human left from human free.
But this usurper his encroachment proud
Stays not on Man to God his tower intends
Siege and defiance:  Wretched man!what food
Will he convey up thither, to sustain
Himself and his rash army where thin air
Above the clouds will pine his entrails gross,
And famish him of breath, if not of bread?
To whom thus Michael.  Justly thou abhorrest
That son, who on the quiet state of men
Such trouble brought, affecting to subdue
Rational liberty yet know withal,
Since thy original lapse, true liberty
Is lost, which always with right reason dwells
Twinned, and from her hath no dividual being:
Reason in man obscured, or not obeyed,
Immediately inordinate desires,
And upstart passions, catch the government
From reason and to servitude reduce
Man, till then free.  Therefore, since he permits
Within himself unworthy powers to reign
Over free reason, God, in judgement just,
Subjects him from without to violent lords
Who oft as undeservedly enthrall
His outward freedom:  Tyranny must be
Though to the tyrant thereby no excuse.
Yet sometimes nations will decline so low
From virtue, which is reason, that no wrong,
But justice, and some fatal curse annexed,
Deprives them of their outward liberty
Their inward lost:  Witness the irreverent son
Of him who built the ark who, for the shame
Done to his father, heard this heavy curse,
Servant of servants, on his vicious race.
Thus will this latter, as the former world,
Still tend from bad to worse till God at last,
Wearied with their iniquities, withdraw
His presence from among them, and avert
His holy eyes resolving from thenceforth
To leave them to their own polluted ways
And one peculiar nation to select
From all the rest, of whom to be invoked,
A nation from one faithful man to spring:
Him on this side Euphrates yet residing,
Bred up in idolworship:  O, that men
Canst thou believe? should be so stupid grown,
While yet the patriarch lived, who scaped the flood,
As to forsake the living God, and fall
To worship their own work in wood and stone
For Gods!  Yet him God the Most High vouchsafes
To call by vision, from his fathers house,
His kindred, and false Gods, into a land
Which he will show him and from him will raise
A mighty nation and upon him shower
His benediction so, that in his seed
All nations shall be blest: he straight obeys
Not knowing to what land, yet firm believes:
I see him, but thou canst not, with what faith
He leaves his Gods, his friends, and native soil,
Ur of Chaldaea, passing now the ford
To Haran after him a cumbrous train
Of herds and flocks, and numerous servitude
Not wandering poor, but trusting all his wealth
With God, who called him, in a land unknown.
Canaan he now attains I see his tents
Pitched about Sechem, and the neighbouring plain
Of Moreh there by promise he receives
Gift to his progeny of all that land,
From Hameth northward to the Desart south
Things by their names I call, though yet unnamed
From Hermon east to the great western Sea
Mount Hermon, yonder sea each place behold
In prospect, as I point them on the shore
Mount Carmel here, the doublefounted stream,
Jordan, true limit eastward but his sons
Shall dwell to Senir, that long ridge of hills.
This ponder, that all nations of the earth
Shall in his seed be blessed:  By that seed
Is meant thy great Deliverer, who shall bruise
The Serpents head whereof to thee anon
Plainlier shall be revealed.  This patriarch blest,
Whom faithful Abraham due time shall call,
A son, and of his son a grandchild, leaves
Like him in faith, in wisdom, and renown:
The grandchild, with twelve sons increased, departs
From Canaan to a land hereafter called
Egypt, divided by the river Nile
See where it flows, disgorging at seven mouths
Into the sea. To sojourn in that land
He comes, invited by a younger son
In time of dearth, a son whose worthy deeds
Raise him to be the second in that realm
Of Pharaoh. There he dies, and leaves his race
Growing into a nation, and now grown
Suspected to a sequent king, who seeks
To stop their overgrowth, as inmate guests
Too numerous whence of guests he makes them slaves
Inhospitably, and kills their infant males:
Till by two brethren these two brethren call
Moses and Aaron sent from God to claim
His people from enthralment, they return,
With glory and spoil, back to their promised land.
But first, the lawless tyrant, who denies
To know their God, or message to regard,
Must be compelled by signs and judgements dire
To blood unshed the rivers must be turned
Frogs, lice, and flies, must all his palace fill
With loathed intrusion, and fill all the land
His cattle must of rot and murren die
Botches and blains must all his flesh emboss,
And all his people thunder mixed with hail,
Hail mixed with fire, must rend the Egyptians sky,
And wheel on the earth, devouring where it rolls
What it devours not, herb, or fruit, or grain,
A darksome cloud of locusts swarming down
Must eat, and on the ground leave nothing green
Darkness must overshadow all his bounds,
Palpable darkness, and blot out three days
Last, with one midnight stroke, all the firstborn
Of Egypt must lie dead.  Thus with ten wounds
The riverdragon tamed at length submits
To let his sojourners depart, and oft
Humbles his stubborn heart but still, as ice
More hardened after thaw till, in his rage
Pursuing whom he late dismissed, the sea
Swallows him with his host but them lets pass,
As on dry land, between two crystal walls
Awed by the rod of Moses so to stand
Divided, till his rescued gain their shore:
Such wondrous power God to his saint will lend,
Though present in his Angel who shall go
Before them in a cloud, and pillar of fire
By day a cloud, by night a pillar of fire
To guide them in their journey, and remove
Behind them, while the obdurate king pursues:
All night he will pursue but his approach
Darkness defends between till morning watch
Then through the fiery pillar, and the cloud,
God looking forth will trouble all his host,
And craze their chariotwheels: when by command
Moses once more his potent rod extends
Over the sea the sea his rod obeys
On their embattled ranks the waves return,
And overwhelm their war:  The race elect
Safe toward Canaan from the shore advance
Through the wild Desart, not the readiest way
Lest, entering on the Canaanite alarmed,
War terrify them inexpert, and fear
Return them back to Egypt, choosing rather
Inglorious life with servitude for life
To noble and ignoble is more sweet
Untrained in arms, where rashness leads not on.
This also shall they gain by their delay
In the wide wilderness there they shall found
Their government, and their great senate choose
Through the twelve tribes, to rule by laws ordained:
God from the mount of Sinai, whose gray top
Shall tremble, he descending, will himself
In thunder, lightning, and loud trumpets sound,
Ordain them laws part, such as appertain
To civil justice part, religious rites
Of sacrifice informing them, by types
And shadows, of that destined Seed to bruise
The Serpent, by what means he shall achieve
Mankinds deliverance.  But the voice of God
To mortal ear is dreadful:  They beseech
That Moses might report to them his will,
And terrour cease he grants what they besought,
Instructed that to God is no access
Without Mediator, whose high office now
Moses in figure bears to introduce
One greater, of whose day he shall foretel,
And all the Prophets in their age the times
Of great Messiah shall sing.  Thus, laws and rites
Established, such delight hath God in Men
Obedient to his will, that he vouchsafes
Among them to set up his tabernacle
The Holy One with mortal Men to dwell:
By his prescript a sanctuary is framed
Of cedar, overlaid with gold therein
An ark, and in the ark his testimony,
The records of his covenant over these
A mercyseat of gold, between the wings
Of two bright Cherubim before him burn
Seven lamps as in a zodiack representing
The heavenly fires over the tent a cloud
Shall rest by day, a fiery gleam by night
Save when they journey, and at length they come,
Conducted by his Angel, to the land
Promised to Abraham and his seed:The rest
Were long to tell how many battles fought
How many kings destroyed and kingdoms won
Or how the sun shall in mid Heaven stand still
A day entire, and nights due course adjourn,
Mans voice commanding, Sun, in Gibeon stand,
And thou moon in the vale of Aialon,
Till Israel overcome! so call the third
From Abraham, son of Isaac and from him
His whole descent, who thus shall Canaan win.
Here Adam interposed.  O sent from Heaven,
Enlightener of my darkness, gracious things
Thou hast revealed those chiefly, which concern
Just Abraham and his seed: now first I find
Mine eyes trueopening, and my heart much eased
Erewhile perplexed with thoughts, what would become
Of me and all mankind:  But now I see
His day, in whom all nations shall be blest
Favour unmerited by me, who sought
Forbidden knowledge by forbidden means.
This yet I apprehend not, why to those
Among whom God will deign to dwell on earth
So many and so various laws are given
So many laws argue so many sins
Among them how can God with such reside?
To whom thus Michael.  Doubt not but that sin
Will reign among them, as of thee begot
And therefore was law given them, to evince
Their natural pravity, by stirring up
Sin against law to fight: that when they see
Law can discover sin, but not remove,
Save by those shadowy expiations weak,
The blood of bulls and goats, they may conclude
Some blood more precious must be paid for Man
Just for unjust that, in such righteousness
To them by faith imputed, they may find
Justification towards God, and peace
Of conscience which the law by ceremonies
Cannot appease nor Man the mortal part
Perform and, not performing, cannot live.
So law appears imperfect and but given
With purpose to resign them, in full time,
Up to a better covenant disciplined
From shadowy types to truth from flesh to spirit
From imposition of strict laws to free
Acceptance of large grace from servile fear
To filial works of law to works of faith.
And therefore shall not Moses, though of God
Highly beloved, being but the minister
Of law, his people into Canaan lead
But Joshua, whom the Gentiles Jesus call,
His name and office bearing, who shall quell
The adversarySerpent, and bring back
Through the worlds wilderness longwandered Man
Safe to eternal Paradise of rest.
Mean while they, in their earthly Canaan placed,
Long time shall dwell and prosper, but when sins
National interrupt their publick peace,
Provoking God to raise them enemies
From whom as oft he saves them penitent
By Judges first, then under Kings of whom
The second, both for piety renowned
And puissant deeds, a promise shall receive
Irrevocable, that his regal throne
For ever shall endure the like shall sing
All Prophecy, that of the royal stock
Of David so I name this king shall rise
A Son, the Womans seed to thee foretold,
Foretold to Abraham, as in whom shall trust
All nations and to kings foretold, of kings
The last for of his reign shall be no end.
But first, a long succession must ensue
And his next son, for wealth and wisdom famed,
The clouded ark of God, till then in tents
Wandering, shall in a glorious temple enshrine.
Such follow him, as shall be registered
Part good, part bad of bad the longer scroll
Whose foul idolatries, and other faults
Heaped to the popular sum, will so incense
God, as to leave them, and expose their land,
Their city, his temple, and his holy ark,
With all his sacred things, a scorn and prey
To that proud city, whose high walls thou sawest
Left in confusion Babylon thence called.
There in captivity he lets them dwell
The space of seventy years then brings them back,
Remembering mercy, and his covenant sworn
To David, stablished as the days of Heaven.
Returned from Babylon by leave of kings
Their lords, whom God disposed, the house of God
They first reedify and for a while
In mean estate live moderate till, grown
In wealth and multitude, factious they grow
But first among the priests dissention springs,
Men who attend the altar, and should most
Endeavour peace: their strife pollution brings
Upon the temple itself: at last they seise
The scepter, and regard not Davids sons
Then lose it to a stranger, that the true
Anointed King Messiah might be born
Barred of his right yet at his birth a star,
Unseen before in Heaven, proclaims him come
And guides the eastern sages, who inquire
His place, to offer incense, myrrh, and gold:
His place of birth a solemn Angel tells
To simple shepherds, keeping watch by night
They gladly thither haste, and by a quire
Of squadroned Angels hear his carol sung.
A virgin is his mother, but his sire
The power of the Most High:  He shall ascend
The throne hereditary, and bound his reign
With Earths wide bounds, his glory with the Heavens.
He ceased, discerning Adam with such joy
Surcharged, as had like grief been dewed in tears,
Without the vent of words which these he breathed.
O prophet of glad tidings, finisher
Of utmost hope! now clear I understand
What oft my steadiest thoughts have searched in vain
Why our great Expectation should be called
The seed of Woman:  Virgin Mother, hail,
High in the love of Heaven yet from my loins
Thou shalt proceed, and from thy womb the Son
Of God Most High: so God with Man unites!
Needs must the Serpent now his capital bruise
Expect with mortal pain:  Say where and when
Their fight, what stroke shall bruise the victors heel.
To whom thus Michael.  Dream not of their fight,
As of a duel, or the local wounds
Of head or heel:  Not therefore joins the Son
Manhood to Godhead, with more strength to foil
Thy enemy nor so is overcome
Satan, whose fall from Heaven, a deadlier bruise,
Disabled, not to give thee thy deaths wound:
Which he, who comes thy Saviour, shall recure,
Not by destroying Satan, but his works
In thee, and in thy seed:  Nor can this be,
But by fulfilling that which thou didst want,
Obedience to the law of God, imposed
On penalty of death, and suffering death
The penalty to thy transgression due,
And due to theirs which out of thine will grow:
So only can high Justice rest appaid.
The law of God exact he shall fulfil
Both by obedience and by love, though love
Alone fulfil the law thy punishment
He shall endure, by coming in the flesh
To a reproachful life, and cursed death
Proclaiming life to all who shall believe
In his redemption and that his obedience,
Imputed, becomes theirs by faith his merits
To save them, not their own, though legal, works.
For this he shall live hated, be blasphemed,
Seised on by force, judged, and to death condemned
A shameful and accursed, nailed to the cross
By his own nation slain for bringing life:
But to the cross he nails thy enemies,
The law that is against thee, and the sins
Of all mankind, with him there crucified,
Never to hurt them more who rightly trust
In this his satisfaction so he dies,
But soon revives Death over him no power
Shall long usurp ere the third dawning light
Return, the stars of morn shall see him rise
Out of his grave, fresh as the dawning light,
Thy ransom paid, which Man from death redeems,
His death for Man, as many as offered life
Neglect not, and the benefit embrace
By faith not void of works:  This Godlike act
Annuls thy doom, the death thou shouldest have died,
In sin for ever lost from life this act
Shall bruise the head of Satan, crush his strength,
Defeating Sin and Death, his two main arms
And fix far deeper in his head their stings
Than temporal death shall bruise the victors heel,
Or theirs whom he redeems a death, like sleep,
A gentle wafting to immortal life.
Nor after resurrection shall he stay
Longer on earth, than certain times to appear
To his disciples, men who in his life
Still followed him to them shall leave in charge
To teach all nations what of him they learned
And his salvation them who shall believe
Baptizing in the profluent stream, the sign
Of washing them from guilt of sin to life
Pure, and in mind prepared, if so befall,
For death, like that which the Redeemer died.
All nations they shall teach for, from that day,
Not only to the sons of Abrahams loins
Salvation shall be preached, but to the sons
Of Abrahams faith wherever through the world
So in his seed all nations shall be blest.
Then to the Heaven of Heavens he shall ascend
With victory, triumphing through the air
Over his foes and thine there shall surprise
The Serpent, prince of air, and drag in chains
Through all his realm, and there confounded leave
Then enter into glory, and resume
His seat at Gods right hand, exalted high
Above all names in Heaven and thence shall come,
When this worlds dissolution shall be ripe,
With glory and power to judge both quick and dead
To judge the unfaithful dead, but to reward
His faithful, and receive them into bliss,
Whether in Heaven or Earth for then the Earth
Shall all be Paradise, far happier place
Than this of Eden, and far happier days.
So spake the ArchAngel Michael then paused,
As at the worlds great period and our sire,
Replete with joy and wonder, thus replied.
O Goodness infinite, Goodness immense!
That all this good of evil shall produce,
And evil turn to good more wonderful
Than that which by creation first brought forth
Light out of darkness!  Full of doubt I stand,
Whether I should repent me now of sin
By me done, and occasioned or rejoice
Much more, that much more good thereof shall spring
To God more glory, more goodwill to Men
From God, and over wrath grace shall abound.
But say, if our Deliverer up to Heaven
Must reascend, what will betide the few
His faithful, left among the unfaithful herd,
The enemies of truth?  Who then shall guide
His people, who defend?  Will they not deal
Worse with his followers than with him they dealt?
Be sure they will, said the Angel but from Heaven
He to his own a Comforter will send,
The promise of the Father, who shall dwell
His Spirit within them and the law of faith,
Working through love, upon their hearts shall write,
To guide them in all truth and also arm
With spiritual armour, able to resist
Satans assaults, and quench his fiery darts
What man can do against them, not afraid,
Though to the death against such cruelties
With inward consolations recompensed,
And oft supported so as shall amaze
Their proudest persecutors:  For the Spirit,
Poured first on his Apostles, whom he sends
To evangelize the nations, then on all
Baptized, shall them with wonderous gifts endue
To speak all tongues, and do all miracles,
As did their Lord before them.  Thus they win
Great numbers of each nation to receive
With joy the tidings brought from Heaven:  At length
Their ministry performed, and race well run,
Their doctrine and their story written left,
They die but in their room, as they forewarn,
Wolves shall succeed for teachers, grievous wolves,
Who all the sacred mysteries of Heaven
To their own vile advantages shall turn
Of lucre and ambition and the truth
With superstitions and traditions taint,
Left only in those written records pure,
Though not but by the Spirit understood.
Then shall they seek to avail themselves of names,
Places, and titles, and with these to join
Secular power though feigning still to act
By spiritual, to themselves appropriating
The Spirit of God, promised alike and given
To all believers and, from that pretence,
Spiritual laws by carnal power shall force
On every conscience laws which none shall find
Left them inrolled, or what the Spirit within
Shall on the heart engrave.  What will they then
But force the Spirit of Grace itself, and bind
His consort Liberty? what, but unbuild
His living temples, built by faith to stand,
Their own faith, not anothers? for, on earth,
Who against faith and conscience can be heard
Infallible? yet many will presume:
Whence heavy persecution shall arise
On all, who in the worship persevere
Of spirit and truth the rest, far greater part,
Will deem in outward rites and specious forms
Religion satisfied Truth shall retire
Bestuck with slanderous darts, and works of faith
Rarely be found:  So shall the world go on,
To good malignant, to bad men benign
Under her own weight groaning till the day
Appear of respiration to the just,
And vengeance to the wicked, at return
Of him so lately promised to thy aid,
The Womans Seed obscurely then foretold,
Now ampler known thy Saviour and thy Lord
Last, in the clouds, from Heaven to be revealed
In glory of the Father, to dissolve
Satan with his perverted world then raise
From the conflagrant mass, purged and refined,
New Heavens, new Earth, ages of endless date,
Founded in righteousness, and peace, and love
To bring forth fruits, joy and eternal bliss.
He ended and thus Adam last replied.
How soon hath thy prediction, Seer blest,
Measured this transient world, the race of time,
Till time stand fixed!  Beyond is all abyss,
Eternity, whose end no eye can reach.
Greatlyinstructed I shall hence depart
Greatly in peace of thought and have my fill
Of knowledge, what this vessel can contain
Beyond which was my folly to aspire.
Henceforth I learn, that to obey is best,
And love with fear the only God to walk
As in his presence ever to observe
His providence and on him sole depend,
Merciful over all his works, with good
Still overcoming evil, and by small
Accomplishing great things, by things deemed weak
Subverting worldly strong, and worldly wise
By simply meek: that suffering for truths sake
Is fortitude to highest victory,
And, to the faithful, death the gate of life
Taught this by his example, whom I now
Acknowledge my Redeemer ever blest.
To whom thus also the Angel last replied.
This having learned, thou hast attained the sum
Of wisdom hope no higher, though all the stars
Thou knewest by name, and all the ethereal powers,
All secrets of the deep, all Natures works,
Or works of God in Heaven, air, earth, or sea,
And all the riches of this world enjoyedst,
And all the rule, one empire only add
Deeds to thy knowledge answerable add faith,
Add virtue, patience, temperance add love,
By name to come called charity, the soul
Of all the rest: then wilt thou not be loth
To leave this Paradise, but shalt possess
A Paradise within thee, happier far.
Let us descend now therefore from this top
Of speculation for the hour precise
Exacts our parting hence and see!the guards,
By me encamped on yonder hill, expect
Their motion at whose front a flaming sword,
In signal of remove, waves fiercely round:
We may no longer stay: go, waken Eve
Her also I with gentle dreams have calmed
Portending good, and all her spirits composed
To meek submission: thou, at season fit,
Let her with thee partake what thou hast heard
Chiefly what may concern her faith to know,
The great deliverance by her seed to come
For by the Womans seed on all mankind:
That ye may live, which will be many days,
Both in one faith unanimous, though sad,
With cause, for evils past yet much more cheered
With meditation on the happy end.
He ended, and they both descend the hill
Descended, Adam to the bower, where Eve
Lay sleeping, ran before but found her waked
And thus with words not sad she him received.
Whence thou returnest, and whither wentest, I know
For God is also in sleep and dreams advise,
Which he hath sent propitious, some great good
Presaging, since with sorrow and hearts distress
Wearied I fell asleep:  But now lead on
In me is no delay with thee to go,
Is to stay here without thee here to stay,
Is to go hence unwilling thou to me
Art all things under Heaven, all places thou,
Who for my wilful crime art banished hence.
This further consolation yet secure
I carry hence though all by me is lost,
Such favour I unworthy am vouchsafed,
By me the Promised Seed shall all restore.
So spake our mother Eve and Adam heard
Well pleased, but answered not:  For now, too nigh
The ArchAngel stood and, from the other hill
To their fixed station, all in bright array
The Cherubim descended on the ground
Gliding meteorous, as eveningmist
Risen from a river oer the marish glides,
And gathers ground fast at the labourers heel
Homeward returning.  High in front advanced,
The brandished sword of God before them blazed,
Fierce as a comet which with torrid heat,
And vapour as the Libyan air adust,
Began to parch that temperate clime whereat
In either hand the hastening Angel caught
Our lingering parents, and to the eastern gate
Led them direct, and down the cliff as fast
To the subjected plain then disappeared.
They, looking back, all the eastern side beheld
Of Paradise, so late their happy seat,
Waved over by that flaming brand the gate
With dreadful faces thronged, and fiery arms:
Some natural tears they dropt, but wiped them soon
The world was all before them, where to choose
Their place of rest, and Providence their guide:
They, hand in hand, with wandering steps and slow,
Through Eden took their solitary way.

The Project Gutenberg Edition of THE WORLD FACTBOOK 1992
This file should be named world92.zip or world92.txt

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, world921.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, world92a.txt.

Information about Project Gutenberg one page

We produce about one million dollars for each hour we work.  One
hundred hours is a conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar, then we produce a
million dollars per hour next year we will have to do four text
files per month, thus upping our productivity to two millionhr.
The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  10,000 x 100,000,000Trillion
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers.

We need your donations more than ever!

All donations should be made to "Project GutenbergIBC", and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law "IBC" is Illinois
Benedictine College.  Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go
to IBC, too

For these and other matters, please mail to:

David Turner, Project Gutenberg
Illinois  Benedictine  College
5700  College  Road
Lisle, IL 605320900

Email requests to:
Internet:    chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu David Turner
Compuserve:  chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu David Turner
Attmail:     internet!chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu David Turner
MCImail:     David Turner
ADDRESS TYPE: MCI  EMS: INTERNET  MBX:chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu

When all other email fails try our Michael S. Hart, Executive Director:
hartvmd.cso.uiuc.edu internet   hartuiucvmd   bitnet

We would prefer to send you this information by email
Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail.


If you have an FTP program or emulator, please:

FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
ftp mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  yourlogin
cd etextetext91
or cd etext92 for new books  now also cd etextetext92
or cd etextarticles get suggest gut for more information
dir to see files
get or mget to get files. . .set bin for zip files
GET INDEX and AAINDEX
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT for newsletters.

Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor
Three Pages

STARTTHE SMALL PRINT!FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTSSTART

Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if whats wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

BEFORE! YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT

By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERGtm etext,
you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept this
"Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive a
refund of the money if any you paid for this etext by sending
a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person you got
it from.  If you received this etext on a physical medium such
as a disk, you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERGTM ETEXTS

This PROJECT GUTENBERGtm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERGtm
etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association the
"Project".  Among other things, this means that no one owns a
United States copyright on or for this work, so the Project and
you! can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special
rules, set forth below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute
this etext under the Projects "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable efforts
to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain works.
Despite these efforts, the Projects etexts and any medium they
may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other things, Defects
may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data,
transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property
infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other etext medium,
a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be
read by your equipment.

DISCLAIMER

But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
1 the Project and any other party you may receive this etext
from as a PROJECT GUTENBERGtm etext disclaims all liability to
you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees, and
2 YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR UNDER STRICT LIABILI
TY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL
DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money if any you
paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that time to
the person you received it from.  If you received it on a
physical medium, you must return it with your note, and such
person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement copy.
If you received it electronically, such person may choose to
alternatively give you a second opportunity to receive it elec
tronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "ASIS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY

You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise from any
distribution of this etext for which you are responsible, and
from 1 any alteration, modification or addition to the etext
for which you are responsible, or 2 any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERGtm"

You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this "Small
Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg, or:

1  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this re
     quires that you do not remove, alter or modify the etext or
     this "small print!" statement.  You may however, if you
     wish, distribute this etext in machine readable binary,
     compressed, markup, or proprietary form, including any
     form resulting from conversion by word processing or hyper
     text software, but only so long as EITHER:

       The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable.  We
          consider an etext not clearly readable if it
          contains characters other than those intended by the
          author of the work, although tilde ~, asterisk 
          and underline  characters may be used to convey
          punctuation intended by the author, and additional
          characters may be used to indicate hypertext links.

       The etext may be readily converted by the reader at no
          expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent form
          by the program that displays the etext as is the
          case, for instance, with most word processors.

       You provide, or agree to also provide on request at no
          additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the etext
          in its original plain ASCII form or in EBCDIC or
          other equivalent proprietary form.

2   Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

3  Pay a trademark license fee of 20 twenty percent of the
     net profits you derive from distributing this etext under
     the trademark, determined in accordance with generally
     accepted accounting practices.  The license fee:

       Is required only if you derive such profits.  In
          distributing under our trademark, you incur no
          obligation to charge money or earn profits for your
          distribution.

       Shall be paid to "Project Gutenberg Association 
          Illinois Benedictine College" or to such other person
          as the Project Gutenberg Association may direct
          within the 60 days following each date you prepare or
          were legally required to prepare your yearend tax
          return with respect to your income for that year.

WHAT IF YOU WANT TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DONT HAVE TO?

The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association  Illinois Benedictine College".

WRITE TO US!  We can be reached at:

Project Gutenberg Director of Communications PGDIRCOM

Internet:     pgdircomvmd.cso.uiuc.edu
Bitnet:       pgdircomuiucvmd
CompuServe:   >internet:pgdircom.vmd.cso.uiuc.edu
Attmail:      internet!vmd.cso.uiuc.edu!pgdircom

Drafted by CHARLES B. KRAMER, Attorney
CompuServe:  72600,2026
  Internet:  72600.2026compuserve.com
       Tel:  212 2545093
ENDTHE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTSVer.07.02.92END



The Project Gutenberg Edition of THE WORLD FACTBOOK 1992:    January 1, 1993

This edition, as are all Project Gutenberg Editions, is Plain Vanilla ASCII,
meaning there are no characters other than what you would see on paper, thus
no page returns, no markup, nothing but the characters you would type if you
were to copy this from a book on a typewriter.  Repetitive paged headers and
trailing spaces are not present.  Leading spaces have been preserved in fact
sections for readability.

Mail subject headers can be searched with leading :s. . .such as:

:Afghanistan Geography
:Afghanistan People
:Afghanistan Government
:Afghanistan Government
:Afghanistan Economy
:Afghanistan Economy
:Afghanistan Communications
:Afghanistan Defense Forces

To find the beginning of any country, search for :country
To find internal information, search for :country section, as above.


THE WORLD FACTBOOK 1992


:Afghanistan Geography

Total area:
    647,500 km2
Land area:
    647,500 km2
Comparative area:
    slightly smaller than Texas
Land boundaries:
    5,529 km total China 76 km, Iran 936 km, Pakistan 2,430 km, Tajikistan
    1,206 km, Turkmenistan 744 km, Uzbekistan 137 km
Coastline:
    none  landlocked
Maritime claims:
    none  landlocked
Disputes:
    Pashtunistan issue over the NorthWest Frontier Province with Pakistan
    periodic disputes with Iran over Helmand water rights Pakistan, Saudi
    Arabia, and Iran continue to support clients in country power struggles
    among various groups for control of Kabul, regional rivalries among emerging
    warlords, and traditional tribal disputes continue
Climate:
    arid to semiarid cold winters and hot summers
Terrain:
    mostly rugged mountains plains in north and southwest
Natural resources:
    natural gas, crude oil, coal, copper, talc, barites, sulphur, lead, zinc,
    iron ore, salt, precious and semiprecious stones
Land use:
    arable land 12 permanent crops NEGL meadows and pastures 46 forest and
    woodland 3 other 39 includes irrigated NEGL
Environment:
    damaging earthquakes occur in Hindu Kush mountains soil degradation,
    desertification, overgrazing, deforestation, pollution
Note:
    landlocked

:Afghanistan People

Population:
    US Bureau of the Census  16,095,664 July 1992, growth rate 2.4 1992
    and excludes 3,750,796 refugees in Pakistan and 1,607,281 refugees in Iran
    note  another report indicates a July 1990 population of 16,904,904,
    including 3,271,580 refugees in Pakistan and 1,277,700 refugees in Iran
Birth rate:
    44 births1,000 population 1992
Death rate:
    20 deaths1,000 population 1992
Net migration rate:
    0 migrants1,000 population 1992 note  there are flows across the border
    in both directions, but data are fragmentary and unreliable
Infant mortality rate:
    162 deaths1,000 live births 1992
Life expectancy at birth:
    45 years male, 43 years female 1992
Total fertility rate:
    6.4 children bornwoman 1992
Nationality:
    noun  Afghans adjective  Afghan
Ethnic divisions:
    Pashtun 38, Tajik 25, Uzbek 6, Hazara 19 minor ethnic groups include
    Chahar Aimaks, Turkmen, Baloch, and others
Religions:
    Sunni Muslim 84, Shia Muslim 15, other 1
Languages:
    Pashtu 35, Afghan Persian Dari 50, Turkic languages primarily Uzbek and
    Turkmen 11, 30 minor languages primarily Balochi and Pashai 4 much
    bilingualism
Literacy:
    29 male 44, female 14 age 15 and over can read and write 1990 est.
Labor force:
    4,980,000 agriculture and animal husbandry 67.8, industry 10.2,
    construction 6.3, commerce 5.0, services and other 10.7, 1980 est.
Organized labor:
    some small governmentcontrolled unions existed under the former regime but
    probably now have disbanded

:Afghanistan Government

Longform name:
    Islamic State of Afghanistan
Type:
    transitional
Capital:
    Kabul
Administrative divisions:
    30 provinces velayat, singular  velayat Badakhshan, Badghis, Baghlan,
    Balkh, Bamian, Farah, Faryab, Ghazni, Ghowr, Helmand, Herat, Jowzjan, Kabol,
    Kandahar, Kapisa, Konar, Kondoz, Laghman, Lowgar, Nangarhar, Nimruz,
    Oruzgan, Paktia, Paktika, Parvan, Samangan, Sare Pol, Takhar, Vardak,
    Zabol note  there may be a new province of Nurestan Nuristan
Independence:
    19 August 1919 from UK
Constitution:
    the old Communistera constitution probably will be replaced with an Islamic
    constitution
Legal system:
    a new legal system has not been adopted but the transitional government has
    declared it will follow Islamic law Sharia
National holiday:
    28 April, Victory of the Muslim Nation 4 May, Remembrance Day for Martyrs
    and Disabled 19 August, Independence Day
Executive branch:
    a 51member transitional council headed by Sibghatullah MOJADDEDI rules
    Kabul this body is to turn over power to a leadership council, which will
    function as the government and organize elections Burhanuddin RABBANI will
    serve as interim President
Legislative branch:
    previous bicameral legislature has been abolished
Judicial branch:
    an interim Chief Justice of the Supreme Court has been appointed, but a new
    court system has not yet been organized
Leaders:
  Chief of State and Head of Government:
    Interim President Burhanuddin RABBANI First Vice President Abdul Wahed
    SORABI since 7 January 1991 Prime Minister Fazil Haq KHALIQYAR since 21
    May 1990
Political parties and leaders:
    the former resistance parties represent the only current political
    organizations and include JamiatiIslami Islamic Society, Burhanuddin
    RABBANI Hizbi IslamiGulbuddin Islamic Party, Gulbuddin Hikmatyar
    Faction Hizbi IslamiKhalis Islamic Party Yunis Khalis Faction
    IttihadiIslami Barai Azadi Afghanistan Islamic Union for the Liberation
    of Afghanistan, Abdul Rasul SAYYAF HarakatInqilabiIslami Islamic
    Revolutionary Movement, Mohammad Nabi MOHAMMADI JabhaiNajatiMilli
    Afghanistan Afghanistan National Liberation Front, Sibghatullah MOJADDEDI
    MahaziMilliIslami National Islamic Front, Sayed Ahamad GAILANI
    JonbeshiMilli Islami National Islamic Movement, Ahmad Shah MASOOD and
    Rashid DOSTAM Hizbi Wahdat Islamic Unity Party, and a number of minor
    resistance parties the former ruling Watan Party has been disbanded
Suffrage:
    undetermined previously universal, male ages 1550
Elections:
    the transition government has promised elections in October 1992
Communists:
    the former ruling Watan Homeland Party has been disbanded

:Afghanistan Government

Other political or pressure groups:
    the former resistance commanders are the major power brokers in the
    countryside shuras councils of commanders are now administering most
    cities outside Kabul ulema religious scholars tribal elders
Member of:
    Has previously been a member of AsDB, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G77, IAEA, IBRD,
    ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OIC,
    UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTO note  the new
    government has not yet announced whether it will continue to be a member of
    these bodies the former resistance government in exile Afghan Interim
    Government was given membership in the OIC in 1989
Diplomatic representation:
    previous MinisterCounselor, Charge dAffaires Abdul Ghafur JOUSHAN
    Chancery at 2341 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 telephone 202
    2343770 or 3771 a new representative has not yet been named
  US:
    Charge dAffaires vacant Embassy at Ansari Wat, Wazir Akbar Khan Mina,
    Kabul telephone 62230 through 62235 or 62436 note  US Embassy in Kabul
    was closed in January 1989
Flag:
    a new flag of unknown description reportedly has been adopted previous flag
    consisted of three equal horizontal bands of black top, red, and green,
    with the national coat of arms superimposed on the hoist side of the black
    and red bands similar to the flag of Malawi, which is shorter and bears a
    radiant, rising red sun centered in the black band

:Afghanistan Economy

Overview:
    Fundamentally, Afghanistan is an extremely poor, landlocked country, highly
    dependent on farming wheat especially and livestock raising sheep and
    goats. Economic considerations, however, have played second fiddle to
    political and military upheavals during more than 13 years of war, including
    the nearly 10year Soviet military occupation which ended 15 February
    1989. Over the past decade, onethird of the population fled the country,
    with Pakistan sheltering more than 3 million refugees and Iran about 1.3
    million. Another 1 million probably moved into and around urban areas within
    Afghanistan. Although reliable data are unavailable, gross domestic product
    is lower than 12 years ago because of the loss of labor and capital and the
    disruption of trade and transport.
GDP:
    exchange rate conversion  3 billion, per capita 200 real growth rate 0
    1989 est.
Inflation rate consumer prices:
    over 90 1991 est.
Unemployment rate:
    NA
Budget:
    revenues NA expenditures NA, including capital expenditures of NA
Exports:
    236 million f.o.b., FY91 est.
  commodities:
    natural gas 55, fruits and nuts 24, handwoven carpets, wool, cotton,
    hides, and pelts
  partners:
    mostly former USSR
Imports:
    874 million c.i.f., FY91 est.
  commodities:
    food and petroleum products
  partners:
    mostly former USSR
External debt:
    2.3 billion March 1991 est.
Industrial production:
    growth rate 2.3 FY91 est. accounts for about 25 of GDP
Electricity:
    480,000 kW capacity 1,450 million kWh produced, 90 kWh per capita 1991
Industries:
    smallscale production of textiles, soap, furniture, shoes, fertilizer, and
    cement handwoven carpets natural gas, oil, coal, copper
Agriculture:
    largely subsistence farming and nomadic animal husbandry cash products 
    wheat, fruits, nuts, karakul pelts, wool, mutton
Illicit drugs:
    an illicit producer of opium poppy and cannabis for the international drug
    trade worlds secondlargest opium producer after Burma and a major
    source of hashish
Economic aid:
    US commitments, including ExIm FY7089, 380 million Western nonUS
    countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments 197089, 510 million OPEC
    bilateral aid 197989, 57 million Communist countries 197089, 4.1
    billion net official Western disbursements 198589, 270 million
Currency:
    afghani plural  afghanis 1 afghani Af  100 puls

:Afghanistan Economy

Exchange rates:
    afghanis Af per US1  550 May 1992, free market exchange rate, 900
    free market exchange rate as of November 1991, 850 1991, 700 198990,
    220 198889 note  these rates reflect the bazaar rates rather than the
    official exchange rates
Fiscal year:
    21 March  20 March

:Afghanistan Communications

Railroads:
    9.6 km single track 1.524meter gauge from Kushka Turkmenistan to
    Towraghondi and 15.0 km from Termez Uzbekistan to Kheyrabad transshipment
    point on south bank of Amu Darya
Highways:
    21,000 km total 1984 2,800 km hard surface, 1,650 km bituminoustreated
    gravel and improved earth, 16,550 km unimproved earth and tracks
Inland waterways:
    total navigability 1,200 km chiefly Amu Darya, which handles steamers up to
    about 500 metric tons
Pipelines:
    petroleum products  former USSR to Bagram and former USSR to Shindand
    natural gas 180 km
Ports:
    Shir Khan and Kheyrabad river ports
Civil air:
    2 Tu154, 2 Boeing 727, 4 Yak40, assorted smaller transports
Airports:
    41 total, 37 usable 9 with permanentsurface runways none with runways
    over 3,659 m 10 with runways 2,4403,659 m 18 with runways 1,2202,439 m
Telecommunications:
    limited telephone, telegraph, and radiobroadcast services television
    introduced in 1980 31,200 telephones broadcast stations  5 AM, no FM, 1
    TV 1 satellite earth station

:Afghanistan Defense Forces

Branches:
    the military currently is being reorganized by the new government and does
    not yet exist on a national scale some elements of the former Army, Air and
    Air Defense Forces, National Guard, Border Guard Forces, National Police
    Force Sarandoi, and Tribal Militias remain intact and are supporting the
    new government the government has asked all military personnel to return to
    their stations a large number of former resistance groups also field
    irregular military forces the Ministry of State Security WAD has been
    disbanded
Manpower availability:
    males 1549, 3,989,232 2,139,771 fit for military service 150,572 reach
    military age 22 annually
Defense expenditures:
    the new government has not yet adopted a defense budget

:Albania Geography

Total area:
    28,750 km2
Land area:
    27,400 km2
Comparative area:
    slightly larger than Maryland
Land boundaries:
    720 km total Greece 282 km, Macedonia 151 km, Serbia and Montenegro 287 km
    114 km with Serbia, 173 km with Montenegro
Coastline:
    362 km
Maritime claims:
  Continental shelf:
    not specified
  Territorial sea:
    12 nm
Disputes:
    Kosovo question with Serbia and Montenegro Northern Epirus question with
    Greece
Climate:
    mild temperate cool, cloudy, wet winters hot, clear, dry summers interior
    is cooler and wetter
Terrain:
    mostly mountains and hills small plains along coast
Natural resources:
    crude oil, natural gas, coal, chromium, copper, timber, nickel
Land use:
    arable land 21 permanent crops 4 meadows and pastures 15 forest and
    woodland 38 other 22 includes irrigated 1
Environment:
    subject to destructive earthquakes tsunami occur along southwestern coast
Note:
    strategic location along Strait of Otranto links Adriatic Sea to Ionian Sea
    and Mediterranean Sea

:Albania People

Population:
    3,285,224 July 1992, growth rate 1.1 1992
Birth rate:
    23 births1,000 population 1992
Death rate:
    5 deaths1,000 population 1992
Net migration rate:
    6 migrants1,000 population 1992
Infant mortality rate:
    27 deaths1,000 live births 1992
Life expectancy at birth:
    71 years male, 78 years female 1992
Total fertility rate:
    2.8 children bornwoman 1992
Nationality:
    noun  Albanians adjective  Albanian
Ethnic divisions:
    Albanian 90, Greeks 8, other 2 Vlachs, Gypsies, Serbs, and Bulgarians
    1989 est.
Religions:
    all mosques and churches were closed in 1967 and religious observances
    prohibited in November 1990, Albania began allowing private religious
    practice estimates of religious affiliation  Muslim 70, Greek Orthodox
    20, Roman Catholic 10
Languages:
    Albanian Tosk is official dialect, Greek
Literacy:
    72 male 80, female 63 age 9 and over can read and write 1955
Labor force:
    1,500,000 1987 agriculture about 60, industry and commerce 40 1986
Organized labor:
    Independent Trade Union Federation of Albania Confederation of Trade Unions

:Albania Government

Longform name:
    Republic of Albania
Type:
    nascent democracy
Capital:
    Tirane
Administrative divisions:
    26 districts rrethe, singular  rreth Berat, Dibre, Durres, Elbasan,
    Fier, Gjirokaster, Gramsh, Kolonje, Kore, Kruje, Kukes, Lezhe, Librazhd,
    Lushnje, Mat, Mirdite, Permet, Pogradec, Puke, Sarande, Shkoder, Skrapar,
    Tepelene, Tirane, Tropoje, Vlore
Independence:
    28 November 1912 from Ottoman Empire Peoples Socialist Republic of
    Albania declared 11 January 1946
Constitution:
    an interim basic law was approved by the Peoples Assembly on 29 April 1991
    a new constitution is to be drafted for adoption in 1992
Legal system:
    has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
National holiday:
    Liberation Day, 29 November 1944
Executive branch:
    president, prime minister of the Council of Ministers, two deputy prime
    ministers of the Council of Ministers
Legislative branch:
    unicameral Peoples Assembly Kuvendi Popullor
Judicial branch:
    Supreme Court
Leaders:
  Chief of State:
    President of the Republic Sali BERISHA since 9 April 1992
  Head of Government:
    Prime Minister of the Council of Ministers Aleksander MEKSI since 10 April
    1992
Political parties and leaders:
    there are at least 18 political parties most prominent are the Albanian
    Socialist Party ASP, Fatos NANO, first secretary Democratic Party DP,
    Eduard SELAMI, chairman Albanian Republican Party RP, Sabri GODO Omonia
    Greek minority party, leader NA ran in 1992 election as Unity for Human
    Rights Party UHP Social Democratic Party SDP, Skender GJINUSHI note 
    in December 1990 then President ALIA allowed new political parties to be
    formed in addition to the then AWP for the first time since 1944
Suffrage:
    universal and compulsory at age 18
Elections:
  Peoples Assembly:
    last held 22 March 1992 results  DP 62.29, ASP 25.57, SDP 4.33, RP
    3.15, UHP 2.92, other 1.74 seats  140 total DP 92, ASP 38, SDP 7, RP
    1, UHP 2
Member of:
    CSCE, EBRD, ECE, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, IMF, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, OIC,
    UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO
Diplomatic representation:
    MinisterCounselor, Charge dAffaires ad interim 30 April 1991 Sazan Hyda
    BEJO chancery temporary at 320 East 79th Street, New York, NY 10021
    telephone 212 2492059
  US:
    Ambassador vacant Embassy at Rruga Labinoti 103, room 2921, Tirane
    mailing address is APO AE 09624 telephone 3554232875 FAX 3554232222

:Albania Government

Flag:
    red with a black twoheaded eagle in the center

:Albania Economy

Overview:
    The Albanian economy, already providing the lowest standard of living in
    Europe, contracted sharply in 1991, with most industries producing at only a
    fraction of past levels and an unemployment rate estimated at 40. For over
    40 years, the Stalinisttype economy has operated on the principle of
    central planning and state ownership of the means of production. Albania
    began fitful economic reforms during 1991, including the liberalization of
    prices and trade, the privatization of shops and transport, and land reform.
    These reform measures were crippled, however, by the widespread civil
    disorder that accompanied the collapse of the Communist state. Following
    their overwhelming victory in the 22 March 1991 elections, the new
    Democratic government announced a program of shock therapy to stabilize the
    economy and establish a market economy. In an effort to expand international
    ties, Tirane has reestablished diplomatic relations with the former Soviet
    Union and the US and has joined the IMF and World Bank. The Albanians have
    also passed legislation allowing foreign investment. Albania possesses
    considerable mineral resources and, until 1990, was largely selfsufficient
    in food however, the breakup of cooperative farms in 1991 and general
    economic decline forced Albania to rely on foreign aid to maintain adequate
    supplies. Available statistics on Albanian economic activity are rudimentary
    and subject to an especially wide margin of error.
GNP:
    purchasing power equivalent  2.7 billion, per capita 820 real growth
    rate 35 1991 est.
Inflation rate consumer prices:
    100 1991 est.
Unemployment rate:
    40 1992 est.
Budget:
    revenues 1.1 billion expenditures 1.4 billion, including capital
    expenditures of 70 million 1991 est.
Exports:
    80 million f.o.b., 1991 est.
  commodities:
    asphalt, petroleum products, metals and metallic ores, electricity, crude
    oil, vegetables, fruits, tobacco
  partners:
    Italy, Yugoslavia, Germany, Greece, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Romania,
    Bulgaria, Hungary
Imports:
    147 million f.o.b., 1991 est.
  commodities:
    machinery, machine tools, iron and steel products, textiles, chemicals,
    pharmaceuticals
  partners:
    Italy, Yugoslavia, Germany, Czechoslovakia, Romania, Poland, Hungary,
    Bulgaria
External debt:
    500 million 1991 est.
Industrial production:
    growth rate 55 1991 est.
Electricity:
    1,690,000 kW capacity 5,000 million kWh produced, 1,530 kWh per capita
    1990
Industries:
    food processing, textiles and clothing, lumber, oil, cement, chemicals,
    basic metals, hydropower

:Albania Economy

Agriculture:
    arable land per capita among lowest in Europe over 60 of arable land now
    in private hands onehalf of work force engaged in farming wide range of
    temperatezone crops and livestock severe dislocations suffered in 1991
Economic aid:
    190 million humanitarian aid, 94 million in loansguaranteescredits
Currency:
    lek plural  leke 1 lek L  100 qintars
Exchange rates:
    leke L per US1  50 January 1992, 25 September 1991
Fiscal year:
    calendar year

:Albania Communications

Railroads:
    543 km total 509 1.435meter standard gauge, single track and 34 km narrow
    gauge, single track 1990 line connecting Titograd Serbia and Montenegro
    and Shkoder Albania completed August 1986
Highways:
    16,700 km total 6,700 km highways, 10,000 km forest and agricultural cart
    roads 1990
Inland waterways:
    43 km plus Albanian sections of Lake Scutari, Lake Ohrid, and Lake Prespa
    1990
Pipelines:
    crude oil 145 km petroleum products 55 km natural gas 64 km 1988
Ports:
    Durres, Sarande, Vlore
Merchant marine:
    11 cargo ships 1,000 GRT or over totaling 52,886 GRT76,449 DWT
Airports:
    12 total, 10 usable more than 5 with permanentsurface runways more than 5
    with runways 2,4403,659 m 5 with runways 1,2202,439 m
Telecommunications:
    inadequate service 15,000 telephones broadcast stations  13 AM, 1 TV
    514,000 radios, 255,000 TVs 1987 est.

:Albania Defense Forces

Branches:
    Army, Coastal Defense Command, Air and Air Defense Forces, Interior Ministry
    Troops, Border Troops
Manpower availability:
    males 1549, 886,032 731,072 fit for military service 33,028 reach
    military age 19 annually
Defense expenditures:
    exchange rate conversion  1.0 billion leks, NA of GNP FY90 note 
    conversion of defense expenditures into US dollars using the current
    exchange rate could produce misleading results

:Algeria Geography

Total area:
    2,381,740 km2
Land area:
    2,381,740 km2
Comparative area:
    slightly less than 3.5 times the size of Texas
Land boundaries:
    6,343 km total Libya 982 km, Mali 1,376 km, Mauritania 463 km, Morocco
    1,559 km, Niger 956 km, Tunisia 965 km, Western Sahara 42 km
Coastline:
    998 km
Maritime claims:
  Territorial sea:
    12 nm
Disputes:
    Libya claims about 19,400 km2 in southeastern Algeria land boundary
    disputes with Tunisia under discussion
Climate:
    arid to semiarid mild, wet winters with hot, dry summers along coast drier
    with cold winters and hot summers on high plateau sirocco is a hot,
    dustsandladen wind especially common in summer
Terrain:
    mostly high plateau and desert some mountains narrow, discontinuous
    coastal plain
Natural resources:
    crude oil, natural gas, iron ore, phosphates, uranium, lead, zinc
Land use:
    arable land 3 permanent crops NEGL meadows and pastures 13 forest and
    woodland 2 other 82 includes irrigated NEGL
Environment:
    mountainous areas subject to severe earthquakes desertification
Note:
    secondlargest country in Africa after Sudan

:Algeria People

Population:
    26,666,921 July 1992, growth rate 2.5 1992
Birth rate:
    31 births1,000 population 1992
Death rate:
    7 deaths1,000 population 1992
Net migration rate:
    0 migrants1,000 population 1992
Infant mortality rate:
    56 deaths1,000 live births 1992
Life expectancy at birth:
    66 years male, 68 years female 1992
Total fertility rate:
    4.1 children bornwoman 1992
Nationality:
    noun  Algerians adjective  Algerian
Ethnic divisions:
    ArabBerber 99, European less than 1
Religions:
    Sunni Muslim state religion 99, Christian and Jewish 1
Languages:
    Arabic official, French, Berber dialects
Literacy:
    50 male 63, female 36 age 15 and over can read and write 1987
Labor force:
    3,700,000 industry and commerce 40, agriculture 24, government 17,
    services 10 1984
Organized labor:
    1619 of labor force claimed General Union of Algerian Workers UGTA is
    the only labor organization and is subordinate to the National Liberation
    Front

:Algeria Government

Longform name:
    Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria
Type:
    republic
Capital:
    Algiers
Administrative divisions:
    48 provinces wilayast, singular  wilaya Adrar, Ain Defla, Ain
    Temouchent, Alger, Annaba, Batna, Bechar, Bejaia, Biskra, Blida, Bordj Bou
    Arreridj, Bouira, Boumerdes, Chlef, Constantine, Djelfa, El Bayadh, El Oued,
    El Tarf, Ghardaia, Guelma, Illizi, Jijel, Khenchela, Laghouat, Mascara,
    Medea, Mila, Mostaganem, MSila, Naama, Oran, Ouargla, Oum el Bouaghi,
    Relizane, Saida, Setif, Sidi Bel Abbes, Skikda, Souk Ahras, Tamanghasset,
    Tebessa, Tiaret, Tindouf, Tipaza, Tissemsilt, Tizi Ouzou, Tlemcen
Independence:
    5 July 1962 from France
Constitution:
    19 November 1976, effective 22 November 1976 revised February 1989
Legal system:
    socialist, based on French and Islamic law judicial review of legislative
    acts in ad hoc Constitutional Council composed of various public officials,
    including several Supreme Court justices has not accepted compulsory ICJ
    jurisdiction
National holiday:
    Anniversary of the Revolution, 1 November 1954
Executive branch:
    president, prime minister, Council of Ministers cabinet
Legislative branch:
    unicameral National Peoples Assembly AlMajlis EchChaabi AlWatani
Judicial branch:
    Supreme Court Cour Supreme
Leaders:
  Chief of State:
    President Mohamed BOUDIAF assassinated 29 June 1992
  Head of Government:
    Interim Prime Minister Sid Ahmed GHOZALI since 6 June 1991
Political parties and leaders:
    National Liberation Front FLN Socialist Forces Front FFS, Hocine Ait
    AHMED, Secretary General the government established a multiparty system in
    September 1989, and, as of 31 December 1990, over 30 legal parties existed
Suffrage:
    universal at age 18
Elections:
  National Peoples Assembly:
    first round held on 26 December 1991 second round canceled by the military
    after President BENJEDID resigned 11 January 1992 results  percent of
    vote by party NA seats  281 total the fundamentalist FIS won 188 of the
    231 seats contested in the first round note  elections municipal and
    wilaya were held in June 1990, the first in Algerian history results  FIS
    55, FLN 27.5, other 17.5, with 65 of the voters participating
  President:
    next election to be held December 1993
Communists:
    400 est. Communist party banned 1962
Member of:
    ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, CCC, ECA, FAO, G15, G24, G77, IAEA,
    IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL,
    IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAPEC, OAS observer, OAU, OIC, OPEC, UN,
    UNAVEM, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO

:Algeria Government

Diplomatic representation:
    Ambassador Abderrahmane BENSID Chancery at 2118 Kalorama Road NW,
    Washington, DC 20008 telephone 202 2652800
  US:
    Ambassador Mary Ann CASEY Embassy at 4 Chemin Cheich Bachir ElIbrahimi,
    Algiers mailing address is B. P. Box 549, AlgerGare, 16000 Algiers
    telephone 213 2 601425 or 255, 186 FAX 213 2 603979 there is a US
    Consulate in Oran
Flag:
    two equal vertical bands of green hoist side and white with a red
    fivepointed star within a red crescent the crescent, star, and color green
    are traditional symbols of Islam the state religion

:Algeria Economy

Overview:
    The oil and natural gas sector forms the backbone of the economy. Algeria
    depends on hydrocarbons for nearly all of its export receipts, about 30 of
    government revenues, and nearly 25 of GDP. In 197374 the sharp increase in
    oil prices led to a booming economy and helped to finance an ambitious
    program of industrialization. Plunging oil and gas prices, combined with the
    mismanagement of Algerias highly centralized economy, has brought the
    nation to its most serious social and economic crisis since independence in
    1988. The government has promised farreaching reforms, including
    privatization of some public sector companies, encouraging privatesector
    activity, boosting gas and nonhydrocarbon exports, and proposing a major
    overhaul of the banking and financial systems, but to date it has made only
    limited progress.
GDP:
    exchange rate conversion  54 billion, per capita 2,130 real growth rate
    2.5 1990 est.
Inflation rate consumer prices:
    30 1991 est.
Unemployment rate:
    30 1991 est.
Budget:
    revenues 16.7 billion expenditures 17.3 billion, including capital
    expenditures of 6.6 billion 1990 est.
Exports:
    11.7 billion f.o.b., 1991 est.
  commodities:
    petroleum and natural gas 97
  partners:
    Netherlands, Czechoslovakia, Romania, Italy, France, US
Imports:
    9 billion f.o.b., 1991 est.
  commodities:
    capital goods 29, consumer goods 30
  partners:
    France 25, Italy 8, FRG 8, US 67
External debt:
    26.4 billion
Industrial production:
    growth rate 3 1989 est. accounts for 30 of GDP, including petroleum
Electricity:
    6,380,000 kW capacity 16,700 million kWh produced, 640 kWh per capita
    1991
Industries:
    petroleum, light industries, natural gas, mining, electrical, petrochemical,
    food processing
Agriculture:
    accounts for 11 of GDP and employs 24 of labor force net importer of food
     grain, vegetable oil, and sugar farm production includes wheat, barley,
    oats, grapes, olives, citrus, fruits, sheep, and cattle
Economic aid:
    US commitments, including ExIm FY7085, 1.4 billion Western nonUS
    countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments 197089, 925 million OPEC
    bilateral aid 197989, 1.8 billion Communist countries 197089, 2.7
    billion net official disbursements 198589, 375 million
Currency:
    Algerian dinar plural  dinars 1 Algerian dinar DA  100 centimes
Exchange rates:
    Algerian dinars DA per US1  21.862 January 1992, 18.473 1991, 8.958
    1990, 7.6086 1989, 5.9148 1988, 4.8497 1987

:Algeria Economy

Fiscal year:
    calendar year

:Algeria Communications

Railroads:
    4,060 km total 2,616 km standard gauge 1.435 m, 1,188 km 1.055meter
    gauge, 256 km 1.000meter gauge 300 km electrified 215 km double track
Highways:
    80,000 km total 60,000 km concrete or bituminous, 20,000 km gravel, crushed
    stone, unimproved earth
Pipelines:
    crude oil 6,612 km petroleum products 298 km natural gas 2,948 km
Ports:
    Algiers, Annaba, Arzew, Bejaia, Djendjene, Ghazaouet, Jijel, Mers el Kebir,
    Mostaganem, Oran, Skikda
Merchant marine:
    75 ships 1,000 GRT or over totaling 903,179 GRT1,064,246 DWT includes 5
    shortsea passenger, 27 cargo, 12 rollonrolloff cargo, 5 petroleum
    tanker, 9 liquefied gas, 7 chemical tanker, 9 bulk, 1 specialized tanker
Civil air:
    42 major transport aircraft
Airports:
    141 total, 124 usable 53 with permanentsurface runways 2 with runways
    over 3,659 m 32 with runways 2,4403,659 m 65 with runways 1,2202,439 m
Telecommunications:
    excellent domestic and international service in the north, sparse in the
    south 822,000 telephones broadcast stations  26 AM, no FM, 18 TV
    1,600,000 TV sets 5,200,000 radios 5 submarine cables radio relay to
    Italy, France, Spain, Morocco, and Tunisia coaxial cable to Morocco and
    Tunisia satellite earth stations  1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT, 1 Indian
    Ocean INTELSAT, 1 Intersputnik, l ARABSAT, and 15 domestic

:Algeria Defense Forces

Branches:
    National Popular Army, Navy, Air Force, Territorial Air Defense, National
    Gendarmerie
Manpower availability:
    males 1549, 6,386,157 3,928,029 fit for military service 283,068 reach
    military age 19 annually
Defense expenditures:
    exchange rate conversion  867 million, approximately 1.8 of GDP 1992

:American Samoa Geography

Total area:
    199 km2
Land area:
    199 km2 includes Rose Island and Swains Island
Comparative area:
    slightly larger than Washington, DC
Land boundaries:
    none
Coastline:
    116 km
Maritime claims:
  Contiguous zone:
    12 nm
  Continental shelf:
    200 m depth
  Exclusive economic zone:
    200 nm
  Territorial sea:
    12 nm
Disputes:
    none
Climate:
    tropical marine, moderated by southeast trade winds annual rainfall
    averages 124 inches rainy season from November to April, dry season from
    May to October little seasonal temperature variation
Terrain:
    five volcanic islands with rugged peaks and limited coastal plains, two
    coral atolls
Natural resources:
    pumice and pumicite
Land use:
    arable land 10 permanent crops 5 meadows and pastures 0 forest and
    woodland 75 other 10
Environment:
    typhoons common from December to March
Note:
    Pago Pago has one of the best natural deepwater harbors in the South Pacific
    Ocean, sheltered by shape from rough seas and protected by peripheral
    mountains from high winds strategic location about 3,700 km southsouthwest
    of Honolulu in the South Pacific Ocean about halfway between Hawaii and New
    Zealand

:American Samoa People

Population:
    51,115 July 1992, growth rate 3.9 1992 about 65,000 American Samoans
    live in the states of California and Washington and 20,000 in Hawaii
Birth rate:
    37 births1,000 population 1992
Death rate:
    4 deaths1,000 population 1992
Net migration rate:
    6 immigrants1,000 population 1992
Infant mortality rate:
    19 deaths1,000 live births 1992
Life expectancy at birth:
    71 years male, 75 years female 1992
Total fertility rate:
    4.5 children bornwoman 1992
Nationality:
    noun  American Samoans adjective  American Samoan US, noncitizen
    nationals
Ethnic divisions:
    Samoan Polynesian 90, Caucasian 2, Tongan 2, other 6
Religions:
    Christian Congregationalist 50, Roman Catholic 20, Protestant
    denominations and other 30
Languages:
    Samoan closely related to Hawaiian and other Polynesian languages and
    English most people are bilingual
Literacy:
    97 male 97, female 97 age 15 and over can read and write 1980
Labor force:
    14,400 1990 government 48, tuna canneries 33, other 19 1986 est.
Organized labor:
    NA

:American Samoa Government

Longform name:
    Territory of American Samoa
Type:
    unincorporated and unorganized territory of the US
    administered by the US Department of Interior, Office of Territorial and
    International Affairs indigenous inhabitants are US nationals, not citizens
    of the US
Capital:
    Pago Pago
Administrative divisions:
    none territory of the US
Independence:
    none territory of the US
Constitution:
    ratified 1966, in effect 1967 note  a comprehensive revision is awaiting
    ratification by the US Congress 1992
National holiday:
    Territorial Flag Day, 17 April 1900
Executive branch:
    popularly elected governor and lieutenant governor
Legislative branch:
    bicameral Legislative Assembly Fono consists of an upper house or Senate
    and a lower house or House of Representatives
Judicial branch:
    High Court, district courts, and village courts
Leaders:
  Chief of State:
    President George BUSH since 20 January 1989 Vice President Dan QUAYLE
    since 20 January 1989
  Head of Government:
    Governor Peter Tali COLEMAN since 20 January 1989 Lieutenant Governor
    Galeai POUMELE since NA 1989
Suffrage:
    universal at age 18 indigenous inhabitants are US nationals, not US
    citizens
Elections:
  Governor:
    last held 7 November 1988 next to be held November 1992 results  Peter
    T. COLEMAN was elected percent of vote NA
  House of Representatives:
    last held November 1990 next to be held November 1992 results 
    representatives popularly elected from 17 house districts seats  21
    total, 20 elected, and 1 nonvoting delegate from Swains Island
  Senate:
    last held 7 November 1988 next to be held November 1992 results 
    senators elected by county councils from 12 senate districts seats  18
    total number of seats by party NA
  US House of Representatives:
    last held 19 November 1990 next to be held November 1992 results  Eni R.
    F. H. FALEOMAVAEGA reelected as a nonvoting delegate
Member of:
    ESCAP, IOC, SPC
Diplomatic representation:
    none territory of the US
Flag:
    blue with a white triangle edged in red that is based on the fly side and
    extends to the hoist side a brown and white American bald eagle flying
    toward the hoist side is carrying two traditional Samoan symbols of
    authority, a staff and a war club

:American Samoa Economy

Overview:
    Economic development is strongly linked to the US, with which American Samoa
    does nearly 90 of its foreign trade. Tuna fishing and tuna processing
    plants are the backbone of the privatesector economy, with canned tuna the
    primary export. The tuna canneries and the government are by far the two
    largest employers. Other economic activities include a slowly developing
    tourist industry.
GNP:
    purchasing power equivalent  128 million, per capita 2,500 real growth
    rate NA 1990
Inflation rate consumer prices:
    4.3 1989
Unemployment rate:
    12 1991
Budget:
    revenues 126,394,000 consisting of 46,441,000 local revenue and
    79,953,000 grant revenue including capital expenditures of NA million
    1990
Exports:
    307 million f.o.b., 1989
  commodities:
    canned tuna 93
  partners:
    US 99.6
Imports:
    377.9 million c.i.f., 1989
  commodities:
    materials for canneries 56, food 8, petroleum 7, machinery and parts 6
  partners:
    US 72, Japan 7, NZ 7, Australia 5, other 9
External debt:
    NA
Industrial production:
    growth rate NA
Electricity:
    42,000 kW capacity 85 million kWh produced, 2,020 kWh per capita 1990
Industries:
    tuna canneries largely dependent on foreign supplies of raw tuna, meat
    canning, handicrafts
Agriculture:
    bananas, coconuts, vegetables, taro, breadfruit, yams, copra, pineapples,
    papayas, dairy farming
Economic aid:
    21,042,650 in operational funds and 5,948,931 in construction funds for
    capital improvement projects from the US Department of Interior 1991
Currency:
    US currency is used
Exchange rates:
    US currency is used
Fiscal year:
    1 October  30 September

:American Samoa Communications

Railroads:
    none
Highways:
    350 km total 150 km paved, 200 km unpaved
Ports:
    Pago Pago, Tau
Airports:
    4 total, 4 usable 2 with permanentsurface runways none with runways over
    3,659 m 1 with runways 2,440 to 3,659 m international airport at Tafuna,
    near Pago Pago small airstrips on Tau and Ofu
Telecommunications:
    6,500 telephones broadcast stations  1 AM, 2 FM, 1 TV good telex,
    telegraph, and facsimile services 1 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT earth station, 1
    COMSAT earth station

:American Samoa Defense Forces

Note:
    defense is the responsibility of the US

:Andorra Geography

Total area:
    450 km2
Land area:
    450 km2
Comparative area:
    slightly more than 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries:
    125 km total France 60 km, Spain 65 km
Coastline:
    none  landlocked
Maritime claims:
    none  landlocked
Disputes:
    none
Climate:
    temperate snowy, cold winters and cool, dry summers
Terrain:
    rugged mountains dissected by narrow valleys
Natural resources:
    hydropower, mineral water, timber, iron ore, lead
Land use:
    arable land 2 permanent crops 0 meadows and pastures 56 forest and
    woodland 22 other 20
Environment:
    deforestation, overgrazing
Note:
    landlocked

:Andorra People

Population:
    54,428 July 1992, growth rate 2.2 1992
Birth rate:
    11 births1,000 population 1992
Death rate:
    4 deaths1,000 population 1992
Net migration rate:
    15 migrants1,000 population 1992
Infant mortality rate:
    7 deaths1,000 live births 1992
Life expectancy at birth:
    74 years male, 81 years female 1992
Total fertility rate:
    1.3 children bornwoman 1992
Nationality:
    noun  Andorrans adjective  Andorran
Ethnic divisions:
    Catalan stock Spanish 61, Andorran 30, French 6, other 3
Religions:
    virtually all Roman Catholic
Languages:
    Catalan official many also speak some French and Castilian
Literacy:
    NA male NA, female NA
Labor force:
    NA
Organized labor:
    none

:Andorra Government

Longform name:
    Principality of Andorra
Type:
    unique coprincipality under formal sovereignty of president of France and
    Spanish bishop of Seo de Urgel, who are represented locally by officials
    called veguers
Capital:
    Andorra la Vella
Administrative divisions:
    7 parishes parroquies, singular  parroquia Andorra, Canillo, Encamp, La
    Massana, Les Escaldes, Ordino, Sant Julia de Loria
Independence:
    1278
Constitution:
    none some pareatges and decrees, mostly custom and usage
Legal system:
    based on French and Spanish civil codes no judicial review of legislative
    acts has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
National holiday:
    Mare de Deu de Meritxell, 8 September
Executive branch:
    two coprinces president of France, bishop of Seo de Urgel in Spain, two
    designated representatives French veguer, Episcopal veguer, two permanent
    delegates French prefect for the department of PyreneesOrientales, Spanish
    vicar general for the Seo de Urgel diocese, president of government,
    Executive Council
Legislative branch:
    unicameral General Council of the Valleys Consell General de las Valls
Judicial branch:
    civil cases  Supreme Court of Andorra at Perpignan France or the
    Ecclesiastical Court of the bishop of Seo de Urgel Spain criminal cases 
    Tribunal of the Courts Tribunal des Cortes
Leaders:
  Chiefs of State:
    French CoPrince Francois MITTERRAND since 21 May 1981, represented by
    Veguer de Franca Jean Pierre COURTOIS Spanish Episcopal CoPrince Mgr. Joan
    MARTI y Alanis since 31 January 1971, represented by Veguer Episcopal
    Francesc BADIA Batalla
  Head of Government:
    Oscar RIBAS Reig since January 1990
Political parties and leaders:
    political parties not yet legally recognized traditionally no political
    parties but partisans for particular independent candidates for the General
    Council on the basis of competence, personality, and orientation toward
    Spain or France various small pressure groups developed in 1972 first
    formal political party, Andorran Democratic Association, was formed in 1976
    and reorganized in 1979 as Andorran Democratic Party
Suffrage:
    universal at age 18
Elections:
  General Council of the Valleys:
    last held 11 December 1989 next to be held December 1993 results 
    percent of vote by party NA seats  28 total number of seats by party NA
Member of:
    INTERPOL, IOC
Diplomatic representation:
    Andorra has no mission in the US

:Andorra Government

  US:
    includes Andorra within the Barcelona Spain Consular District, and the US
    Consul General visits Andorra periodically Consul General Carolee HEILEMAN
    Consulate General at Via Layetana 33, 08003 Barcelona mailing address APO
    AE 09646 telephone 34 3 3199550
Flag:
    three equal vertical bands of blue hoist side, yellow, and red with the
    national coat of arms centered in the yellow band the coat of arms features
    a quartered shield similar to the flags of Chad and Romania that do not
    have a national coat of arms in the center

:Andorra Economy

Overview:
    The mainstay of Andorras economy is tourism. An estimated 13 million
    tourists visit annually, attracted by Andorras dutyfree status and by its
    summer and winter resorts. Agricultural production is limited by a scarcity
    of arable land, and most food has to be imported. The principal livestock
    activity is sheep raising. Manufacturing consists mainly of cigarettes,
    cigars, and furniture. The rapid pace of European economic integration is a
    potential threat to Andorras advantages from its dutyfree status.
GDP:
    purchasing power equivalent  727 million, per capita 14,000 real growth
    rate NA 1990 est.
Inflation rate consumer prices:
    NA
Unemployment rate:
    none
Budget:
    revenues NA expenditures NA, including capital expenditures of NA
Exports:
    0.017 million f.o.b., 1986
  commodities:
    electricity
  partners:
    France, Spain
Imports:
    531 million f.o.b., 1986
  commodities:
    consumer goods, food
  partners:
    France, Spain
External debt:
    NA
Industrial production:
    growth rate NA
Electricity:
    35,000 kW capacity 140 million kWh produced, 2,800 kWh per capita 1991
Industries:
    tourism particularly skiing, sheep, timber, tobacco, banking
Agriculture:
    sheep raising small quantities of tobacco, rye, wheat, barley, oats, and
    some vegetables
Economic aid:
    none
Currency:
    French franc plural  francs and Spanish peseta plural  pesetas 1
    French franc F  100 centimes and 1 Spanish peseta Pta  100 centimos
Exchange rates:
    French francs F per US1  5.3801 January 1992, 5.6421 1991, 5.4453
    1990, 6.3801 1989, 5.9569 1988, 6.0107 1987 Spanish pesetas Ptas
    per US1  100.02 January 1992, 103.91 1991, 101.93 1990, 118.38
    1989, 116.49 1988, 123.48 1987
Fiscal year:
    calendar year

:Andorra Communications

Highways:
    96 km
Telecommunications:
    international digital microwave network international landline circuits to
    France and Spain broadcast stations  1 AM, no FM, no TV 17,700 telephones

:Andorra Defense Forces

Note:
    defense is the responsibility of France and Spain

:Angola Geography

Total area:
    1,246,700 km2
Land area:
    1,246,700 km2
Comparative area:
    slightly less than twice the size of Texas
Land boundaries:
    5,198 km total Congo 201 km, Namibia 1,376 km, Zaire 2,511 km, Zambia 1,110
    km
Coastline:
    1,600 km
Maritime claims:
  Exclusive fishing zone:
    200 nm
  Territorial sea:
    20 nm
Disputes:
    civil war since independence on 11 November 1975 on 31 May 1991 Angolan
    President Jose Eduardo dos SANTOS and Jonas SAVIMBI, leader of the National
    Union for the Total Independence of Angola UNITA, signed a peace treaty
    that calls for multiparty elections in late September 1992, an
    internationally monitored ceasefire, and termination of outside military
    assistance
Climate:
    semiarid in south and along coast to Luanda north has cool, dry season May
    to October and hot, rainy season November to April
Terrain:
    narrow coastal plain rises abruptly to vast interior plateau
Natural resources:
    petroleum, diamonds, iron ore, phosphates, copper, feldspar, gold, bauxite,
    uranium
Land use:
    arable land 2 permanent crops NEGL meadows and pastures 23 forest and
    woodland 43 other 32
Environment:
    locally heavy rainfall causes periodic flooding on plateau desertification
Note:
    Cabinda is separated from rest of country by Zaire

:Angola People

Population:
    8,902,076 July 1992, growth rate 2.7 1992
Birth rate:
    46 births1,000 population 1992
Death rate:
    19 deaths1,000 population 1992
Net migration rate:
    NEGL migrants1,000 population 1992
Infant mortality rate:
    152 deaths1,000 live births 1992
Life expectancy at birth:
    43 years male, 47 years female 1992
Total fertility rate:
    6.6 children bornwoman 1992
Nationality:
    noun  Angolans adjective  Angolan
Ethnic divisions:
    Ovimbundu 37, Kimbundu 25, Bakongo 13, Mestico 2,European 1, other 22
Religions:
    indigenous beliefs 47, Roman Catholic 38, Protestant 15 est.
Languages:
    Portuguese official various Bantu dialects
Literacy:
    42 male 56, female 28 age 15 and over can read and write 1990 est.
Labor force:
    2,783,000 economically active agriculture 85, industry 15 1985 est.
Organized labor:
    about 450,695 1980

:Angola Government

Longform name:
    Peoples Republic of Angola
Type:
    in transition from a oneparty Marxist state to a multiparty democracy with
    a strong presidential system
Capital:
    Luanda
Administrative divisions:
    18 provinces provincias, singular  provincia Bengo, Benguela, Bie,
    Cabinda, Cuando Cubango, Cuanza Norte, Cuanza Sul, Cunene, Huambo, Huila,
    Luanda, Lunda Norte, Lunda Sul, Malanje, Moxico, Namibe, Uige, Zaire
Independence:
    11 November 1975 from Portugal
Constitution:
    11 November 1975 revised 7 January 1978, 11 August 1980, and 6 March 1991
Legal system:
    based on Portuguese civil law system and customary law recently modified to
    accommodate multipartyism and increased use of free markets
National holiday:
    Independence Day, 11 November 1975
Executive branch:
    president, prime minister, chairman of the Council of Ministers, Council of
    Ministers cabinet
Legislative branch:
    unicameral Peoples Assembly Assembleia do Povo
Judicial branch:
    Supreme Court Tribunal da Relacaao
Leaders:
  Chief of State:
    President Jose Eduardo dos SANTOS since 21 September 1979
  Head of Government:
    Prime Minister Fernando Jose Franca VAN DUNEM since 21 July 1991
Political parties and leaders:
    the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola  Labor Party MPLA, led
    by Jose Eduardo dos SANTOS, is the ruling party that has been in power in
    Angolas oneparty system since 1975. The National Union for the Total
    Independence of Angola UNITA, led by Jonas SAVIMBI, has been in insurgency
    since 1975, but as a result of the peace accords is now a legally recognized
    political party. Some 30 other political parties now exist in Angola, but
    few of them are viable and only a couple have met the requirements to become
    legally recognized.
Suffrage:
    universal at age 18
Elections:
    first nationwide, multiparty elections to be held between September and
    November 1992
Member of:
    ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEEAC observer, ECA, FAO, FLS, G77, IBRD, ICAO, IFAD,
    ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, SADCC, UN,
    UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO
Diplomatic representation:
    none note  US Liaison Office USLO established after Peace Accords in May
    1991 as a precursor to establishing an embassy after election in 1992
    address  Luanda USLO, BPA Building, llth floor, telephone 244 2
    390242 FAX 244 2 390515
Flag:
    two equal horizontal bands of red top and black with a centered yellow
    emblem consisting of a fivepointed star within half a cogwheel crossed by a
    machete in the style of a hammer and sickle

:Angola Economy

Overview:
    Subsistence agriculture provides the main livelihood for 8090 of the
    population, but accounts for less than 15 of GDP. Oil production is vital
    to the economy, contributing about 60 to GDP. In recent years, a bitter
    internal war has severely affected the nonoil economy, and food has to be
    imported. For the long run, Angola has the advantage of rich natural
    resources in addition to oil, notably gold, diamonds, and arable land. To
    realize its economic potential Angola not only must secure domestic peace
    but also must reform government policies that have led to distortions and
    imbalances throughout the economy.
GDP:
    exchange rate conversion  8.3 billion, per capita 950 real growth rate
    1.7 1991 est.
Inflation rate consumer prices:
    6.1 1990 est.
Unemployment rate:
    NA
Budget:
    revenues 2.6 billion expenditures 4.4 billion, including capital
    expenditures of 963 million 1990 est.
Exports:
    3.9 billion f.o.b., 1990 est.
  commodities:
    oil, liquefied petroleum gas, diamonds, coffee, sisal, fish and fish
    products, timber, cotton
  partners:
    US, USSR, Cuba, Portugal, Brazil, France
Imports:
    1.5 billion f.o.b., 1990 est.
  commodities:
    capital equipment machinery and electrical equipment, food, vehicles and
    spare parts, textiles and clothing, medicines substantial military
    deliveries
  partners:
    US, USSR, Cuba, Portugal, Brazil
External debt:
    7.0 billion 1990
Industrial production:
    growth rate NA accounts for about 60 of GDP, including petroleum output
Electricity:
    510,000 kW capacity 770 million kWh produced, 90 kWh per capita 1991
Industries:
    petroleum, diamonds, mining, fish processing, food processing, brewing,
    tobacco, sugar, textiles, cement, basic metal products
Agriculture:
    cash crops  coffee, sisal, corn, cotton, sugar, manioc, tobacco food crops
     cassava, corn, vegetables, plantains, bananas livestock production
    accounts for 20, fishing 4, forestry 2 of total agricultural output
    disruptions caused by civil war and marketing deficiencies require food
    imports
Economic aid:
    US commitments, including ExIm FY7089, 265 million Western nonUS
    countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments 197089, 1,105 million
    Communist countries 197089, 1.3 billion net official disbursements
    198589, 750 million
Currency:
    kwanza plural  kwanza 1 kwanza Kz  100 lwei
Exchange rates:
    kwanza Kz per US1  180.0

:Angola Economy

Fiscal year:
    calendar year

:Angola Communications

Railroads:
    3,189 km total 2,879 km 1.067meter gauge, 310 km 0.600meter gauge
    limited trackage in use because of landmines still in place from the civil
    war majority of the Benguela Railroad also closed because of civil war
Highways:
    73,828 km total 8,577 km bituminoussurface treatment, 29,350 km crushed
    stone, gravel, or improved earth, remainder unimproved earth
Inland waterways:
    1,295 km navigable
Pipelines:
    crude oil 179 km
Ports:
    Luanda, Lobito, Namibe, Cabinda
Merchant marine:
    12 ships 1,000 GRT or over totaling 66,348 GRT102,825 DWT includes 11
    cargo, 1 petroleum tanker
Civil air:
    28 major transport aircraft
Airports:
    309 total, 177 usable 30 with permanentsurface runways 2 with runways
    over 3,659 m 15 with runways 2,4403,659 m 54 with runways 1,2202,439 m
Telecommunications:
    limited system of wire, radio relay, and troposcatter routes high frequency
    radio used extensively for military links 40,300 telephones broadcast
    stations  17 AM, 13 FM, 6 TV 2 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth stations

:Angola Defense Forces

Branches:
    Army, Navy, Air ForceAir Defense, Peoples Defense Organization and
    Territorial Troops, Frontier Guard
Manpower availability:
    males 1549, 2,129,877 1,072,323 fit for military service 89,585 reach
    military age 18 annually
Defense expenditures:
    exchange rate conversion  NA, NA of GDP

:Anguilla Geography

Total area:
    91 km2
Land area:
    91 km2
Comparative area:
    about half the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries:
    none
Coastline:
    61 km
Maritime claims:
  Exclusive fishing zone:
    200 nm
  Territorial sea:
    3 nm
Disputes:
    none
Climate:
    tropical moderated by northeast trade winds
Terrain:
    flat and lowlying island of coral and limestone
Natural resources:
    negligible salt, fish, lobster
Land use:
    arable land NA permanent crops NA meadows and pastures NA forest and
    woodland NA other NA mostly rock with sparse scrub oak, few trees, some
    commercial salt ponds
Environment:
    frequent hurricanes, other tropical storms July to October
Note:
    located 270 km east of Puerto Rico

:Anguilla People

Population:
    6,963 July 1992, growth rate 0.6 1992
Birth rate:
    24 births1,000 population 1992
Death rate:
    8 deaths1,000 population 1992
Net migration rate:
    10 migrants1,000 population 1992
Infant mortality rate:
    18 deaths1,000 live births 1992
Life expectancy at birth:
    71 years male, 77 years female 1992
Total fertility rate:
    3.1 children bornwoman 1992
Nationality:
    noun  Anguillans adjective  Anguillan
Ethnic divisions:
    mainly of black African descent
Religions:
    Anglican 40, Methodist 33, SeventhDay Adventist 7, Baptist 5, Roman
    Catholic 3, other 12
Languages:
    English official
Literacy:
    95 male 95, female 95 age 12 and over can read and write 1984
Labor force:
    2,780 1984
Organized labor:
    NA

:Anguilla Government

Longform name:
    none
Type:
    dependent territory of the UK
Capital:
    The Valley
Administrative divisions:
    none dependent territory of the UK
Independence:
    none dependent territory of the UK
Constitution:
    1 April 1982
Legal system:
    based on English common law
National holiday:
    Anguilla Day, 30 May
Executive branch:
    British monarch, governor, chief minister, Executive Council cabinet
Legislative branch:
    unicameral House of Assembly
Judicial branch:
    High Court
Leaders:
  Chief of State:
    Queen ELIZABETH II since 6 February 1952, represented by Governor Brian G.
    J. CANTY since NA 1989
  Head of Government:
    Chief Minister Emile GUMBS since March 1984, served previously from
    February 1977 to May 1980
Political parties and leaders:
    Anguilla National Alliance ANA, Emile GUMBS Anguilla United Party AUP,
    Hubert HUGHES Anguilla Democratic Party ADP, Victor BANKS
Suffrage:
    universal at age 18
Elections:
  House of Assembly:
    last held 27 February 1989 next to be held February 1994 results 
    percent of vote by party NA seats  11 total, 7 elected ANA 3, AUP 2, ADP
    1, independent 1
Member of:
    CARICOM observer, CDB
Diplomatic representation:
    none dependent territory of the UK
Flag:
    two horizontal bands of white top, almost triple width and light blue with
    three orange dolphins in an interlocking circular design centered in the
    white band a new flag may have been in use since 30 May 1990

:Anguilla Economy

Overview:
    Anguilla has few natural resources, and the economy depends heavily on
    lobster fishing, offshore banking, tourism, and remittances from emigrants.
    In recent years the economy has benefited from a boom in tourism.
    Development plans center around the improvement of the infrastructure,
    particularly transport and tourist facilities, and also light industry.
GDP:
    exchange rate conversion  23 million, per capita 3,300 real growth rate
    8.2 1988 est.
Inflation rate consumer prices:
    4.5 1988 est.
Unemployment rate:
    5.0 1988 est.
Budget:
    revenues 13.8 million expenditures 15.2 million, including capital
    expenditures of 2.4 million 1992 est.
Exports:
    NA
  commodities:
    lobster and salt
  partners:
    NA
Imports:
    NA
  commodities:
    NA
  partners:
    NA
External debt:
    NA
