with the prices currently charged by photocopy vendors.

Of course, with scanning, in addition to the paper facsimile, one is left
with a digital file from which subsequent copies of the book can be
produced for a fraction of the cost of photocopy, with readers afforded
choices in the form of these copies.

KENNEY concluded that digital technology offers an electronic means for a
library preservation effort to pay for itself.  If a brittlebook program
included the means of disseminating reprints of books that are in demand
by libraries and researchers alike, the initial investment in capture
could be recovered and used to preserve additional but less popular
books.  She disclosed that an economic model for a selfsustaining
program could be developed for CXPs report to the Commission on
Preservation and Access CPA.

KENNEY stressed that the focus of CXP has been on obtaining high quality
in a production environment.  The use of digital technology is viewed as
an affordable alternative to other reformatting options.

                                 


ANDRE  Overview and history of NATDP  Various agricultural CDROM
products created inhouse and by service bureaus  Pilot project on
Internet transmission  Additional products in progress 


Pamela ANDRE, associate director for automation, National Agricultural
Text Digitizing Program NATDP, National Agricultural Library NAL,
presented an overview of NATDP, which has been underway at NAL the last
four years, before Judith ZIDAR discussed the technical details.  ANDRE
defined agricultural information as a broad range of material going from
basic and applied research in the hard sciences to the onepage pamphlets
that are distributed by the cooperative state extension services on such
things as how to grow blueberries.

NATDP began in late 1986 with a meeting of representatives from the
landgrant library community to deal with the issue of electronic
information.  NAL and fortyfive of these libraries banded together to
establish this projectto evaluate the technology for converting what
were then source documents in paper form into electronic form, to provide
access to that digital information, and then to distribute it.
Distributing that material to the communitythe university community as
well as the extension service community, potentially down to the county
levelconstituted the groups chief concern.

Since January 1988 when the microcomputerbased scanning system was
installed at NAL, NATDP has done a variety of things, concerning which
ZIDAR would provide further details.  For example, the first technology
considered in the projects discussion phase was digital videodisc, which
indicates how long ago it was conceived.

Over the four years of this project, four separate CDROM products on
four different agricultural topics were created, two at a
scanningandOCR station installed at NAL, and two by service bureaus.
Thus, NATDP has gained comparative information in terms of those relative
costs.  Each of these products contained the full ASCII text as well as
page images of the material, or between 4,000 and 6,000 pages of material
on these disks.  Topics included aquaculture, food, agriculture and
science i.e., international agriculture and research, acid rain, and
Agent Orange, which was the final product distributed approximately
eighteen months before the Workshop.

The third phase of NATDP focused on delivery mechanisms other than
CDROM.  At the suggestion of Clifford LYNCH, who was a technical
consultant to the project at this point, NATDP became involved with the
Internet and initiated a project with the help of North Carolina State
University, in which fourteen of the landgrant university libraries are
transmitting digital images over the Internet in response to interlibrary
loan requestsa topic for another meeting.  At this point, the pilot
project had been completed for about a year and the final report would be
available shortly after the Workshop.  In the meantime, the projects
success had led to its extension.  ANDRE noted that one of the first
things done under the program title was to select a retrieval package to
use with subsequent products Windows Personal Librarian was the package
of choice after a lengthy evaluation.

Three additional products had been planned and were in progress:

     1 An arrangement with the American Society of Agronomya
     professional society that has published the Agronomy Journal since
     about 1908to scan and create bitmapped images of its journal.
     ASA granted permission first to put and then to distribute this
     material in electronic form, to hold it at NAL, and to use these
     electronic images as a mechanism to deliver documents or print out
     material for patrons, among other uses.  Effectively, NAL has the
     right to use this material in support of its program.
     Significantly, this arrangement offers a potential cooperative
     model for working with other professional societies in agriculture
     to try to do the same thingput the journals of particular interest
     to agriculture research into electronic form.

     2 An extension of the earlier product on aquaculture.

     3 The George Washington Carver Papersa joint project with
     Tuskegee University to scan and convert from microfilm some 3,500
     images of Carvers papers, letters, and drawings.

It was anticipated that all of these products would appear no more than
six months after the Workshop.

                                 


ZIDAR  A separate arena for scanning  Steps in creating a database 
Image capture, with and without performing OCR  Keying in tracking data
 Scanning, with electronic and manual tracking  Adjustments during
scanning process  Scanning resolutions  Compression  Deskewing and
filtering  Image capture from microform:  the papers and letters of
George Washington Carver  Equipment used for a scanning system 


Judith ZIDAR, coordinator, National Agricultural Text Digitizing Program
NATDP, National Agricultural Library NAL, illustrated the technical
details of NATDP, including her primary responsibility, scanning and
creating databases on a topic and putting them on CDROM.

ZIDAR remarked a separate arena from the CDROM projects, although the
processing of the material is nearly identical, in which NATDP is also
scanning material and loading it on a Next microcomputer, which in turn
is linked to NALs integrated library system.  Thus, searches in NALs
bibliographic database will enable people to pull up actual page images
and text for any documents that have been entered.

In accordance with the sessions topic, ZIDAR focused her illustrated
talk on image capture, offering a primer on the three main steps in the
process:  1 assemble the printed publications 2 design the database
