
SCENE V	The Forest.


	Enter AMIENS, JAQUES, and others

	SONG.
AMIENS	Under the greenwood tree
	Who loves to lie with me,
	And turn his merry note
	Unto the sweet birds throat,
	Come hither, come hither, come hither:
	Here shall he see No enemy
	But winter and rough weather.

JAQUES	More, more, I prithee, more.

AMIENS	It will make you melancholy, Monsieur Jaques.

JAQUES	I thank it. More, I prithee, more. I can suck
	melancholy out of a song, as a weasel sucks eggs.
	More, I prithee, more.

AMIENS	My voice is ragged: I know I cannot please you.

JAQUES	I do not desire you to please me I do desire you to
	sing. Come, more another stanzo: call you em stanzos?

AMIENS	What you will, Monsieur Jaques.

JAQUES	Nay, I care not for their names they owe me
	nothing. Will you sing?

AMIENS	More at your request than to please myself.

JAQUES	Well then, if ever I thank any man, Ill thank you
	but that they call compliment is like the encounter
	of two dogapes, and when a man thanks me heartily,
	methinks I have given him a penny and he renders me
	the beggarly thanks. Come, sing and you that will
	not, hold your tongues.

AMIENS	Well, Ill end the song. Sirs, cover the while the
	duke will drink under this tree. He hath been all
	this day to look you.

JAQUES	And I have been all this day to avoid him. He is
	too disputable for my company: I think of as many
	matters as he, but I give heaven thanks and make no
	boast of them. Come, warble, come.

	SONG.
	Who doth ambition shun

	All together here

	And loves to live i the sun,
	Seeking the food he eats
	And pleased with what he gets,
	Come hither, come hither, come hither:
	Here shall he see No enemy
	But winter and rough weather.

JAQUES	Ill give you a verse to this note that I made
	yesterday in despite of my invention.

AMIENS	And Ill sing it.

JAQUES	Thus it goes:

	If it do come to pass
	That any man turn ass,
	Leaving his wealth and ease,
	A stubborn will to please,
	Ducdame, ducdame, ducdame:
	Here shall he see
	Gross fools as he,
	An if he will come to me.

AMIENS	Whats that ducdame?

JAQUES	Tis a Greek invocation, to call fools into a
	circle. Ill go sleep, if I can if I cannot, Ill
	rail against all the firstborn of Egypt.

AMIENS	And Ill go seek the duke: his banquet is prepared.

	Exeunt severally




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT II



SCENE VI	The forest.


	Enter ORLANDO and ADAM

ADAM	Dear master, I can go no further. O, I die for food!
	Here lie I down, and measure out my grave. Farewell,
	kind master.

ORLANDO	Why, how now, Adam! no greater heart in thee? Live
	a little comfort a little cheer thyself a little.
	If this uncouth forest yield any thing savage, I
	will either be food for it or bring it for food to
	thee. Thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers.
	For my sake be comfortable hold death awhile at
	the arms end: I will here be with thee presently
	and if I bring thee not something to eat, I will
	give thee leave to die: but if thou diest before I
	come, thou art a mocker of my labour. Well said!
	thou lookest cheerly, and Ill be with thee quickly.
	Yet thou liest in the bleak air: come, I will bear
	thee to some shelter and thou shalt not die for
	lack of a dinner, if there live any thing in this
	desert. Cheerly, good Adam!

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT II



SCENE VII	The forest.


	A table set out. Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, and
	Lords like outlaws

DUKE SENIOR	I think he be transformd into a beast
	For I can no where find him like a man.

First Lord	My lord, he is but even now gone hence:
	Here was he merry, hearing of a song.

DUKE SENIOR	If he, compact of jars, grow musical,
	We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.
	Go, seek him: tell him I would speak with him.

	Enter JAQUES

First Lord	He saves my labour by his own approach.

DUKE SENIOR	Why, how now, monsieur! what a life is this,
	That your poor friends must woo your company?
	What, you look merrily!

JAQUES	A fool, a fool! I met a fool i the forest,
	A motley fool a miserable world!
	As I do live by food, I met a fool
	Who laid him down and baskd him in the sun,
	And raild on Lady Fortune in good terms,
	In good set terms and yet a motley fool.
	Good morrow, fool, quoth I. No, sir, quoth he,
	Call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune:
	And then he drew a dial from his poke,
	And, looking on it with lacklustre eye,
	Says very wisely, It is ten oclock:
	Thus we may see, quoth he, how the world wags:
	Tis but an hour ago since it was nine,
	And after one hour more twill be eleven
	And so, from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe,
	And then, from hour to hour, we rot and rot
	And thereby hangs a tale. When I did hear
	The motley fool thus moral on the time,
	My lungs began to crow like chanticleer,
	That fools should be so deepcontemplative,
	And I did laugh sans intermission
	An hour by his dial. O noble fool!
	A worthy fool! Motleys the only wear.

DUKE SENIOR	What fool is this?

JAQUES	O worthy fool! One that hath been a courtier,
	And says, if ladies be but young and fair,
	They have the gift to know it: and in his brain,
	Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
	After a voyage, he hath strange places crammd
	With observation, the which he vents
	In mangled forms. O that I were a fool!
	I am ambitious for a motley coat.

DUKE SENIOR	Thou shalt have one.

JAQUES	It is my only suit
	Provided that you weed your better judgments
	Of all opinion that grows rank in them
	That I am wise. I must have liberty
	Withal, as large a charter as the wind,
	To blow on whom I please for so fools have
	And they that are most galled with my folly,
	They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so?
	The why is plain as way to parish church:
	He that a fool doth very wisely hit
	Doth very foolishly, although he smart,
	Not to seem senseless of the bob: if not,
	The wise mans folly is anatomized
	Even by the squandering glances of the fool.
	Invest me in my motley give me leave
	To speak my mind, and I will through and through
	Cleanse the foul body of the infected world,
	If they will patiently receive my medicine.

DUKE SENIOR	Fie on thee! I can tell what thou wouldst do.

JAQUES	What, for a counter, would I do but good?

DUKE SENIOR	Most mischievous foul sin, in chiding sin:
	For thou thyself hast been a libertine,
	As sensual as the brutish sting itself
	And all the embossed sores and headed evils,
	That thou with licence of free foot hast caught,
	Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.

JAQUES	Why, who cries out on pride,
	That can therein tax any private party?
	Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea,
	Till that the weary very means do ebb?
	What woman in the city do I name,
	When that I say the citywoman bears
	The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?
	Who can come in and say that I mean her,
	When such a one as she such is her neighbour?
	Or what is he of basest function
	That says his bravery is not of my cost,
	Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
	His folly to the mettle of my speech?
	There then how then? what then? Let me see wherein
	My tongue hath wrongd him: if it do him right,
	Then he hath wrongd himself if he be free,
	Why then my taxing like a wildgoose flies,
	Unclaimd of any man. But who comes here?

	Enter ORLANDO, with his sword drawn

ORLANDO	Forbear, and eat no more.

JAQUES	Why, I have eat none yet.

ORLANDO	Nor shalt not, till necessity be served.

JAQUES	Of what kind should this cock come of?

DUKE SENIOR	Art thou thus boldend, man, by thy distress,
	Or else a rude despiser of good manners,
	That in civility thou seemst so empty?

ORLANDO	You touchd my vein at first: the thorny point
	Of bare distress hath taen from me the show
	Of smooth civility: yet am I inland bred
	And know some nurture. But forbear, I say:
	He dies that touches any of this fruit
	Till I and my affairs are answered.

JAQUES	An you will not be answered with reason, I must die.

DUKE SENIOR	What would you have? Your gentleness shall force
	More than your force move us to gentleness.

ORLANDO	I almost die for food and let me have it.

DUKE SENIOR	Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.

ORLANDO	Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you:
	I thought that all things had been savage here
	And therefore put I on the countenance
	Of stern commandment. But whateer you are
	That in this desert inaccessible,
	Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
	Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time
	If ever you have lookd on better days,
	If ever been where bells have knolld to church,
	If ever sat at any good mans feast,
	If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear
	And know what tis to pity and be pitied,
	Let gentleness my strong enforcement be:
	In the which hope I blush, and hide my sword.

DUKE SENIOR	True is it that we have seen better days,
	And have with holy bell been knolld to church
	And sat at good mens feasts and wiped our eyes
	Of drops that sacred pity hath engenderd:
	And therefore sit you down in gentleness
	And take upon command what help we have
	That to your wanting may be ministerd.

ORLANDO	Then but forbear your food a little while,
	Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn
	And give it food. There is an old poor man,
	Who after me hath many a weary step
	Limpd in pure love: till he be first sufficed,
	Oppressd with two weak evils, age and hunger,
	I will not touch a bit.

DUKE SENIOR	Go find him out,
	And we will nothing waste till you return.

ORLANDO	I thank ye and be blest for your good comfort!

	Exit

DUKE SENIOR	Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy:
	This wide and universal theatre
	Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
	Wherein we play in.

JAQUES	All the worlds a stage,
	And all the men and women merely players:
	They have their exits and their entrances
	And one man in his time plays many parts,
	His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
	Mewling and puking in the nurses arms.
	And then the whining schoolboy, with his satchel
	And shining morning face, creeping like snail
	Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
	Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
	Made to his mistress eyebrow. Then a soldier,
	Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,
	Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
	Seeking the bubble reputation
	Even in the cannons mouth. And then the justice,
	In fair round belly with good capon lined,
	With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
	Full of wise saws and modern instances
	And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
	Into the lean and slipperd pantaloon,
	With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
	His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide
	For his shrunk shank and his big manly voice,
	Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
	And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
	That ends this strange eventful history,
	Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
	Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.

	Reenter ORLANDO, with ADAM

DUKE SENIOR	Welcome. Set down your venerable burthen,
	And let him feed.

ORLANDO	I thank you most for him.

ADAM	So had you need:
	I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.

DUKE SENIOR	Welcome fall to: I will not trouble you
	As yet, to question you about your fortunes.
	Give us some music and, good cousin, sing.

	SONG.
AMIENS	Blow, blow, thou winter wind.
	Thou art not so unkind
	As mans ingratitude
	Thy tooth is not so keen,
	Because thou art not seen,
	Although thy breath be rude.
	Heighho! sing, heighho! unto the green holly:
	Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:
	Then, heighho, the holly!
	This life is most jolly.
	Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
	That dost not bite so nigh
	As benefits forgot:
	Though thou the waters warp,
	Thy sting is not so sharp
	As friend rememberd not.
	Heighho! sing, c.

DUKE SENIOR	If that you were the good Sir Rowlands son,
	As you have whisperd faithfully you were,
	And as mine eye doth his effigies witness
	Most truly limnd and living in your face,
	Be truly welcome hither: I am the duke
	That loved your father: the residue of your fortune,
	Go to my cave and tell me. Good old man,
	Thou art right welcome as thy master is.
	Support him by the arm. Give me your hand,
	And let me all your fortunes understand.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE I	A room in the palace.


	Enter DUKE FREDERICK, Lords, and OLIVER

DUKE FREDERICK	Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be:
	But were I not the better part made mercy,
	I should not seek an absent argument
	Of my revenge, thou present. But look to it:
	Find out thy brother, wheresoeer he is
	Seek him with candle bring him dead or living
	Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more
	To seek a living in our territory.
	Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine
	Worth seizure do we seize into our hands,
	Till thou canst quit thee by thy brothers mouth
	Of what we think against thee.

OLIVER	O that your highness knew my heart in this!
	I never loved my brother in my life.

DUKE FREDERICK	More villain thou. Well, push him out of doors
	And let my officers of such a nature
	Make an extent upon his house and lands:
	Do this expediently and turn him going.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE II	The forest.


	Enter ORLANDO, with a paper

ORLANDO	Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love:
	And thou, thricecrowned queen of night, survey
	With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,
	Thy huntress name that my full life doth sway.
	O Rosalind! these trees shall be my books
	And in their barks my thoughts Ill character
	That every eye which in this forest looks
	Shall see thy virtue witnessd every where.
	Run, run, Orlando carve on every tree
	The fair, the chaste and unexpressive she.

	Exit

	Enter CORIN and TOUCHSTONE

CORIN	And how like you this shepherds life, Master Touchstone?

TOUCHSTONE	Truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good
	life, but in respect that it is a shepherds life,
	it is naught. In respect that it is solitary, I
	like it very well but in respect that it is
	private, it is a very vile life. Now, in respect it
	is in the fields, it pleaseth me well but in
	respect it is not in the court, it is tedious. As
	is it a spare life, look you, it fits my humour well
	but as there is no more plenty in it, it goes much
	against my stomach. Hast any philosophy in thee, shepherd?

CORIN	No more but that I know the more one sickens the
	worse at ease he is and that he that wants money,
	means and content is without three good friends
	that the property of rain is to wet and fire to
	burn that good pasture makes fat sheep, and that a
	great cause of the night is lack of the sun that
	he that hath learned no wit by nature nor art may
	complain of good breeding or comes of a very dull kindred.

TOUCHSTONE	Such a one is a natural philosopher. Wast ever in
	court, shepherd?

CORIN	No, truly.

