puzzled her a good deal until she made out what it was:  she was
beginning to grow larger again, and she thought at first she
would get up and leave the court but on second thoughts she
decided to remain where she was as long as there was room for
her.

  I wish you wouldnt squeeze so. said the Dormouse, who was
sitting next to her.  I can hardly breathe.

  I cant help it, said Alice very meekly:  Im growing.

  Youve no right to grow here, said the Dormouse.

  Dont talk nonsense, said Alice more boldly:  you know
youre growing too.

  Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace, said the Dormouse:
not in that ridiculous fashion.  And he got up very sulkily
and crossed over to the other side of the court.

  All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the
Hatter, and, just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to
one of the officers of the court, Bring me the list of the
singers in the last concert! on which the wretched Hatter
trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.

  Give your evidence, the King repeated angrily, or Ill have
you executed, whether youre nervous or not.

  Im a poor man, your Majesty, the Hatter began, in a
trembling voice, and I hadnt begun my teanot above a week
or soand what with the breadandbutter getting so thinand
the twinkling of the tea

  The twinkling of the what? said the King.

  It began with the tea, the Hatter replied.

  Of course twinkling begins with a T! said the King sharply.
Do you take me for a dunce?  Go on!

  Im a poor man, the Hatter went on, and most things
twinkled after thatonly the March Hare said

  I didnt! the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.

  You did! said the Hatter.

  I deny it! said the March Hare.

  He denies it, said the King:  leave out that part.

  Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said the Hatter went on,
looking anxiously round to see if he would deny it too:  but the
Dormouse denied nothing, being fast asleep.

  After that, continued the Hatter, I cut some more bread
andbutter

  But what did the Dormouse say? one of the jury asked.

  That I cant remember, said the Hatter.

  You MUST remember, remarked the King, or Ill have you
executed.

  The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and breadandbutter,
and went down on one knee.  Im a poor man, your Majesty, he
began.
