                      Who Stole the Tarts?


  The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when
they arrived, with a great crowd assembled about themall sorts
of little birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards:
the Knave was standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on
each side to guard him and near the King was the White Rabbit,
with a trumpet in one hand, and a scroll of parchment in the
other.  In the very middle of the court was a table, with a large
dish of tarts upon it:  they looked so good, that it made Alice
quite hungry to look at themI wish theyd get the trial done,
she thought, and hand round the refreshments!  But there seemed
to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about
her, to pass away the time.

  Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had
read about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that
she knew the name of nearly everything there.  Thats the
judge, she said to herself, because of his great wig.

  The judge, by the way, was the King and as he wore his crown
over the wig, look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he
did it, he did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly
not becoming.

  And thats the jurybox, thought Alice, and those twelve
creatures, she was obliged to say creatures, you see, because
some of them were animals, and some were birds, I suppose they
are the jurors.  She said this last word two or three times over
to herself, being rather proud of it:  for she thought, and
rightly too, that very few little girls of her age knew the
meaning of it at all.  However, jurymen would have done just
as well.

  The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates.
What are they doing?  Alice whispered to the Gryphon.  They
cant have anything to put down yet, before the trials begun.

  Theyre putting down their names, the Gryphon whispered in
reply, for fear they should forget them before the end of the
trial.

  Stupid things! Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but
she stopped hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, Silence in
the court! and the King put on his spectacles and looked
anxiously round, to make out who was talking.

  Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their
shoulders, that all the jurors were writing down stupid things!
on their slates, and she could even make out that one of them
didnt know how to spell stupid, and that he had to ask his
neighbour to tell him.  A nice muddle their slatesll be in
before the trials over! thought Alice.

  One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked.  This of course,
Alice could not stand, and she went round the court and got
behind him, and very soon found an opportunity of taking it
away.  She did it so quickly that the poor little juror it was
Bill, the Lizard could not make out at all what had become of
it so, after hunting all about for it, he was obliged to write
