other arm curled round her head.  Still she went on growing, and,
as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one
foot up the chimney, and said to herself Now I can do no more,
whatever happens.  What WILL become of me?

  Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full
effect, and she grew no larger:  still it was very uncomfortable,
and, as there seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting
out of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy.

  It was much pleasanter at home, thought poor Alice, when one
wasnt always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about
by mice and rabbits.  I almost wish I hadnt gone down that
rabbitholeand yetand yetits rather curious, you know,
this sort of life!  I do wonder what CAN have happened to me!
When I used to read fairytales, I fancied that kind of thing
never happened, and now here I am in the middle of one!  There
ought to be a book written about me, that there ought!  And when
I grow up, Ill write onebut Im grown up now, she added in a
sorrowful tone at least theres no room to grow up any more
HERE.

  But then, thought Alice, shall I NEVER get any older than I
am now?  Thatll be a comfort, one waynever to be an old woman
but thenalways to have lessons to learn!  Oh, I shouldnt like
THAT!

  Oh, you foolish Alice! she answered herself.  How can you
learn lessons in here?  Why, theres hardly room for YOU, and no
room at all for any lessonbooks!

  And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other,
and making quite a conversation of it altogether but after a few
minutes she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

  Mary Ann!  Mary Ann! said the voice.  Fetch me my gloves
this moment!  Then came a little pattering of feet on the
stairs.  Alice knew it was the Rabbit coming to look for her, and
she trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she
was now about a thousand times as large as the Rabbit, and had no
reason to be afraid of it.

  Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it
but, as the door opened inwards, and Alices elbow was pressed
hard against it, that attempt proved a failure.  Alice heard it
say to itself Then Ill go round and get in at the window.

  THAT you wont thought Alice, and, after waiting till she
fancied she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly
spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air.  She did not
get hold of anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall,
and a crash of broken glass, from which she concluded that it was
just possible it had fallen into a cucumberframe, or something
of the sort.

  Next came an angry voicethe RabbitsPat! Pat!  Where are
you?  And then a voice she had never heard before, Sure then
Im here!  Digging for apples, yer honour!

  Digging for apples, indeed! said the Rabbit angrily.  Here!
Come and help me out of THIS!  Sounds of more broken glass.

  Now tell me, Pat, whats that in the window?

  Sure, its an arm, yer honour!  He pronounced it arrum.

  An arm, you goose!   Who ever saw one that size?  Why, it
fills the whole window!

  Sure, it does, yer honour:  but its an arm for all that.

  Well, its got no business there, at any rate:  go and take it
away!

  There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear
whispers now and then such as, Sure, I dont like it, yer
honour, at all, at all!  Do as I tell you, you coward! and at
last she spread out her hand again, and made another snatch in
the air.  This time there were TWO little shrieks, and more
sounds of broken glass.  What a number of cucumberframes there
must be! thought Alice.  I wonder what theyll do next!  As for
pulling me out of the window, I only wish they COULD!  Im sure I
dont want to stay in here any longer!

  She waited for some time without hearing anything more:  at
last came a rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a
good many voice all talking together:  she made out the words:
Wheres the other ladder?Why, I hadnt to bring but one
Bills got the otherBill! fetch it here, lad!Here, put em up
at this cornerNo, tie em together firstthey dont reach half
high enough yetOh! theyll do well enough dont be particular
Here, Bill! catch hold of this ropeWill the roof bear?Mind
that loose slateOh, its coming down!  Heads below! a loud
crashNow, who did that?It was Bill, I fancyWhos to go
down the chimney?Nay, I shant! YOU do it!That I wont,
then!Bills to go downHere, Bill! the master says youre to
go down the chimney!

  Oh! So Bills got to come down the chimney, has he? said
Alice to herself.  Shy, they seem to put everything upon Bill!
I wouldnt be in Bills place for a good deal:  this fireplace is
narrow, to be sure but I THINK I can kick a little!

  She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and
waited till she heard a little animal she couldnt guess of what
sort it was scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close
above her:  then, saying to herself This is Bill, she gave one
sharp kick, and waited to see what would happen next.

  The first thing she heard was a general chorus of There goes
Bill! then the Rabbits voice alongCatch him, you by the
hedge! then silence, and then another confusion of voicesHold
up his headBrandy nowDont choke himHow was it, old fellow?
What happened to you?  Tell us all about it!

  Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, Thats Bill,
thought Alice, Well, I hardly knowNo more, thank ye Im
better nowbut Im a deal too flustered to tell youall I know
is, something comes at me like a Jackinthebox, and up I goes
like a skyrocket!

  So you did, old fellow! said the others.

  We must burn the house down! said the Rabbits voice and
Alice called out as loud as she could, If you do.  Ill set
Dinah at you!

  There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to
herself, I wonder what they WILL do next!  If they had any
sense, theyd take the roof off.  After a minute or two, they
began moving about again, and Alice heard the Rabbit say, A
barrowful will do, to begin with.

  A barrowful of WHAT? thought Alice but she had not long to
doubt, for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came
rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face.
Ill put a stop to this, she said to herself, and shouted out,
Youd better not do that again! which produced another dead
silence.

  Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all
turning into little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright
idea came into her head.  If I eat one of these cakes, she
thought, its sure to make SOME change in my size and as it
cant possibly make me larger, it must make me smaller, I
suppose.

  So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find
that she began shrinking directly.  As soon as she was small
enough to get through the door, she ran out of the house, and
found quite a crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside.
The poor little Lizard, Bill, was in the middle, being held up by
two guineapigs, who were giving it something out of a bottle.
They all made a rush at Alice the moment she appeared but she
ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself safe in a
thick wood.

