Information about Project Gutenberg one page

We produce about one million dollars for each hour we work.  One
hundred hours is a conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar, then we produce a
million dollars per hour next year we will have to do four text
files per month, thus upping our productivity to two millionhr.
The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  10,000 x 100,000,000Trillion
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers.

We need your donations more than ever!

All donations should be made to "Project GutenbergIBC", and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law "IBC" is Illinois
Benedictine College.  Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go
to IBC, too

For these and other matters, please mail to:

David Turner, Project Gutenberg
Illinois  Benedictine  College
5700  College  Road
Lisle, IL 605320900

Email requests to:
Internet:    chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu David Turner
Compuserve:  chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu David Turner
Attmail:     internet!chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu David Turner
MCImail:     David Turner
ADDRESS TYPE: MCI  EMS: INTERNET  MBX:chipmonkeagle.ibc.edu

When all other email fails try our Michael S. Hart, Executive Director:
hartvmd.cso.uiuc.edu internet   hartuiucvmd   bitnet

We would prefer to send you this information by email
Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail.


If you have an FTP program or emulator, please:

FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
ftp mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  yourlogin
cd etextetext91
or cd etext92 for new books  now also cd etextetext92
or cd etextarticles get suggest gut for more information
dir to see files
get or mget to get files. . .set bin for zip files
GET INDEX and AAINDEX
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT for newsletters.

Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor
Three Pages

STARTTHE SMALL PRINT!FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTSSTART

Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if whats wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

BEFORE! YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT

By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERGtm etext,
you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept this
"Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive a
refund of the money if any you paid for this etext by sending
a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person you got
it from.  If you received this etext on a physical medium such
as a disk, you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERGTM ETEXTS

This PROJECT GUTENBERGtm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERGtm
etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association the
"Project".  Among other things, this means that no one owns a
United States copyright on or for this work, so the Project and
you! can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special
rules, set forth below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute
this etext under the Projects "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable efforts
to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain works.
Despite these efforts, the Projects etexts and any medium they
may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other things, Defects
may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data,
transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property
infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other etext medium,
a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be
read by your equipment.

DISCLAIMER

But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
1 the Project and any other party you may receive this etext
from as a PROJECT GUTENBERGtm etext disclaims all liability to
you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees, and
2 YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR UNDER STRICT LIABILI
TY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL
DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money if any you
paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that time to
the person you received it from.  If you received it on a
physical medium, you must return it with your note, and such
person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement copy.
If you received it electronically, such person may choose to
alternatively give you a second opportunity to receive it elec
tronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "ASIS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY

You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise from any
distribution of this etext for which you are responsible, and
from 1 any alteration, modification or addition to the etext
for which you are responsible, or 2 any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERGtm"

You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this "Small
Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg, or:

1  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this re
     quires that you do not remove, alter or modify the etext or
     this "small print!" statement.  You may however, if you
     wish, distribute this etext in machine readable binary,
     compressed, markup, or proprietary form, including any
     form resulting from conversion by word processing or hyper
     text software, but only so long as EITHER:

       The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable.  We
          consider an etext not clearly readable if it
          contains characters other than those intended by the
          author of the work, although tilde ~, asterisk 
          and underline  characters may be used to convey
          punctuation intended by the author, and additional
          characters may be used to indicate hypertext links.

       The etext may be readily converted by the reader at no
          expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent form
          by the program that displays the etext as is the
          case, for instance, with most word processors.

       You provide, or agree to also provide on request at no
          additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the etext
          in its original plain ASCII form or in EBCDIC or
          other equivalent proprietary form.

2   Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

3  Pay a trademark license fee of 20 twenty percent of the
     net profits you derive from distributing this etext under
     the trademark, determined in accordance with generally
     accepted accounting practices.  The license fee:

       Is required only if you derive such profits.  In
          distributing under our trademark, you incur no
          obligation to charge money or earn profits for your
          distribution.

       Shall be paid to "Project Gutenberg Association 
          Illinois Benedictine College" or to such other person
          as the Project Gutenberg Association may direct
          within the 60 days following each date you prepare or
          were legally required to prepare your yearend tax
          return with respect to your income for that year.

WHAT IF YOU WANT TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DONT HAVE TO?

The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association  Illinois Benedictine College".

WRITE TO US!  We can be reached at:

Project Gutenberg Director of Communications PGDIRCOM

Internet:     pgdircomvmd.cso.uiuc.edu
Bitnet:       pgdircomuiucvmd
CompuServe:   >internet:pgdircom.vmd.cso.uiuc.edu
Attmail:      internet!vmd.cso.uiuc.edu!pgdircom

Drafted by CHARLES B. KRAMER, Attorney
CompuServe:  72600,2026
  Internet:  72600.2026compuserve.com
       Tel:  212 2545093
ENDTHE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTSVer.07.02.92END



The Project Gutenberg Edition of THE WORLD FACTBOOK 1992:    January 1, 1993

This edition, as are all Project Gutenberg Editions, is Plain Vanilla ASCII,
meaning there are no characters other than what you would see on paper, thus
no page returns, no markup, nothing but the characters you would type if you
were to copy this from a book on a typewriter.  Repetitive paged headers and
trailing spaces are not present.  Leading spaces have been preserved in fact
sections for readability.

Mail subject headers can be searched with leading :s. . .such as:

:Afghanistan Geography
:Afghanistan People
:Afghanistan Government
:Afghanistan Government
:Afghanistan Economy
:Afghanistan Economy
:Afghanistan Communications
:Afghanistan Defense Forces

To find the beginning of any country, search for :country
To find internal information, search for :country section, as above.


THE WORLD FACTBOOK 1992


:Afghanistan Geography

Total area:
    647,500 km2
Land area:
    647,500 km2
Comparative area:
    slightly smaller than Texas
Land boundaries:
    5,529 km total China 76 km, Iran 936 km, Pakistan 2,430 km, Tajikistan
    1,206 km, Turkmenistan 744 km, Uzbekistan 137 km
Coastline:
    none  landlocked
Maritime claims:
    none  landlocked
Disputes:
    Pashtunistan issue over the NorthWest Frontier Province with Pakistan
    periodic disputes with Iran over Helmand water rights Pakistan, Saudi
    Arabia, and Iran continue to support clients in country power struggles
    among various groups for control of Kabul, regional rivalries among emerging
    warlords, and traditional tribal disputes continue
Climate:
    arid to semiarid cold winters and hot summers
Terrain:
    mostly rugged mountains plains in north and southwest
Natural resources:
    natural gas, crude oil, coal, copper, talc, barites, sulphur, lead, zinc,
    iron ore, salt, precious and semiprecious stones
Land use:
    arable land 12 permanent crops NEGL meadows and pastures 46 forest and
    woodland 3 other 39 includes irrigated NEGL
Environment:
    damaging earthquakes occur in Hindu Kush mountains soil degradation,
    desertification, overgrazing, deforestation, pollution
Note:
    landlocked

:Afghanistan People

Population:
    US Bureau of the Census  16,095,664 July 1992, growth rate 2.4 1992
    and excludes 3,750,796 refugees in Pakistan and 1,607,281 refugees in Iran
    note  another report indicates a July 1990 population of 16,904,904,
    including 3,271,580 refugees in Pakistan and 1,277,700 refugees in Iran
Birth rate:
    44 births1,000 population 1992
Death rate:
    20 deaths1,000 population 1992
Net migration rate:
    0 migrants1,000 population 1992 note  there are flows across the border
    in both directions, but data are fragmentary and unreliable
Infant mortality rate:
    162 deaths1,000 live births 1992
Life expectancy at birth:
    45 years male, 43 years female 1992
Total fertility rate:
    6.4 children bornwoman 1992
Nationality:
    noun  Afghans adjective  Afghan
Ethnic divisions:
    Pashtun 38, Tajik 25, Uzbek 6, Hazara 19 minor ethnic groups include
    Chahar Aimaks, Turkmen, Baloch, and others
Religions:
    Sunni Muslim 84, Shia Muslim 15, other 1
Languages:
    Pashtu 35, Afghan Persian Dari 50, Turkic languages primarily Uzbek and
    Turkmen 11, 30 minor languages primarily Balochi and Pashai 4 much
    bilingualism
Literacy:
    29 male 44, female 14 age 15 and over can read and write 1990 est.
Labor force:
    4,980,000 agriculture and animal husbandry 67.8, industry 10.2,
    construction 6.3, commerce 5.0, services and other 10.7, 1980 est.
Organized labor:
    some small governmentcontrolled unions existed under the former regime but
    probably now have disbanded

:Afghanistan Government

Longform name:
    Islamic State of Afghanistan
Type:
    transitional
Capital:
    Kabul
Administrative divisions:
    30 provinces velayat, singular  velayat Badakhshan, Badghis, Baghlan,
    Balkh, Bamian, Farah, Faryab, Ghazni, Ghowr, Helmand, Herat, Jowzjan, Kabol,
    Kandahar, Kapisa, Konar, Kondoz, Laghman, Lowgar, Nangarhar, Nimruz,
    Oruzgan, Paktia, Paktika, Parvan, Samangan, Sare Pol, Takhar, Vardak,
    Zabol note  there may be a new province of Nurestan Nuristan
Independence:
    19 August 1919 from UK
Constitution:
    the old Communistera constitution probably will be replaced with an Islamic
    constitution
Legal system:
    a new legal system has not been adopted but the transitional government has
    declared it will follow Islamic law Sharia
National holiday:
    28 April, Victory of the Muslim Nation 4 May, Remembrance Day for Martyrs
    and Disabled 19 August, Independence Day
Executive branch:
    a 51member transitional council headed by Sibghatullah MOJADDEDI rules
    Kabul this body is to turn over power to a leadership council, which will
    function as the government and organize elections Burhanuddin RABBANI will
    serve as interim President
Legislative branch:
    previous bicameral legislature has been abolished
Judicial branch:
    an interim Chief Justice of the Supreme Court has been appointed, but a new
    court system has not yet been organized
Leaders:
  Chief of State and Head of Government:
    Interim President Burhanuddin RABBANI First Vice President Abdul Wahed
    SORABI since 7 January 1991 Prime Minister Fazil Haq KHALIQYAR since 21
    May 1990
Political parties and leaders:
    the former resistance parties represent the only current political
    organizations and include JamiatiIslami Islamic Society, Burhanuddin
    RABBANI Hizbi IslamiGulbuddin Islamic Party, Gulbuddin Hikmatyar
    Faction Hizbi IslamiKhalis Islamic Party Yunis Khalis Faction
    IttihadiIslami Barai Azadi Afghanistan Islamic Union for the Liberation
    of Afghanistan, Abdul Rasul SAYYAF HarakatInqilabiIslami Islamic
    Revolutionary Movement, Mohammad Nabi MOHAMMADI JabhaiNajatiMilli
    Afghanistan Afghanistan National Liberation Front, Sibghatullah MOJADDEDI
    MahaziMilliIslami National Islamic Front, Sayed Ahamad GAILANI
    JonbeshiMilli Islami National Islamic Movement, Ahmad Shah MASOOD and
    Rashid DOSTAM Hizbi Wahdat Islamic Unity Party, and a number of minor
    resistance parties the former ruling Watan Party has been disbanded
Suffrage:
    undetermined previously universal, male ages 1550
Elections:
    the transition government has promised elections in October 1992
Communists:
    the former ruling Watan Homeland Party has been disbanded

:Afghanistan Government

Other political or pressure groups:
    the former resistance commanders are the major power brokers in the
    countryside shuras councils of commanders are now administering most
    cities outside Kabul ulema religious scholars tribal elders
Member of:
    Has previously been a member of AsDB, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G77, IAEA, IBRD,
    ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OIC,
    UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTO note  the new
    government has not yet announced whether it will continue to be a member of
    these bodies the former resistance government in exile Afghan Interim
    Government was given membership in the OIC in 1989
Diplomatic representation:
    previous MinisterCounselor, Charge dAffaires Abdul Ghafur JOUSHAN
    Chancery at 2341 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 telephone 202
    2343770 or 3771 a new representative has not yet been named
  US:
    Charge dAffaires vacant Embassy at Ansari Wat, Wazir Akbar Khan Mina,
    Kabul telephone 62230 through 62235 or 62436 note  US Embassy in Kabul
    was closed in January 1989
Flag:
    a new flag of unknown description reportedly has been adopted previous flag
    consisted of three equal horizontal bands of black top, red, and green,
    with the national coat of arms superimposed on the hoist side of the black
    and red bands similar to the flag of Malawi, which is shorter and bears a
    radiant, rising red sun centered in the black band

:Afghanistan Economy

Overview:
    Fundamentally, Afghanistan is an extremely poor, landlocked country, highly
    dependent on farming wheat especially and livestock raising sheep and
    goats. Economic considerations, however, have played second fiddle to
    political and military upheavals during more than 13 years of war, including
    the nearly 10year Soviet military occupation which ended 15 February
    1989. Over the past decade, onethird of the population fled the country,
    with Pakistan sheltering more than 3 million refugees and Iran about 1.3
    million. Another 1 million probably moved into and around urban areas within
    Afghanistan. Although reliable data are unavailable, gross domestic product
    is lower than 12 years ago because of the loss of labor and capital and the
    disruption of trade and transport.
GDP:
    exchange rate conversion  3 billion, per capita 200 real growth rate 0
    1989 est.
Inflation rate consumer prices:
    over 90 1991 est.
Unemployment rate:
    NA
Budget:
    revenues NA expenditures NA, including capital expenditures of NA
Exports:
    236 million f.o.b., FY91 est.
  commodities:
    natural gas 55, fruits and nuts 24, handwoven carpets, wool, cotton,
    hides, and pelts
  partners:
    mostly former USSR
Imports:
    874 million c.i.f., FY91 est.
  commodities:
    food and petroleum products
