To that meek man, who well had sacrificed
Is piety thus and pure devotion paid?
To whom Michael thus, he also moved, replied.
These two are brethren, Adam, and to come
Out of thy loins the unjust the just hath slain,
For envy that his brothers offering found
From Heaven acceptance but the bloody fact
Will be avenged and the others faith, approved,
Lose no reward though here thou see him die,
Rolling in dust and gore.  To which our sire.
Alas! both for the deed, and for the cause!
But have I now seen Death?  Is this the way
I must return to native dust?  O sight
Of terrour, foul and ugly to behold,
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!
To whom thus Michael.  Death thou hast seen
In his first shape on Man but many shapes
Of Death, and many are the ways that lead
To his grim cave, all dismal yet to sense
More terrible at the entrance, than within.
Some, as thou sawest, by violent stroke shall die
By fire, flood, famine, by intemperance more
In meats and drinks, which on the earth shall bring
Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew
Before thee shall appear that thou mayest know
What misery the inabstinence of Eve
Shall bring on Men.  Immediately a place
Before his eyes appeared, sad, noisome, dark
A lazarhouse it seemed wherein were laid
Numbers of all diseased all maladies
Of ghastly spasm, or racking torture, qualms
Of heartsick agony, all feverous kinds,
Convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs,
Intestine stone and ulcer, colickpangs,
Demoniack phrenzy, moaping melancholy,
And moonstruck madness, pining atrophy,
Marasmus, and widewasting pestilence,
Dropsies, and asthmas, and jointracking rheums.
Dire was the tossing, deep the groans Despair
Tended the sick busiest from couch to couch
And over them triumphant Death his dart
Shook, but delayed to strike, though oft invoked
With vows, as their chief good, and final hope.
Sight so deform what heart of rock could long
Dryeyed behold?  Adam could not, but wept,
Though not of woman born compassion quelled
His best of man, and gave him up to tears
A space, till firmer thoughts restrained excess
And, scarce recovering words, his plaint renewed.
O miserable mankind, to what fall
Degraded, to what wretched state reserved!
Better end here unborn.  Why is life given
To be thus wrested from us? rather, why
Obtruded on us thus? who, if we knew
What we receive, would either no accept
Life offered, or soon beg to lay it down
Glad to be so dismissed in peace.  Can thus
The image of God in Man, created once
So goodly and erect, though faulty since,
To such unsightly sufferings be debased
Under inhuman pains?  Why should not Man,
Retaining still divine similitude
In part, from such deformities be free,
And, for his Makers image sake, exempt?
Their Makers image, answered Michael, then
Forsook them, when themselves they vilified
To serve ungoverned Appetite and took
