Flag:
    maroon field with small rectangle in upper left corner rectangle divided
    horizontally with black on top, white below

:Georgia Economy

Overview:
    Among the former Soviet republics, Georgia is noted for its Black Sea
    tourist industry, its large output of citrus fruits and tea, and the amazing
    diversity of an industrial sector that accounted, however, for less than 2
    of the USSRs output. Another salient characteristic of the economy has been
    a flourishing private sector compared with the other republics. Almost 30
    of the labor force is employed in agriculture and 18 in industry. Mineral
    resources consist of manganese and copper, and, to a lesser extent,
    molybdenum, arsenic, tungsten, and mercury. Except for very small quantities
    of domestic oil, gas, and coal, fuel must be imported from neighboring
    republics. Oil and its products are delivered by pipeline from Azerbaijan to
    the port of Batumi for export and local refining. Gas is supplied in
    pipelines from Krasnodar and Stavropol. Georgia is nearly selfsufficient
    in electric power, thanks to abundant hydropower stations as well as some
    thermal power stations. The dismantling of central economic controls is
    being delayed by political factionalism, marked by armed struggles between
    the elected government and the opposition, and industrial output seems to
    have fallen more steeply in Georgia in 1991 than in any other of the former
    Soviet republics. To prevent further economic decline, Georgia must
    establish domestic peace and must maintain economic ties to the other former
    Soviet republics while developing new links to the West.
GDP:
    purchasing power equivalent  NA per capita NA real growth rate  23
    1991
Inflation rate consumer prices:
    approximately 90 1991
Unemployment rate:
    NA
Budget:
    revenues NA expenditures NA, including capital expenditures of NA
    million 1991
Exports:
    176 million f.o.b., 1990
  commodities:
    citrus fruits, tea, other agricultural products diverse types of machinery
    ferrous and nonferrous metals textiles
  partners:
    NA
Imports:
    1.5 billion c.i.f., 1990
  commodities:
    machinery and parts, fuel, transport equipment, textiles
  partners:
    NA
External debt:
    650 million 1991 est.
Industrial production:
    growth rate  19 1991
Electricity:
    4,575,000 kW capacity 15,300 million kWh produced, about 2,600 kWh per
    capita 1991
Industries:
    Heavy industrial products include raw steel, rolled steel, cement, lumber
    machine tools, foundry equipment, electric mining locomotives, tower cranes,
    electric welding equipment, machinery for food preparation, meat packing,
    dairy, and fishing industries airconditioning electric motors up to 100 kW
    in size, electric motors for cranes, magnetic starters for motors devices
    for control of industrial processes trucks, tractors, and other farm
    machinery light industrial products, including cloth, hosiery, and shoes

:Georgia Economy

