hallucinogens with some sedative properties, and includes marijuana pot,
Acapulco gold, grass, reefer, tetrahydrocannabinol THC, Marinol, hashish
hash, and hashish oil hash oil.

Coca Erythroxylon coca is a bush, and the leaves contain the stimulant
cocaine. Coca is not to be confused with cocoa, which comes from cacao seeds
and is used in making chocolate, cocoa, and cocoa butter.

Cocaine is a stimulant derived from the leaves of the coca bush.

Depressants sedatives are drugs that reduce tension and anxiety and include
chloral hydrate, barbiturates Amytal, Nembutal, Seconal, phenobarbital,
benzodiazepines Librium, Valium, methaqualone Quaalude, glutethimide
Doriden, and others Equanil, Placidyl, Valmid.

Drugs are any chemical substances that effect a physical, mental, emotional,
or behavioral change in an individual.

Drug abuse is the use of any licit or illicit chemical substance that results
in physical, mental, emotional, or behavioral impairment in an individual.

Hallucinogens are drugs that affect sensation, thinking, selfawareness, and
emotion.

Hallucinogens include LSD acid, microdot, mescaline and peyote mexc,
buttons, cactus, amphetamine variants PMA, STP, DOB, phencyclidine PCP,
angel dust, hog, phencyclidine analogues PCE, PCPy, TCP, and others
psilocybin, psilocyn.

Hashish is the resinous exudate of the cannabis or hemp plant Cannabis
sativa.

Heroin is a semisynthetic derivative of morphine.

Marijuana is the dried leaves of the cannabis or hemp plant Cannabis sativa.

Narcotics are drugs that relieve pain, often induce sleep, and refer to opium,
opium derivatives, and synthetic substitutes. Natural narcotics include opium
paregoric, parepectolin, morphine MSContin, Roxanol, codeine Tylenol
wcodeine, Empirin wcodeine, Robitussan AC, and thebaine. Semisynthetic
narcotics include heroin horse, smack, and hydromorphone Dilaudid.
Synthetic narcotics include meperidine or Pethidine Demerol, Mepergan,
methadone Dolophine, Methadose, and others Darvon, Lomotil.

Opium is the milky exudate of the incised, unripe seedpod of the opium poppy.

Opium poppy Papaver somniferum is the source for many natural and
semisynthetic narcotics.

Poppy straw concentrate is the alkaloid derived from the mature dried opium
poppy.

Qat kat, khat is a stimulant from the buds or leaves of Catha edulis that
is chewed or drunk as tea.

Stimulants are drugs that relieve mild depression, increase energy and
activity, and include cocaine coke, snow, crack, amphetamines Desoxyn,
Dexedrine, phenmetrazine Preludin, methylphenidate Ritalin, and others
Cylert, Sanorex, Tenuate.
