	copulatives, to swear and to forswear: according as
	marriage binds and blood breaks: a poor virgin,
	sir, an illfavoured thing, sir, but mine own a poor
	humour of mine, sir, to take that that no man else
	will: rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a
	poor house as your pearl in your foul oyster.

DUKE SENIOR	By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.

TOUCHSTONE	According to the fools bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.

JAQUES	But, for the seventh cause how did you find the
	quarrel on the seventh cause?

TOUCHSTONE	Upon a lie seven times removed:bear your body more
	seeming, Audrey:as thus, sir. I did dislike the
	cut of a certain courtiers beard: he sent me word,
	if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the
	mind it was: this is called the Retort Courteous.
	If I sent him word again it was not well cut, he
	would send me word, he cut it to please himself:
	this is called the Quip Modest. If again it was
	not well cut, he disabled my judgment: this is
	called the Reply Churlish. If again it was not
	well cut, he would answer, I spake not true: this
	is called the Reproof Valiant. If again it was not
	well cut, he would say I lied: this is called the
	Countercheque Quarrelsome: and so to the Lie
	Circumstantial and the Lie Direct.

JAQUES	And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?

TOUCHSTONE	I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial,
	nor he durst not give me the Lie Direct and so we
	measured swords and parted.

JAQUES	Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?

TOUCHSTONE	O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book as you have
	books for good manners: I will name you the degrees.
	The first, the Retort Courteous the second, the
	Quip Modest the third, the Reply Churlish the
	fourth, the Reproof Valiant the fifth, the
	Countercheque Quarrelsome the sixth, the Lie with
	Circumstance the seventh, the Lie Direct. All
	these you may avoid but the Lie Direct and you may
	avoid that too, with an If. I knew when seven
	justices could not take up a quarrel, but when the
	parties were met themselves, one of them thought but
	of an If, as, If you said so, then I said so and
	they shook hands and swore brothers. Your If is the
	only peacemaker much virtue in If.

JAQUES	Is not this a rare fellow, my lord? hes as good at
	any thing and yet a fool.

DUKE SENIOR	He uses his folly like a stalkinghorse and under
	the presentation of that he shoots his wit.

	Enter HYMEN, ROSALIND, and CELIA

	Still Music

HYMEN	        Then is there mirth in heaven,
	When earthly things made even
	Atone together.
	Good duke, receive thy daughter
	Hymen from heaven brought her,
	Yea, brought her hither,
	That thou mightst join her hand with his
	Whose heart within his bosom is.

ROSALIND	To DUKE SENIOR  To you I give myself, for I am yours.

	To ORLANDO

	To you I give myself, for I am yours.

DUKE SENIOR	If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.

ORLANDO	If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.

PHEBE	If sight and shape be true,
	Why then, my love adieu!

ROSALIND	Ill have no father, if you be not he:
	Ill have no husband, if you be not he:
	Nor neer wed woman, if you be not she.

HYMEN	        Peace, ho! I bar confusion:
	Tis I must make conclusion
	Of these most strange events:
	Heres eight that must take hands
	To join in Hymens bands,
	If truth holds true contents.
	You and you no cross shall part:
	You and you are heart in heart
	You to his love must accord,
	Or have a woman to your lord:
	You and you are sure together,
	As the winter to foul weather.
	Whiles a wedlockhymn we sing,
	Feed yourselves with questioning
	That reason wonder may diminish,
	How thus we met, and these things finish.

	SONG.
	Wedding is great Junos crown:
	O blessed bond of board and bed!
	Tis Hymen peoples every town
	High wedlock then be honoured:
	Honour, high honour and renown,
	To Hymen, god of every town!

DUKE SENIOR	O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me!
	Even daughter, welcome, in no less degree.

PHEBE	I will not eat my word, now thou art mine
	Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.

	Enter JAQUES DE BOYS

JAQUES DE BOYS	Let me have audience for a word or two:
	I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
	That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
	Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
	Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
	Addressd a mighty power which were on foot,
	In his own conduct, purposely to take
	His brother here and put him to the sword:
	And to the skirts of this wild wood he came
	Where meeting with an old religious man,
	After some question with him, was converted
	Both from his enterprise and from the world,
	His crown bequeathing to his banishd brother,
	And all their lands restored to them again
	That were with him exiled. This to be true,
	I do engage my life.

DUKE SENIOR	Welcome, young man
	Thou offerst fairly to thy brothers wedding:
	To one his lands withheld, and to the other
	A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.
	First, in this forest, let us do those ends
	That here were well begun and well begot:
	And after, every of this happy number
	That have endured shrewd days and nights with us
	Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
	According to the measure of their states.
	Meantime, forget this newfalln dignity
	And fall into our rustic revelry.
	Play, music! And you, brides and bridegrooms all,
	With measure heapd in joy, to the measures fall.

JAQUES	Sir, by your patience. If I heard you rightly,
	The duke hath put on a religious life
	And thrown into neglect the pompous court?

