     future scholarly needs, not to build for the past.  Capture
     deteriorating information at the highest affordable resolution, even
     though the dissemination and display technologies will lag.

      Develop cooperative mechanisms to foster agreement on protocols
     for document structure and other interchange mechanisms necessary
     for widespread dissemination and use before official standards are
     set.

      Accept that, in a transition period, de facto standards will have
     to be developed.

      Capture information in a way that keeps all options open and
     provides for total convertibility:  OCR, scanning of microfilm,
     producing microfilm from scanned documents, etc.

      Work closely with the generators of information and the builders
     of networks and databases to ensure that continuing accessibility is
     a primary concern from the beginning.

      Piggyback on standards under development for the broad market, and
     avoid libraryspecific standards work with the vendors, in order to
     take advantage of that which is being standardized for the rest of
     the world.

      Concentrate efforts on managing permanence in the digital world,
     rather than perfecting the longevity of a particular medium.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Additional comments on TIFF 


During the brief discussion period that followed BATTINs presentation,
BARONAS explained that TIFF was not developed in collaboration with or
under the auspices of AIIM.  TIFF is a company product, not a standard,
is owned by two corporations, and is always changing.  BARONAS also
observed that ANSIAIIM MS53, a bilevel image file transfer format that
allows unlike systems to exchange images, is compatible with TIFF as well
as with DECs architecture and IBMs MODCAIOCA.

                                 


HOOTON  Several questions to be considered in discussing text conversion



HOOTON introduced the final topic, text conversion, by noting that it is
becoming an increasingly important part of the imaging business.  Many
people now realize that it enhances their system to be able to have more
and more character data as part of their imaging system.  Re the issue of
OCR versus rekeying, HOOTON posed several questions:  How does one get
text into computerreadable form?  Does one use automated processes?
Does one attempt to eliminate the use of operators where possible?
Standards for accuracy, he said, are extremely important:  it makes a
major difference in cost and time whether one sets as a standard 98.5
percent acceptance or 99.5 percent.  He mentioned outsourcing as a
possibility for converting text.  Finally, what one does with the image
to prepare it for the recognition process is also important, he said,
because such preparation changes how recognition is viewed, as well as
facilitates recognition itself.

                                 


LESK  Roles of participants in CORE  Data flow  The scanning process 
The image interface  Results of experiments involving the use of
electronic resources and traditional paper copies  Testing the issue of
serendipity  Conclusions 


Michael LESK, executive director, Computer Science Research, Bell
Communications Research, Inc. Bellcore, discussed the Chemical Online
Retrieval Experiment CORE, a cooperative project involving Cornell
University, OCLC, Bellcore, and the American Chemical Society ACS.

LESK spoke on 1 how the scanning was performed, including the unusual
feature of page segmentation, and 2 the use made of the text and the
image in experiments.

Working with the chemistry journals because ACS has been saving its
typesetting tapes since the mid1970s and thus has a significant backrun
of the most important chemistry journals in the United States, CORE is
attempting to create an automated chemical library.  Approximately a
quarter of the pages by square inch are made up of images of
quasipictorial material dealing with the graphic components of the
pages is extremely important.  LESK described the roles of participants
in CORE:  1 ACS provides copyright permission, journals on paper,
journals on microfilm, and some of the definitions of the files 2 at
Bellcore, LESK chiefly performs the data preparation, while Dennis Egan
performs experiments on the users of chemical abstracts, and supplies the
indexing and numerous magnetic tapes  3 Cornell provides the site of the
experiment 4 OCLC develops retrieval software and other user interfaces.
Various manufacturers and publishers have furnished other help.

Concerning data flow, Bellcore receives microfilm and paper from ACS the
microfilm is scanned by outside vendors, while the paper is scanned
inhouse on an Improvision scanner, twenty pages per minute at 300 dpi,
which provides sufficient quality for all practical uses.  LESK would
prefer to have more gray level, because one of the ACS journals prints on
some colored pages, which creates a problem.

Bellcore performs all this scanning, creates a pageimage file, and also
selects from the pages the graphics, to mix with the text file which is
discussed later in the Workshop.  The user is always searching the ASCII
file, but she or he may see a display based on the ASCII or a display
based on the images.

LESK illustrated how the program performs page analysis, and the image
interface.  The user types several words, is presented with a list
usually of the titles of articles contained in an issuethat derives
from the ASCII, clicks on an icon and receives an image that mirrors an
ACS page.  LESK also illustrated an alternative interface, based on text
on the ASCII, the socalled SuperBook interface from Bellcore.

LESK next presented the results of an experiment conducted by Dennis Egan
and involving thirtysix students at Cornell, one third of them
undergraduate chemistry majors, one third senior undergraduate chemistry
