The good I sought not.  To the loss of that,
Sufficient penalty, why hast thou added
The sense of endless woes?  Inexplicable
Why am I mocked with death, and lengthened out
To deathless pain?  How gladly would I meet
Mortality my sentence, and be earth
Insensible!  How glad would lay me down
As in my mothers lap!  There I should rest,
And sleep secure his dreadful voice no more
Would thunder in my ears no fear of worse
To me, and to my offspring, would torment me
With cruel expectation.  Yet one doubt
Pursues me still, lest all I cannot die
Lest that pure breath of life, the spirit of Man
Which God inspired, cannot together perish
With this corporeal clod then, in the grave,
Or in some other dismal place, who knows
But I shall die a living death?  O thought
Horrid, if true!  Yet why? It was but breath
Of life that sinned what dies but what had life
And sin?  The body properly had neither,
All of me then shall die: let this appease
The doubt, since human reach no further knows.
For though the Lord of all be infinite,
Is his wrath also?  Be it, Man is not so,
But mortal doomed.  How can he exercise
Wrath without end on Man, whom death must end?
Can he make deathless death?  That were to make
Strange contradiction, which to God himself
Impossible is held as argument
Of weakness, not of power.  Will he draw out,
For angers sake, finite to infinite,
In punished Man, to satisfy his rigour,
Satisfied never?  That were to extend
His sentence beyond dust and Natures law
By which all causes else, according still
To the reception of their matter, act
Not to the extent of their own sphere.  But say
That death be not one stroke, as I supposed,
Bereaving sense, but endless misery
From this day onward which I feel begun
Both in me, and without me and so last
To perpetuityAy me!that fear
Comes thundering back with dreadful revolution
On my defenceless head both Death and I
Am found eternal, and incorporate both
Nor I on my part single in me all
Posterity stands cursed:  Fair patrimony
That I must leave ye, Sons!  O, were I able
To waste it all myself, and leave ye none!
So disinherited, how would you bless
Me, now your curse!  Ah, why should all mankind,
For one mans fault, thus guiltless be condemned,
It guiltless?  But from me what can proceed,
But all corrupt both mind and will depraved
Not to do only, but to will the same
With me?  How can they then acquitted stand
In sight of God?  Him, after all disputes,
Forced I absolve: all my evasions vain,
And reasonings, though through mazes, lead me still
But to my own conviction: first and last
On me, me only, as the source and spring
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due
So might the wrath!  Fond wish!couldst thou support
That burden, heavier than the earth to bear
Than all the world much heavier, though divided
With that bad Woman?  Thus, what thou desirest,
And what thou fearest, alike destroys all hope
Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable
Beyond all past example and future
To Satan only like both crime and doom.
O Conscience! into what abyss of fears
And horrours hast thou driven me out of which
I find no way, from deep to deeper plunged!
Thus Adam to himself lamented loud,
Through the still night not now, as ere Man fell,
Wholesome, and cool, and mild, but with black air
Accompanied with damps, and dreadful gloom
Which to his evil conscience represented
All things with double terrour:  On the ground
Outstretched he lay, on the cold ground and oft
Cursed his creation  Death as oft accused
Of tardy execution, since denounced
The day of his offence.  Why comes not Death,
Said he, with one thriceacceptable stroke
To end me?  Shall Truth fail to keep her word,
Justice Divine not hasten to be just?
But Death comes not at call Justice Divine
Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries,
O woods, O fountains, hillocks, dales, and bowers!
With other echo late I taught your shades
To answer, and resound far other song.
Whom thus afflicted when sad Eve beheld,
Desolate where she sat, approaching nigh,
Soft words to his fierce passion she assayed:
But her with stern regard he thus repelled.
Out of my sight, thou Serpent!  That name best
Befits thee with him leagued, thyself as false
And hateful nothing wants, but that thy shape,
Like his, and colour serpentine, may show
Thy inward fraud to warn all creatures from thee
Henceforth lest that too heavenly form, pretended
To hellish falshood, snare them!  But for thee
I had persisted happy had not thy pride
And wandering vanity, when least was safe,
Rejected my forewarning, and disdained
