PDRY: Peoples Democratic Republic of Yemen Yemen Aden or South Yemen
used for information dated before 22 May 1990 or CY91

UAE: United Arab Emirates

UK: United Kingdom

US: United States

USSR: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics Soviet Union used for information
dated before 25 December 1991

YAR: Yemen Arab Republic Yemen Sanaa or North Yemen used for information
dated before 22 May 1990 or CY91

Administrative divisions: The numbers, designatory terms, and firstorder
administrative divisions are generally those approved by the US Board on
Geographic Names BGN. Changes that have been reported but not yet acted on
by BGN are noted.

Area: Total area is the sum of all land and water areas delimited by
international boundaries andor coastlines. Land area is the aggregate of
all surfaces delimited by international boundaries andor coastlines,
excluding inland water bodies lakes, reservoirs, rivers. Comparative areas
are based on total area equivalents. Most entities are compared with the
entire US or one of the 50 states. The smaller entities are compared with
Washington, DC 178 km2, 69 miles2 or the Mall in Washington, DC 0.59 km2,
0.23 miles2, 146 acres.

Birth rate: The average annual number of births during a year per 1,000
population at midyear also known as crude birth rate.

Dates of information: In general, information available as of 1 January 1992
was used in the preparation of this edition. Population figures are estimates
for 1 July 1992, with population growth rates estimated for mid1992 through
mid1993. Major political events have been updated through 30 June 1992.
Military age figures are for 1992.

Death rate: The average annual number of deaths during a year per l,000
population at midyear also known as crude death rate.

Diplomatic representation: The US Government has diplomatic relations with
176 nations the US has not yet established full diplomatic relations with
Bosnia and Hercegovina, Croatia, and Slovenia. The US has diplomatic
relations with 167 of the 178 UN members  the exceptions are Angola, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Hercegovina, Croatia, Cuba, Iran, Iraq, North Korea, Slovenia,
and Vietnam. In addition, the US has diplomatic relations with 9 nations
that are not in the UN  Andorra, Kiribati, Monaco, Nauru, San Marino,
Switzerland, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vatican City.

Disputes: This category includes a wide variety of situations that range from
traditional bilateral boundary disputes to unilateral claims of one sort or
another. Every international land boundary dispute in the Guide to Interna
tional Boundaries, a map published by the Department of State, is included.
References to other situations may also be included that are border or
frontier relevant, such as maritime disputes, geopolitical questions, or
irredentist issues. However, inclusion does not necessarily constitute
official acceptance or recognition by the US Government.

Economic aid: This entry refers to bilateral commitments of official develop
