wandered about in the wood, is to grow to my right size again
and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden.
I think that will be the best plan.

  It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and
simply arranged the only difficulty was, that she had not the
smallest idea how to set about it and while she was peering
about anxiously among the trees, a little sharp bark just over
her head made her look up in a great hurry.

  An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round
eyes, and feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her.
Poor little thing! said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried
hard to whistle to it but she was terribly frightened all the
time at the thought that it might be hungry, in which case it
would be very likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing.

  Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of
stick, and held it out to the puppy whereupon the puppy jumped
into the air off all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight,
and rushed at the stick, and made believe to worry it then Alice
dodged behind a great thistle, to keep herself from being run
over and the moment she appeared on the other side, the puppy
made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head over heels in
its hurry to get hold of it then Alice, thinking it was very
like having a game of play with a carthorse, and expecting every
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle
again then the puppy began a series of short charges at the
stick, running a very little way forwards each time and a long
way back, and barking hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat
down a good way off, panting, with its tongue hanging out of its
mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

  This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape
so she set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out
of breath, and till the puppys bark sounded quite faint in the
distance.

  And yet what a dear little puppy it was! said Alice, as she
leant against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself
with one of the leaves:  I should have liked teaching it tricks
very much, ifif Id only been the right size to do it!  Oh
dear!  Id nearly forgotten that Ive got to grow up again!  Let
me seehow IS it to be managed?  I suppose I ought to eat or
drink something or other but the great question is, what?

  The great question certainly was, what?  Alice looked all round
her at the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see
anything that looked like the right thing to eat or drink under
the circumstances.  There was a large mushroom growing near her,
about the same height as herself and when she had looked under
it, and on both sides of it, and behind it, it occurred to her
that she might as well look and see what was on the top of it.

  She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of
the mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large
caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded,
quietly smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice
of her or of anything else.



                            CHAPTER V

                    Advice from a Caterpillar


  The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some time in
silence:  at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its
mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.

  Who are YOU? said the Caterpillar.

  This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation.  Alice
replied, rather shyly, II hardly know, sir, just at present
at least I know who I WAS when I got up this morning, but I think
I must have been changed several times since then.

  What do you mean by that? said the Caterpillar sternly.
Explain yourself!

  I cant explain MYSELF, Im afraid, sir said Alice, because
Im not myself, you see.

  I dont see, said the Caterpillar.

  Im afraid I cant put it more clearly, Alice replied very
politely, for I cant understand it myself to begin with and
being so many different sizes in a day is very confusing.

  It isnt, said the Caterpillar.

  Well, perhaps you havent found it so yet, said Alice but
when you have to turn into a chrysalisyou will some day, you
knowand then after that into a butterfly, I should think youll
feel it a little queer, wont you?

  Not a bit, said the Caterpillar.

  Well, perhaps your feelings may be different, said Alice
all I know is, it would feel very queer to ME.

  You! said the Caterpillar contemptuously.  Who are YOU?

  Which brought them back again to the beginning of the
conversation.  Alice felt a little irritated at the Caterpillars
making such VERY short remarks, and she drew herself up and said,
very gravely, I think, you ought to tell me who YOU are, first.

  Why? said the Caterpillar.

  Here was another puzzling question and as Alice could not
think of any good reason, and as the Caterpillar seemed to be in
a VERY unpleasant state of mind, she turned away.

  Come back! the Caterpillar called after her.  Ive something
important to say!

  This sounded promising, certainly:  Alice turned and came back
again.

  Keep your temper, said the Caterpillar.

  Is that all? said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as
she could.

  No, said the Caterpillar.

  Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else
to do, and perhaps after all it might tell her something worth
hearing.  For some minutes it puffed away without speaking, but
at last it unfolded its arms, took the hookah out of its mouth
again, and said, So you think youre changed, do you?

  Im afraid I am, sir, said Alice I cant remember things as
I usedand I dont keep the same size for ten minutes together!

  Cant remember WHAT things? said the Caterpillar.

  Well, Ive tried to say "HOW DOTH THE LITTLE BUSY BEE," but it
all came different! Alice replied in a very melancholy voice.

  Repeat, "YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM," said the Caterpillar.

  Alice folded her hands, and began:

    You are old, Father William, the young man said,
      And your hair has become very white
    And yet you incessantly stand on your head
      Do you think, at your age, it is right?

    In my youth, Father William replied to his son,
      I feared it might injure the brain
    But, now that Im perfectly sure I have none,
      Why, I do it again and again.

    You are old, said the youth, as I mentioned before,
      And have grown most uncommonly fat
    Yet you turned a backsomersault in at the door
      Pray, what is the reason of that?

    In my youth, said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
      I kept all my limbs very supple
    By the use of this ointmentone shilling the box
      Allow me to sell you a couple?

    You are old, said the youth, and your jaws are too weak
      For anything tougher than suet
