

George THOMA, chief, Communications Engineering Branch, National Library
of Medicine NLM, illustrated several of the deficiencies discussed by
the previous speakers.  He introduced the topic of special problems by
noting the advantages of electronic imaging.  For example, it is regenerable
because it is a coded file, and realtime quality control is possible with
electronic capture, whereas in photographic capture it is not.

One of the difficulties discussed in the scanning and storage process was
image quality which, without belaboring the obvious, means different
things for maps, medical Xrays, or broadcast television.  In the case of
documents, THOMA said, image quality boils down to legibility of the
textual parts, and fidelity in the case of gray or color photo printtype
material.  Legibility boils down to scan density, the standard in most
cases being 300 dpi.  Increasing the resolution with scanners that
perform 600 or 1200 dpi, however, comes at a cost.

Better image quality entails at least four different kinds of costs:  1
equipment costs, because the CCD i.e., chargecouple device with
greater number of elements costs more  2 time costs that translate to
the actual capture costs, because manual labor is involved the time is
also dependent on the fact that more data has to be moved around in the
machine in the scanning or network devices that perform the scanning as
well as the storage  3 media costs, because at high resolutions larger
files have to be stored and 4 transmission costs, because there is just
more data to be transmitted.

But while resolution takes care of the issue of legibility in image
quality, other deficiencies have to do with contrast and elements on the
page scanned or the image that needed to be removed or clarified.  Thus,
THOMA proceeded to illustrate various deficiencies, how they are
manifested, and several techniques to overcome them.

Fixed thresholding was the first technique described, suitable for
blackandwhite text, when the contrast does not vary over the page.  One
can have many different threshold levels in scanning devices.  Thus,
THOMA offered an example of extremely poor contrast, which resulted from
the fact that the stock was a heavy red.  This is the sort of image that
when microfilmed fails to provide any legibility whatsoever.  Fixed
thresholding is the way to change the blacktored contrast to the
desired blacktowhite contrast.

Other examples included material that had been browned or yellowed by
age.  This was also a case of contrast deficiency, and correction was
done by fixed thresholding.  A final example boils down to the same
thing, slight variability, but it is not significant.  Fixed thresholding
solves this problem as well.  The microfilm equivalent is certainly legible,
but it comes with dark areas.  Though THOMA did not have a slide of the
microfilm in this case, he did show the reproduced electronic image.

When one has variable contrast over a page or the lighting over the page
area varies, especially in the case where a bound volume has light
shining on it, the image must be processed by a dynamic thresholding
scheme.  One scheme, dynamic averaging, allows the threshold level not to
be fixed but to be recomputed for every pixel from the neighboring
characteristics.  The neighbors of a pixel determine where the threshold
should be set for that pixel.

THOMA showed an example of a page that had been made deficient by a
