LYNCHs offer to test or demonstrate its database in a network
environment, FLEISCHHAUER said.

Returning the discussion to what she viewed as the vital issue of
electronic deposit, BATTIN recommended that LC initiate a catalytic
process in terms of distributed responsibility, that is, bring together
the distributed organizations and set up a study group to look at all
these issues and see where we as a nation should move.  The broader
issues of how we deal with the management of electronic information will
not disappear, but only grow worse.

LESK took up this theme and suggested that LC attempt to persuade one
major library in each state to deal with its state equivalent publisher,
which might produce a cooperative project that would be equitably
distributed around the country, and one in which LC would be dealing with
a minimal number of publishers and minimal copyright problems.

GRABER remarked the recent development in the scientific community of a
willingness to use SGML and either deposit or interchange on a fairly
standardized format.  He wondered if a similar movement was taking place
in the humanities.  Although the National Library of Medicine found only
a few publishers to cooperate in a like venture two or three years ago, a
new effort might generate a much larger number willing to cooperate.

KIMBALL recounted his units MachineReadable Collections Reading Room
troubles with the commercial publishers of electronic media in acquiring
materials for LCs collections, in particular the publishers fear that
they would not be able to cover their costs and would lose control of
their products, that LC would give them away or sell them and make
profits from them.  He doubted that the publishing industry was prepared
to move into this area at the moment, given its resistance to allowing LC
to use its machinereadable materials as the Library would like.

The copyright law now addresses compact disk as a medium, and LC can
request one copy of that, or two copies if it is the only version, and
can request copies of software, but that fails to address magazines or
books or anything like that which is in machinereadable form.

GIFFORD acknowledged the thorny nature of this issue, which he illustrated
with the example of the cumbersome process involved in putting a copy of a
scientific database on a LAN in LCs science reading room.  He also
acknowledged that LC needs help and could enlist the energies and talents
of Workshop participants in thinking through a number of these problems.

GIFFORD returned the discussion to getting the image and text people to
think through together where they want to go in the long term.  MYLONAS
conceded that her experience at the Pierce Symposium the previous week at
Georgetown University and this week at LC had forced her to reevaluate
her perspective on the usefulness of text as images.  MYLONAS framed the
issues in a series of questions:  How do we acquire machinereadable
text?  Do we take pictures of it and perform OCR on it later?  Is it
important to obtain very highquality images and text, etc.?
FLEISCHHAUER agreed with MYLONASs framing of strategic questions, adding
that a large institution such as LC probably has to do all of those
things at different times.  Thus, the trick is to exercise judgment.  The
Workshop had added to his and AMs considerations in making those
judgments.  Concerning future meetings or discussions, MYLONAS suggested
that screening priorities would be helpful.

WEIBEL opined that the diversity reflected in this group was a sign both
of the health and of the immaturity of the field, and more time would
have to pass before we convince one another concerning standards.

An exchange between MYLONAS and BATTIN clarified the point that the
driving force behind both the Perseus and the Cornell Xerox projects was
the preservation of knowledge for the future, not simply for particular
research use.  In the case of Perseus, MYLONAS said, the assumption was
that the texts would not be entered again into electronically readable
form.  SPERBERGMcQUEEN added that a scanned image would not serve as an
archival copy for purposes of preservation in the case of, say, the Bill
of Rights, in the sense that the scanned images are effectively the
archival copies for the Cornell mathematics books.


                                 


                          Appendix I:  PROGRAM



                                WORKSHOP
                                   ON
                               ELECTRONIC
                                  TEXTS



                             910 June 1992

                           Library of Congress
                            Washington, D.C.



    Supported by a Grant from the David and Lucile Packard Foundation


Tuesday, 9 June 1992

NATIONAL DEMONSTRATION LAB, ATRIUM, LIBRARY MADISON

8:30 AM   Coffee and Danish, registration

9:00 AM   Welcome

          Prosser Gifford, Director for Scholarly Programs, and Carl
             Fleischhauer, Coordinator, American Memory, Library of
             Congress

9:l5 AM   Session I.  Content in a New Form:  Who Will Use It and What
          Will They Do?

          Broad description of the range of electronic information.
          Characterization of who uses it and how it is or may be used.
          In addition to a look at scholarly uses, this session will
          include a presentation on use by students K12 and college
          and the general public.

          Moderator:  James Daly
          Avra Michelson, Archival Research and Evaluation Staff,
             National Archives and Records Administration Overview
          Susan H. Veccia, Team Leader, American Memory, User Evaluation,
             and
          Joanne Freeman, Associate Coordinator, American Memory, Library
             of Congress Beyond the scholar

10:30
11:00 AM  Break

11:00 AM  Session II.  Show and Tell.

          Each presentation to consist of a fifteenminute
          statementshow group discussion will follow lunch.

          Moderator:  Jacqueline Hess, Director, National Demonstration
             Lab

            1.  A classics project, stressing texts and text retrieval
                more than multimedia:  Perseus Project, Harvard
                University
                Elli Mylonas, Managing Editor

            2.  Other humanities projects employing the emerging norms of
                the Text Encoding Initiative TEI:  ChadwyckHealeys
                The English Poetry Full Text Database andor Patrologia
                Latina Database
                Eric M. Calaluca, Vice President, ChadwyckHealey, Inc.

            3.  American Memory
                Carl Fleischhauer, Coordinator, and
                Ricky Erway, Associate Coordinator, Library of Congress

            4.  Founding Fathers example from Packard Humanities
                Institute:  The Papers of George Washington, University
                of Virginia
                Dorothy Twohig, Managing Editor, andor
                David Woodley Packard

            5.  An electronic medical journal offering graphics and
                fulltext searchability:  The Online Journal of Current
                Clinical Trials, American Association for the Advancement
                of Science
                Maria L. Lebron, Managing Editor

            6.  A project that offers facsimile images of pages but omits
                searchable text:  Cornell math books
                Lynne K. Personius, Assistant Director, Cornell
                   Information Technologies for Scholarly Information
                   Sources, Cornell University

12:30 PM  Lunch  Dining Room A, Library Madison 620.  Exhibits
          available.

1:30 PM   Session II.  Show and Tell Contd..

3:00
3:30 PM   Break
