  You couldnt have wanted it much, said Alice living at the
bottom of the sea.

  I couldnt afford to learn it. said the Mock Turtle with a
sigh.  I only took the regular course.

  What was that? inquired Alice.

  Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with, the Mock
Turtle replied and then the different branches of Arithmetic
Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.

  I never heard of "Uglification," Alice ventured to say.  What
is it?

  The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise.  What!  Never
heard of uglifying! it exclaimed.  You know what to beautify
is, I suppose?

  Yes, said Alice doubtfully:  it meanstomakeanything
prettier.

  Well, then, the Gryphon went on, if you dont know what to
uglify is, you ARE a simpleton.

  Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about
it, so she turned to the Mock Turtle, and said What else had you
to learn?

  Well, there was Mystery, the Mock Turtle replied, counting
off the subjects on his flappers, Mystery, ancient and modern,
with Seaography:  then Drawlingthe Drawlingmaster was an old
congereel, that used to come once a week:  HE taught us
Drawling, Stretching, and Fainting in Coils.

  What was THAT like? said Alice.

  Well, I cant show it you myself, the Mock Turtle said:  Im
too stiff.  And the Gryphon never learnt it.

  Hadnt time, said the Gryphon:  I went to the Classics
master, though.  He was an old crab, HE was.

  I never went to him, the Mock Turtle said with a sigh:  he
taught Laughing and Grief, they used to say.

  So he did, so he did, said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn
and both creatures hid their faces in their paws.

  And how many hours a day did you do lessons? said Alice, in a
hurry to change the subject.

  Ten hours the first day, said the Mock Turtle: nine the
next, and so on.

  What a curious plan! exclaimed Alice.

  Thats the reason theyre called lessons, the Gryphon
remarked:  because they lessen from day to day.

  This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a
