  Youre a very poor speaker, said the King.

  Here one of the guineapigs cheered, and was immediately
suppressed by the officers of the court.  As that is rather a
hard word, I will just explain to you how it was done.  They had
a large canvas bag, which tied up at the mouth with strings:
into this they slipped the guineapig, head first, and then sat
upon it.

  Im glad Ive seen that done, thought Alice.  Ive so often
read in the newspapers, at the end of trials, "There was some
attempts at applause, which was immediately suppressed by the
officers of the court," and I never understood what it meant
till now.

  If thats all you know about it, you may stand down,
continued the King.

  I cant go no lower, said the Hatter:  Im on the floor, as
it is.

  Then you may SIT down, the King replied.

  Here the other guineapig cheered, and was suppressed.

  Come, that finished the guineapigs! thought Alice.  Now we
shall get on better.

  Id rather finish my tea, said the Hatter, with an anxious
look at the Queen, who was reading the list of singers.

  You may go, said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the
court, without even waiting to put his shoes on.

  and just take his head off outside, the Queen added to one
of the officers:  but the Hatter was out of sight before the
officer could get to the door.

  Call the next witness! said the King.

  The next witness was the Duchesss cook.  She carried the
pepperbox in her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before
she got into the court, by the way the people near the door began
sneezing all at once.

  Give your evidence, said the King.

  Shant, said the cook.

  The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said in a
low voice, Your Majesty must crossexamine THIS witness.

  Well, if I must, I must, the King said, with a melancholy
air, and, after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till
his eyes were nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, What
are tarts made of?

  Pepper, mostly, said the cook.

  Treacle, said a sleepy voice behind her.

  Collar that Dormouse, the Queen shrieked out.  Behead that
Dormouse!  Turn that Dormouse out of court!  Suppress him!  Pinch
him!  Off with his whiskers!

  For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the
Dormouse turned out, and, by the time they had settled down
