relevant to scholarship 2 the key trends in the use of currently
available technology by scholars in the nonscientific community and 3
the relationship between these two very distinct but interrelated trends.
The investment in understanding this relationship being made by
information providers, technologists, and public policy developers, as
well as by scholars themselves, seems to be pervasive and growing,
MICHELSON contended.  She drew on collaborative work with Jeff Rothenberg
on the scholarly use of technology.

MICHELSON sought to place the phenomenon of electronic texts within the
context of broader trends within information technology and scholarly
communication.  She argued that electronic texts are of most use to
researchers to the extent that the researchers working context i.e.,
their relevant bibliographic sources, collegial feedback, analytic tools,
notes, drafts, etc., along with their fields primary and secondary
sources, also is accessible in electronic form and can be integrated in
ways that are unique to the online environment.

Evaluation of the prospects for the use of electronic texts includes two
elements:  1 an examination of the ways in which researchers currently
are using electronic texts along with other electronic resources, and 2
an analysis of key information technology trends that are affecting the
longterm conduct of scholarly communication.  MICHELSON limited her
discussion of the use of electronic texts to the practices of humanists
and noted that the scientific community was outside the panels overview.

MICHELSON examined the nature of the current relationship of electronic
texts in particular, and electronic resources in general, to what she
maintained were, essentially, five processes of scholarly communication
in humanities research.  Researchers 1 identify sources, 2 communicate
with their colleagues, 3 interpret and analyze data, 4 disseminate
their research findings, and 5 prepare curricula to instruct the next
generation of scholars and students.  This examination would produce a
clearer understanding of the synergy among these five processes that
fuels the tendency of the use of electronic resources for one process to
stimulate its use for other processes of scholarly communication.

For the first process of scholarly communication, the identification of
sources, MICHELSON remarked the opportunity scholars now enjoy to
supplement traditional wordofmouth searches for sources among their
colleagues with new forms of electronic searching.  So, for example,
instead of having to visit the library, researchers are able to explore
descriptions of holdings in their offices.  Furthermore, if their own
institutions holdings prove insufficient, scholars can access more than
200 major American library catalogues over Internet, including the
universities of California, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin.
Direct access to the bibliographic databases offers intellectual
empowerment to scholars by presenting a comprehensive means of browsing
through libraries from their homes and offices at their convenience.

The second process of communication involves communication among
scholars.  Beyond the most common methods of communication, scholars are
using Email and a variety of new electronic communications formats
derived from it for further academic interchange.  Email exchanges are
growing at an astonishing rate, reportedly 15 percent a month.  They
currently constitute approximately half the traffic on research and
education networks.  Moreover, the global spread of Email has been so
rapid that it is now possible for American scholars to use it to
communicate with colleagues in close to 140 other countries.

Other new exchange formats created by scholars and operating on Internet
include more than 700 conferences, with about 80 percent of these devoted
to topics in the social sciences and humanities.  The rate of growth of
these scholarly electronic conferences also is astonishing.  From l990 to
l991, 200 new conferences were identified on Internet.  From October 1991
