wonder how many miles Ive fallen by this time? she said aloud.
I must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth.  Let
me see:  that would be four thousand miles down, I think for,
you see, Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her
lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was not a VERY good
opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to
listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over yes,
thats about the right distancebut then I wonder what Latitude
or Longitude Ive got to?  Alice had no idea what Latitude was,
or Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to
say.

  Presently she began again.  I wonder if I shall fall right
THROUGH the earth!  How funny itll seem to come out among the
people that walk with their heads downward!  The Antipathies, I
think she was rather glad there WAS no one listening, this
time, as it didnt sound at all the right word but I shall
have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know.
Please, Maam, is this New Zealand or Australia? and she tried
to curtsey as she spokefancy CURTSEYING as youre falling
through the air!  Do you think you could manage it?  And what
an ignorant little girl shell think me for asking!  No, itll
never do to ask:  perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.

  Down, down, down.  There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon
began talking again.  Dinahll miss me very much tonight, I
should think!  Dinah was the cat.  I hope theyll remember
her saucer of milk at teatime.  Dinah my dear!  I wish you were
down here with me!  There are no mice in the air, Im afraid, but
you might catch a bat, and thats very like a mouse, you know.
But do cats eat bats, I wonder?  And here Alice began to get
rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of
way, Do cats eat bats?  Do cats eat bats? and sometimes, Do
bats eat cats? for, you see, as she couldnt answer either
question, it didnt much matter which way she put it.  She felt
that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she
was walking hand in hand with Dinah, and saying to her very
earnestly, Now, Dinah, tell me the truth:  did you ever eat a
bat? when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of
sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

  Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a
moment:  she looked up, but it was all dark overhead before her
was another long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in
sight, hurrying down it.  There was not a moment to be lost:
away went Alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it
say, as it turned a corner, Oh my ears and whiskers, how late
its getting!  She was close behind it when she turned the
corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen:  she found
herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps
hanging from the roof.

  There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked
and when Alice had been all the way down one side and up the
other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle,
wondering how she was ever to get out again.

  Suddenly she came upon a little threelegged table, all made of
solid glass there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key,
and Alices first thought was that it might belong to one of the
doors of the hall but, alas! either the locks were too large, or
