So much delights me, as those graceful acts,
Those thousand decencies, that daily flow
From all her words and actions mixed with love
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned
Union of mind, or in us both one soul
Harmony to behold in wedded pair
More grateful than harmonious sound to the ear.
Yet these subject not I to thee disclose
What inward thence I feel, not therefore foiled,
Who meet with various objects, from the sense
Variously representing yet, still free,
Approve the best, and follow what I approve.
To love, thou blamest me not for Love, thou sayest,
Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask:
Love not the heavenly Spirits, and how their love
Express they? by looks only? or do they mix
Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch?
To whom the Angel, with a smile that glowed
Celestial rosy red, Loves proper hue,
Answered.  Let it suffice thee that thou knowest
Us happy, and without love no happiness.
Whatever pure thou in the body enjoyest,
And pure thou wert created we enjoy
In eminence and obstacle find none
Of membrane, joint, or limb, exclusive bars
Easier than air with air, if Spirits embrace,
Total they mix, union of pure with pure
Desiring, nor restrained conveyance need,
As flesh to mix with flesh, or soul with soul.
But I can now no more the parting sun
Beyond the Earths green Cape and verdant Isles
Hesperian sets, my signal to depart.
Be strong, live happy, and love!  But, first of all,
Him, whom to love is to obey, and keep
His great command take heed lest passion sway
Thy judgement to do aught, which else free will
Would not admit: thine, and of all thy sons,
The weal or woe in thee is placed beware!
I in thy persevering shall rejoice,
And all the Blest:  Stand fastto stand or fall
Free in thine own arbitrement it lies.
Perfect within, no outward aid require
And all temptation to transgress repel.
So saying, he arose whom Adam thus
Followed with benediction.  Since to part,
Go, heavenly guest, ethereal Messenger,
Sent from whose sovran goodness I adore!
Gentle to me and affable hath been
Thy condescension, and shall be honoured ever
With grateful memory:  Thou to mankind
Be good and friendly still, and oft return!
So parted they the Angel up to Heaven
From the thick shade, and Adam to his bower.



Book IX


No more of talk where God or Angel guest
With Man, as with his friend, familiar usd,
To sit indulgent, and with him partake
Rural repast permitting him the while
Venial discourse unblamd. I now must change
Those notes to tragick foul distrust, and breach
Disloyal on the part of Man, revolt,
And disobedience: on the part of Heaven
