JAQUES	Which is he that killed the deer?

A Lord	Sir, it was I.

JAQUES	Lets present him to the duke, like a Roman
	conqueror and it would do well to set the deers
	horns upon his head, for a branch of victory. Have
	you no song, forester, for this purpose?

Forester	Yes, sir.

JAQUES	Sing it: tis no matter how it be in tune, so it
	make noise enough.

	SONG.
Forester	What shall he have that killd the deer?
	His leather skin and horns to wear.
	Then sing him home

	The rest shall bear this burden

	Take thou no scorn to wear the horn
	It was a crest ere thou wast born:
	Thy fathers father wore it,
	And thy father bore it:
	The horn, the horn, the lusty horn
	Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT IV



SCENE III	The forest.


	Enter ROSALIND and CELIA

ROSALIND	How say you now? Is it not past two oclock? and
	here much Orlando!

CELIA	I warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain, he
	hath taen his bow and arrows and is gone forth to
	sleep. Look, who comes here.

	Enter SILVIUS

SILVIUS	My errand is to you, fair youth
	My gentle Phebe bid me give you this:
	I know not the contents but, as I guess
	By the stern brow and waspish action
	Which she did use as she was writing of it,
	It bears an angry tenor: pardon me:
	I am but as a guiltless messenger.

ROSALIND	Patience herself would startle at this letter
	And play the swaggerer bear this, bear all:
	She says I am not fair, that I lack manners
	She calls me proud, and that she could not love me,
	Were man as rare as phoenix. Ods my will!
	Her love is not the hare that I do hunt:
	Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well,
	This is a letter of your own device.

SILVIUS	No, I protest, I know not the contents:
	Phebe did write it.

ROSALIND	Come, come, you are a fool
	And turnd into the extremity of love.
	I saw her hand: she has a leathern hand.
	A freestonecolourd hand I verily did think
	That her old gloves were on, but twas her hands:
	She has a huswifes hand but thats no matter:
	I say she never did invent this letter
	This is a mans invention and his hand.

SILVIUS	Sure, it is hers.

ROSALIND	Why, tis a boisterous and a cruel style.
	A style forchallengers why, she defies me,
	Like Turk to Christian: womens gentle brain
	Could not drop forth such giantrude invention
	Such Ethiope words, blacker in their effect
	Than in their countenance. Will you hear the letter?

SILVIUS	So please you, for I never heard it yet
	Yet heard too much of Phebes cruelty.

ROSALIND	She Phebes me: mark how the tyrant writes.

	Reads

	Art thou god to shepherd turnd,
	That a maidens heart hath burnd?
	Can a woman rail thus?

SILVIUS	Call you this railing?

ROSALIND	Reads

	Why, thy godhead laid apart,
	Warrst thou with a womans heart?
	Did you ever hear such railing?
	Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
	That could do no vengeance to me.
	Meaning me a beast.
	If the scorn of your bright eyne
	Have power to raise such love in mine,
	Alack, in me what strange effect
	Would they work in mild aspect!
	Whiles you chid me, I did love
	How then might your prayers move!
	He that brings this love to thee
	Little knows this love in me:
	And by him seal up thy mind
	Whether that thy youth and kind
	Will the faithful offer take
	Of me and all that I can make
	Or else by him my love deny,
	And then Ill study how to die.

SILVIUS	Call you this chiding?

CELIA	Alas, poor shepherd!

ROSALIND	Do you pity him? no, he deserves no pity. Wilt
	thou love such a woman? What, to make thee an
	instrument and play false strains upon thee! not to
	be endured! Well, go your way to her, for I see
	love hath made thee a tame snake, and say this to
	her: that if she love me, I charge her to love
	thee if she will not, I will never have her unless
	thou entreat for her. If you be a true lover,
	hence, and not a word for here comes more company.

	Exit SILVIUS

	Enter OLIVER

OLIVER	Good morrow, fair ones: pray you, if you know,
	Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
	A sheepcote fenced about with olive trees?

CELIA	West of this place, down in the neighbour bottom:
	The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
	Left on your right hand brings you to the place.
	But at this hour the house doth keep itself
	Theres none within.

OLIVER	If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
	Then should I know you by description
	Such garments and such years: The boy is fair,
	Of female favour, and bestows himself
	Like a ripe sister: the woman low
	And browner than her brother. Are not you
	The owner of the house I did inquire for?

CELIA	It is no boast, being askd, to say we are.

OLIVER	Orlando doth commend him to you both,
	And to that youth he calls his Rosalind
	He sends this bloody napkin. Are you he?

ROSALIND	I am: what must we understand by this?

OLIVER	Some of my shame if you will know of me
	What man I am, and how, and why, and where
	This handkercher was staind.

CELIA	I pray you, tell it.

OLIVER	When last the young Orlando parted from you
	He left a promise to return again
	Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,
	Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
	Lo, what befell! he threw his eye aside,
	And mark what object did present itself:
	Under an oak, whose boughs were mossd with age
	And high top bald with dry antiquity,
	A wretched ragged man, oergrown with hair,
	Lay sleeping on his back: about his neck
	A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself,
	Who with her head nimble in threats approachd
	The opening of his mouth but suddenly,
	Seeing Orlando, it unlinkd itself,
	And with indented glides did slip away
	Into a bush: under which bushs shade
	A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
	Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch,
	When that the sleeping man should stir for tis
	The royal disposition of that beast
	To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead:
	This seen, Orlando did approach the man
	And found it was his brother, his elder brother.

CELIA	O, I have heard him speak of that same brother
	And he did render him the most unnatural
	That lived amongst men.

OLIVER	And well he might so do,
	For well I know he was unnatural.

ROSALIND	But, to Orlando: did he leave him there,
	ULLW GL GSV HFXPW ZMW SFMTIB ORLMVHH?

LOREVI	GDRXV WRW SV GFIM SRH YZXP ZMW KFIKLHVW HL
	YFG PRMWMVHH, MLYOVI VEVI GSZM IVEVMTV,
	ZMW MZGFIV, HGILMTVI GSZM SRH QFHG LXXZHRLM,
	NZWV SRN TREV YZGGOV GL GSV ORLMVHH,
	DSL JFRXPOB UVOO YVULIV SRN: RM DSRXS SFIGORMT
	UILN NRHVIZYOV HOFNYVI R ZDZPVW.

XVORZ	ZIV BLF SRH YILGSVI?
