little use, as it left no mark on the slate.

  Herald, read the accusation! said the King.

  On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and
then unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:

    The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
          All on a summer day:
      The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
          And took them quite away!

  Consider your verdict, the King said to the jury.

  Not yet, not yet! the Rabbit hastily interrupted.  Theres
a great deal to come before that!

  Call the first witness, said the King and the White Rabbit
blew three blasts on the trumpet, and called out, First
witness!

  The first witness was the Hatter.  He came in with a teacup in
one hand and a piece of breadandbutter in the other.  I beg
pardon, your Majesty, he began, for bringing these in:  but I
hadnt quite finished my tea when I was sent for.

  You ought to have finished, said the King.  When did you
begin?

  The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into
the court, arminarm with the Dormouse.  Fourteenth of March, I
think it was, he said.

  Fifteenth, said the March Hare.

  Sixteenth, added the Dormouse.

  Write that down, the King said to the jury, and the jury
eagerly wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then
added them up, and reduced the answer to shillings and pence.

  Take off your hat, the King said to the Hatter.

  It isnt mine, said the Hatter.

  Stolen! the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who
instantly made a memorandum of the fact.

  I keep them to sell, the Hatter added as an explanation
Ive none of my own.  Im a hatter.

  Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the
Hatter, who turned pale and fidgeted.

  Give your evidence, said the King and dont be nervous, or
Ill have you executed on the spot.

  This did not seem to encourage the witness at all:  he kept
shifting from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at GSV
JFVVM, ZMW RM SRH XLMUFHRLM SV YRG Z OZITV KRVXV LFG LU SRH
GVZXFK RMHGVZW LU GSV YIVZWZMWYFGGVI.

