business with a workstation focused on conversion and allowing POB to
explore user access 2 movement into a highervolume conversion with
networkaccessible storage and multiple access stations and 3 a
highvolume conversion, fullcapacity storage, and multiple browsing
stations distributed throughout the campus.

The costs proposed for startup assumed the existence of the Yale network
and its two DocuTech image printers.  Other startup costs are estimated
at 1 million over the three phases.  At the end of the project, the annual
operating costs estimated primarily for the software and hardware proposed
come to about 60,000, but these exclude costs for labor needed in the
conversion process, network and printer usage, and facilities management.

Finally, the selection process produced for Yale a more sophisticated
view of the imaging markets:  the management of complex documents in
image form is not a preservation problem, not a library problem, but a
general problem in a broad, general industry.  Preservation materials are
useful for developing that market because of the qualities of the
material.  For example, much of it is out of copyright.  The resolution
of key issues such as the quality of scanning and image browsing also
will affect development of that market.

The technology is readily available but changing rapidly.  In this
context of rapid change, several factors affect quality and cost, to
which POB intends to pay particular attention, for example, the various
levels of resolution that can be achieved.  POB believes it can bring
resolution up to 600 dpi, but an interpolation process from 400 to 600 is
more likely.  The variation quality in microfilm will prove to be a
highly important factor.  POB may reexamine the standards used to film in
the first place by looking at this process as a followon to microfilming.

Other important factors include:  the techniques available to the
operator for handling material, the ways of integrating quality control
into the digitizing work flow, and a work flow that includes indexing and
storage.  POBs requirement was to be able to deal with quality control
at the point of scanning.  Thus, thanks to Xerox, POB anticipates having
a mechanism which will allow it not only to scan in batch form, but to
review the material as it goes through the scanner and control quality
from the outset.

The standards for measuring quality and costs depend greatly on the uses
of the material, including subsequent OCR, storage, printing, and
browsing.  But especially at issue for POB is the facility for browsing.
This facility, WATERS said, is perhaps the weakest aspect of imaging
technology and the most in need of development.

A variety of factors affect the usability of complex documents in image
form, among them:  1 the ability of the system to handle the full range
of document types, not just monographs but serials, multipart
monographs, and manuscripts 2 the location of the database of record
for bibliographic information about the image document, which POB wants
to enter once and in the most useful place, the online catalog 3 a
document identifier for referencing the bibliographic information in one
place and the images in another 4 the technique for making the basic
internal structure of the document accessible to the reader and finally,
5 the physical presentation on the CRT of those documents.  POB is ready
to complete this phase now.  One last decision involves deciding which
material to scan.

                                 


DISCUSSION  TIFF files constitute de facto standard  NARAs experience
with image XLMEVIHRLM HLUGDZIV ZMW GVCG XLMEVIHRLM  IUX 1314 
XLMHRWVIZYOV UOFC XLMXVIMRMT ZEZROZYOV SZIWDZIV ZMW HLUGDZIV HLOFGRLMH 
MZO GSILFTSKFG IZGV WFIRMT HXZMMRMT  DRMWLD NZMZTVNVMG JFVHGRLMH 

