communication represents a viable indicator of the prospects for
electronic texts.

The discussion of current practice is balanced by an analysis of key
trends in the scholarly use of information technology.  These include the
trends toward enduser computing and connectivity, which provide a
framework for forecasting the use of electronic texts through this
millennium.  The presentation concludes with a summary of the ways in
which the nonscientific scholarly community can be expected to use
electronic texts, and the implications of that use for information
providers.

Susan VECCIA and Joanne FREEMAN    Electronic Archives for the Public:
                                   Use of American Memory in Public and
                                   School Libraries

This joint discussion focuses on nonscholarly applications of electronic
library materials, specifically addressing use of the Library of Congress
American Memory AM program in a small number of public and school
libraries throughout the United States.  AM consists of selected Library
of Congress primary archival materials, stored on optical media
CDROMvideodisc, and presented with little or no editing.  Many
collections are accompanied by electronic introductions and users guides
offering background information and historical context.  Collections
represent a variety of formats including photographs, graphic arts,
motion pictures, recorded sound, music, broadsides and manuscripts,
books, and pamphlets.

In 1991, the Library of Congress began a nationwide evaluation of AM in
different types of institutions.  Test sites include public libraries,
elementary and secondary school libraries, college and university
libraries, state libraries, and special libraries.  Susan VECCIA and
Joanne FREEMAN will discuss their observations on the use of AM by the
nonscholarly community, using evidence gleaned from this ongoing
evaluation effort.

VECCIA will comment on the overall goals of the evaluation project, and
the types of public and school libraries included in this study.  Her
comments on nonscholarly use of AM will focus on the public library as a
cultural and community institution, often bridging the gap between formal
and informal education.  FREEMAN will discuss the use of AM in school
libraries.  Use by students and teachers has revealed some broad
questions about the use of electronic resources, as well as definite
benefits gained by the "nonscholar."  Topics will include the problem of
grasping content and context in an electronic environment, the stumbling
blocks created by "new" technologies, and the unique skills and interests
awakened through use of electronic resources.

SESSION II

Elli MYLONAS             The Perseus Project:  Interactive Sources and
                         Studies in Classical Greece

The Perseus Project 5 has just released Perseus 1.0, the first publicly
available version of its hypertextual database of multimedia materials on
classical Greece.  Perseus is designed to be used by a wide audience,
comprised of readers at the student and scholar levels.  As such, it must
be able to locate information using different strategies, and it must
contain enough detail to serve the different needs of its users.  In
addition, it must be delivered so that it is affordable to its target
audience.  These problems and the solutions we XSLHV ZIV WVHXIRYVW RM
NBOLMZH, "ZM RMGVIUZXV GL XOZHHRXZO TIVVP XRERORAZGRLM," QZHRH 43:2,
NZIXS 1992.

RM LIWVI GL ZXSRVEV RGH LYQVXGREV, GSV KILQVXG HGZUU WVXRWVW GL NZPV Z
