That rest or intermission none I find.
Before mine eyes in opposition sits
Grim Death, my son and foe, who set them on,
And me, his parent, would full soon devour
For want of other prey, but that he knows
His end with mine involved, and knows that I
Should prove a bitter morsel, and his bane,
Whenever that shall be: so Fate pronounced.
But thou, O father, I forewarn thee, shun
His deadly arrow neither vainly hope
To be invulnerable in those bright arms,
Through tempered heavenly for that mortal dint,
Save he who reigns above, none can resist."
  She finished and the subtle Fiend his lore
Soon learned, now milder, and thus answered smooth:
  "Dear daughtersince thou claimst me for thy sire,
And my fair son here showst me, the dear pledge
Of dalliance had with thee in Heaven, and joys
Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change
Befallen us unforeseen, unthoughtofknow,
I come no enemy, but to set free
From out this dark and dismal house of pain
Both him and thee, and all the heavenly host
Of Spirits that, in our just pretences armed,
Fell with us from on high. From them I go
This uncouth errand sole, and one for all
Myself expose, with lonely steps to tread
Th unfounded Deep, and through the void immense
To search, with wandering quest, a place foretold
Should beand, by concurring signs, ere now
Created vast and rounda place of bliss
In the purlieus of Heaven and therein placed
A race of upstart creatures, to supply
Perhaps our vacant room, though more removed,
Lest Heaven, surcharged with potent multitude,
Might hap to move new broils. Be this, or aught
Than this more secret, now designed, I haste
To know and, this once known, shall soon return,
And bring ye to the place where thou and Death
Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen
Wing silently the buxom air, embalmed
With odours. There ye shall be fed and filled
Immeasurably all things shall be your prey."
  He ceased for both seemed highly pleased, and Death
Grinned horrible a ghastly smile, to hear
His famine should be filled, and blessed his maw
Destined to that good hour. No less rejoiced
His mother bad, and thus bespake her sire:
  "The key of this infernal Pit, by due
And by command of Heavens allpowerful King,
I keep, by him forbidden to unlock
These adamantine gates against all force
Death ready stands to interpose his dart,
Fearless to be oermatched by living might.
But what owe I to his commands above,
Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down
Into this gloom of Tartarus profound,
To sit in hateful office here confined,
Inhabitant of Heaven and heavenly born
Here in perpetual agony and pain,
With terrors and with clamours compassed round
Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed?
Thou art my father, thou NB ZFGSLI, GSLF
NB YVRMT TZEHG NV DSLN HSLFOW R LYVB
YFG GSVV? DSLN ULOOLD? GSLF DROG YIRMT NV HLLM
GL GSZG MVD DLIOW LU ORTSG ZMW YORHH, ZNLMT
