Myself the total crime, or to accuse
My other self, the partner of my life
Whose failing, while her faith to me remains,
I should conceal, and not expose to blame
By my complaint: but strict necessity
Subdues me, and calamitous constraint
Lest on my head both sin and punishment,
However insupportable, be all
Devolved though should I hold my peace, yet thou
Wouldst easily detect what I conceal.
This Woman, whom thou madest to be my help,
And gavest me as thy perfect gift, so good,
So fit, so acceptable, so divine,
That from her hand I could suspect no ill,
And what she did, whatever in itself,
Her doing seemed to justify the deed
She gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
To whom the Sovran Presence thus replied.
Was she thy God, that her thou didst obey
Before his voice? or was she made thy guide,
Superiour, or but equal, that to her
Thou didst resign thy manhood, and the place
Wherein God set thee above her made of thee,
And for thee, whose perfection far excelled
Hers in all real dignity?  Adorned
She was indeed, and lovely, to attract
Thy love, not thy subjection and her gifts
Were such, as under government well seemed
Unseemly to bear rule which was thy part
And person, hadst thou known thyself aright.
So having said, he thus to Eve in few.
Say, Woman, what is this which thou hast done?
To whom sad Eve, with shame nigh overwhelmed,
Confessing soon, yet not before her Judge
Bold or loquacious, thus abashed replied.
The Serpent me beguiled, and I did eat.
Which when the Lord God heard, without delay
To judgement he proceeded on the accused
Serpent, though brute unable to transfer
The guilt on him, who made him instrument
Of mischief, and polluted from the end
Of his creation justly then accursed,
As vitiated in nature:  More to know
Concerned not Man, since he no further knew
Nor altered his offence yet God at last
To Satan first in sin his doom applied,
Though in mysterious terms, judged as then best:
And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall.
Because thou hast done this, thou art accursed
Above all cattle, each beast of the field
Upon thy belly groveling thou shalt go,
And dust shalt eat all the days of thy life.
Between thee and the woman I will put
Enmity, and betwVVM GSRMV ZMW SVI HVVW
SVI HVVW HSZOO YIFRHV GSB SVZW, GSLF YIFRHV SRH SVVO.
HL HKZPV GSRH LIZXOV, GSVM EVIRURVW
DSVM QVHFH, HLM LU NZIB, HVXLMW VEV,
HZD HZGZM UZOO, ORPV ORTSGMRMT, WLDM UILN SVZEVM,
KIRMXV LU GSV ZRI GSVM, IRHRMT UILN SRH TIZEV
