
CORIN	Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new mistresss brother.

	Enter ROSALIND, with a paper, reading

ROSALIND	     From the east to western Ind,
	No jewel is like Rosalind.
	Her worth, being mounted on the wind,
	Through all the world bears Rosalind.
	All the pictures fairest lined
	Are but black to Rosalind.
	Let no fair be kept in mind
	But the fair of Rosalind.

TOUCHSTONE	Ill rhyme you so eight years together, dinners and
	suppers and sleepinghours excepted: it is the
	right butterwomens rank to market.

ROSALIND	Out, fool!

TOUCHSTONE	For a taste:
	If a hart do lack a hind,
	Let him seek out Rosalind.
	If the cat will after kind,
	So be sure will Rosalind.
	Winter garments must be lined,
	So must slender Rosalind.
	They that reap must sheaf and bind
	Then to cart with Rosalind.
	Sweetest nut hath sourest rind,
	Such a nut is Rosalind.
	He that sweetest rose will find
	Must find loves prick and Rosalind.
	This is the very false gallop of verses: why do you
	infect yourself with them?

ROSALIND	Peace, you dull fool! I found them on a tree.

TOUCHSTONE	Truly, the tree yields bad fruit.

ROSALIND	Ill graff it with you, and then I shall graff it
	with a medlar: then it will be the earliest fruit
	i the country for youll be rotten ere you be half
	ripe, and thats the right virtue of the medlar.

TOUCHSTONE	You have said but whether wisely or no, let the
	forest judge.

	Enter CELIA, with a writing

ROSALIND	Peace! Here comes my sister, reading: stand aside.

CELIA	Reads

	Why should this a desert be?
	For it is unpeopled? No:
	Tongues Ill hang on every tree,
	That shall civil sayings show:
	Some, how brief the life of man
	Runs his erring pilgrimage,
	That the stretching of a span
	Buckles in his sum of age
	Some, of violated vows
	Twixt the souls of friend and friend:
	But upon the fairest boughs,
	Or at every sentence end,
	Will I Rosalinda write,
	Teaching all that read to know
	The quintessence of every sprite
	Heaven would in little show.
	Therefore Heaven Nature charged
	That one body should be filld
	With all graces wideenlarged:
	Nature presently distilld
	Helens cheek, but not her heart,
	Cleopatras majesty,
	Atalantas better part,
	Sad Lucretias modesty.
	Thus Rosalind of many parts
	By heavenly synod was devised,
	Of many faces, eyes and hearts,
	To have the touches dearest prized.
	Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
	And I to live and die her slave.

ROSALIND	O most gentle pulpiter! what tedious homily of love
	have you wearied your parishioners withal, and never
	cried Have patience, good people!

CELIA	How now! back, friends! Shepherd, go off a little.
	Go with him, sirrah.

TOUCHSTONE	Come, shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat
	though not with bag and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.

	Exeunt CORIN and TOUCHSTONE

CELIA	Didst thou hear these verses?

ROSALIND	O, yes, I heard them all, and more too for some of
	them had in them more feet than the verses would bear.

CELIA	Thats no matter: the feet might bear the verses.

ROSALIND	Ay, but the feet were lame and could not bear
	themselves without the verse and therefore stood
	lamely in the verse.

CELIA	But didst thou hear without wondering how thy name
	should be hanged and carved upon these trees?

ROSALIND	I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder
	before you came for look here what I found on a
	palmtree. I was never so berhymed since
	Pythagoras time, that I was an Irish rat, which I
	can hardly remember.

CELIA	Trow you who hath done this?

ROSALIND	Is it a man?

CELIA	And a chain, that you once wore, about his neck.
	Change you colour?

ROSALIND	I prithee, who?

CELIA	O Lord, Lord! it is a hard matter for friends to
	meet but mountains may be removed with earthquakes
	and so encounter.

ROSALIND	Nay, but who is it?

CELIA	Is it possible?

ROSALIND	Nay, I prithee now with most petitionary vehemence,
	tell me who it is.

CELIA	O wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful
	wonderful! and yet again wonderful, and after that,
	out of all hooping!

ROSALIND	Good my complexion! dost thou think, though I am
	caparisoned like a man, I have a doublet and hose in
	my disposition? One inch of delay more is a
	Southsea of discovery I prithee, tell me who is it
	quickly, and speak apace. I would thou couldst
	stammer, that thou mightst pour this concealed man
	out of thy mouth, as wine comes out of a narrow
	mouthed bottle, either too much at once, or none at
	all. I prithee, take the cork out of thy mouth that
	may drink thy tidings.

CELIA	So you may put a man in your belly.

ROSALIND	Is he of Gods making? What manner of man? Is his
	head worth a hat, or his chin worth a beard?

CELIA	Nay, he hath but a little beard.

ROSALIND	Why, God will send more, if the man will be
	thankful: let me stay the growth of his beard, if
	thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.

CELIA	It is young Orlando, that tripped up the wrestlers
	heels and your heart both in an instant.

ROSALIND	Nay, but the devil take mocking: speak, sad brow and
	true maid.

CELIA	I faith, coz, tis he.

ROSALIND	Orlando?

CELIA	Orlando.

ROSALIND	Alas the day! what shall I do with my doublet and
	hose? What did he when thou sawest him? What said
	he? How looked he? Wherein went he? What makes
	him here? Did he ask for me? Where remains he?
	How parted he with thee? and when shalt thou see
	him again? Answer me in one word.

CELIA	You must borrow me Gargantuas mouth first: tis a
	word too great for any mouth of this ages size. To
	say ay and no to these particulars is more than to
	answer in a catechism.

ROSALIND	But doth he know that I am in this forest and in
	mans apparel? Looks he as freshly as he did the
	day he wrestled?

CELIA	It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the
	propositions of a lover but take a taste of my
	finding him, and relish it with good observance.
	I found him under a tree, like a dropped acorn.

ROSALIND	It may well be called Joves tree, when it drops
	forth such fruit.

CELIA	Give me audience, good madam.

ROSALIND	Proceed.

CELIA	There lay he, stretched along, like a wounded knight.

ROSALIND	Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well
	becomes the ground.

CELIA	Cry holla to thy tongue, I prithee it curvets
	unseasonably. He was furnished like a hunter.

ROSALIND	O, ominous! he comes to kill my heart.

CELIA	I would sing my song without a burden: thou bringest
	me out of tune.

ROSALIND	Do you not know I am a woman? when I think, I must
	speak. Sweet, say on.

CELIA	You bring me out. Soft! comes he not here?

	Enter ORLANDO and JAQUES

ROSALIND	Tis he: slink by, and note him.

JAQUES	I thank you for your company but, good faith, I had
	as lief have been myself alone.

ORLANDO	And so had I but yet, for fashion sake, I thank you
	too for your society.

JAQUES	God be wi you: lets meet as little as we can.

ORLANDO	I do desire we may be better strangers.

JAQUES	I pray you, mar no more trees with writing
	lovesongs in their barks.

ORLANDO	I pray you, mar no more of my verses with reading
	them illfavouredly.

JAQUES	Rosalind is your loves name?

ORLANDO	Yes, just.

JAQUES	I do not like her name.

ORLANDO	There was no thought of pleasing you when she was
	christened.

JAQUES	What stature is she of?

ORLANDO	Just as high as my heart.

JAQUES	You are full of pretty answers. Have you not been
	acquainted with goldsmiths wives, and conned them
	out of rings?

ORLANDO	Not so but I answer you right painted cloth, from
	whence you have studied your questions.

JAQUES	You have a nimble wit: I think twas made of
	Atalantas heels. Will you sit down with me? and
	we two will rail against our mistress the world and
	all our misery.

ORLANDO	I will chide no breather in the world but myself,
	against whom I know most faults.

JAQUES	The worst fault you have is to be in love.

ORLANDO	Tis a fault I will not change for your best virtue.
	I am weary of you.

JAQUES	By my troth, I was seeking for a fool when I found
	you.

ORLANDO	He is drowned in the brook: look but in, and you
	shall see him.

JAQUES	There I shall see mine own figure.

ORLANDO	Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher.

JAQUES	Ill tarry no longer with you: farewell, good
	Signior Love.

ORLANDO	I am glad of your departure: adieu, good Monsieur
	Melancholy.

	Exit JAQUES

ROSALIND	Aside to CELIA  I will speak to him, like a saucy
	lackey and under that habit play the knave with him.
	Do you hear, forester?

ORLANDO	Very well: what would you?

ROSALIND	I pray you, what ist oclock?

ORLANDO	You should ask me what time o day: theres no clock
	in the forest.

ROSALIND	Then there is no true lover in the forest else
	sighing every minute and groaning every hour would
	detect the lazy foot of Time as well as a clock.

ORLANDO	And why not the swift foot of Time? had not that
	been as proper?

ROSALIND	By no means, sir: Time travels in divers paces with
	divers persons. Ill tell you who Time ambles
	withal, who Time trots withal, who Time gallops
	withal and who he stands still withal.

ORLANDO	I prithee, who doth he trot withal?

ROSALIND	Marry, he trots hard with a young maid between the
	contract of her marriage and the day it is
	solemnized: if the interim be but a sennight,
	Times pace is so hard that it seems the length of
	seven year.

ORLANDO	Who ambles Time withal?

ROSALIND	With a priest that lacks Latin and a rich man that
	hath not the gout, for the one sleeps easily because
	he cannot study, and the other lives merrily because
	he feels no pain, the one lacking the burden of lean
	and wasteful learning, the other knowing no burden
	of heavy tedious penury these Time ambles withal.

ORLANDO	Who doth he gallop withal?

ROSALIND	With a thief to the gallows, for though he go as
	softly as foot can fall, he thinks himself too soon there.

ORLANDO	Who stays it still withal?

ROSALIND	With lawyers in the vacation, for they sleep between
	term and term and then they perceive not how Time moves.

ORLANDO	Where dwell you, pretty youth?

ROSALIND	With this shepherdess, my sister here in the
	skirts of the forest, like fringe upon a petticoat.

ORLANDO	Are you native of this place?

ROSALIND	As the cony that you see dwell where she is kindled.

ORLANDO	Your accent is something finer than you could
	purchase in so removed a dwelling.

ROSALIND	I have been told so of many: but indeed an old
	religious uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was
	in his youth an inland man one that knew courtship
	too well, for there he fell in love. I have heard
	him read many lectures against it, and I thank God
	I am not a woman, to be touched with so many
	giddy offences as he hath generally taxed their
	whole sex withal.

ORLANDO	Can you remember any of the principal evils that he
	laid to the charge of women?

ROSALIND	There were none principal they were all like one
	another as halfpence are, every one fault seeming
	monstrous till his fellow fault came to match it.

ORLANDO	I prithee, recount some of them.

ROSALIND	No, I will not cast away my physic but on those that
	are sick. There is a man haunts the forest, that
	abuses our young plants with carving Rosalind on
	their barks hangs odes upon hawthorns and elegies
	on brambles, all, forsooth, deifying the name of
	Rosalind: if I could meet that fancymonger I would
	give him some good counsel, for he seems to have the
	quotidian of love upon him.

ORLANDO	I am he that is so loveshaked: I pray you tell me
	your remedy.

ROSALIND	There is none of my uncles marks upon you: he
	taught me how to know a man in love in which cage
	of rushes I am sure you are not prisoner.

ORLANDO	What were his marks?

ROSALIND	A lean cheek, which you have not, a blue eye and
	sunken, which you have not, an unquestionable
	spirit, which you have not, a beard neglected,
	which you have not but I pardon you for that, for
	simply your having in beard is a younger brothers
	revenue: then your hose should be ungartered, your
	bonnet unbanded, your sleeve unbuttoned, your shoe
	untied and every thing about you demonstrating a
	careless desolation but you are no such man you
	are rather pointdevice in your accoutrements as
	loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other.

ORLANDO	Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I love.

ROSALIND	Me believe it! you may as soon make her that you
	love believe it which, I warrant, she is apter to
	do than to confess she does: that is one of the
	points in the which women still give the lie to
	their consciences. But, in good sooth, are you he
	that hangs the verses on the trees, wherein Rosalind
	is so admired?

ORLANDO	I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of
	Rosalind, I am that he, that unfortunate he.

ROSALIND	But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?

ORLANDO	Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.

ROSALIND	Love is merely a madness, and, I tell you, deserves
	as well a dark house and a whip as madmen do: and
	the reason why they are not so punished and cured
	is, that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers
	are in love too. Yet I profess curing it by counsel.

ORLANDO	Did you ever cure any so?

ROSALIND	Yes, one, and in this manner. He was to imagine me
	his love, his mistress and I set him every day to
	woo me: at which time would I, being but a moonish
	youth, grieve, be effeminate, changeable, longing
	and liking, proud, fantastical, apish, shallow,
	inconstant, full of tears, full of smiles, for every
	passion something and for no passion truly any
	thing, as boys and women are for the most part
	cattle of this colour would now like him, now loathe
	him then entertain him, then forswear him now weep
	for him, then spit at him that I drave my suitor
	from his mad humour of love to a living humour of
	madness which was, to forswear the full stream of
	the world, and to live in a nook merely monastic.
	And thus I cured him and this way will I take upon
	me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheeps
	heart, that there shall not be one spot of love int.

ORLANDO	I would not be cured, youth.

ROSALIND	I would cure you, if you would but call me Rosalind
	and come every day to my cote and woo me.

ORLANDO	Now, by the faith of my love, I will: tell me
	where it is.

ROSALIND	Go with me to it and Ill show it you and by the way
	you shall tell me where in the forest you live.
	Will you go?

ORLANDO	With all my heart, good youth.

ROSALIND	Nay you must call me Rosalind. Come, sister, will you go?

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE III	The forest.


	Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY JAQUES behind

TOUCHSTONE	Come apace, good Audrey: I will fetch up your
	goats, Audrey. And how, Audrey? am I the man yet?
	doth my simple feature content you?

AUDREY	Your features! Lord warrant us! what features!

TOUCHSTONE	I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most
	capricious poet, honest Ovid, was among the Goths.

JAQUES	Aside  O knowledge illinhabited, worse than Jove
	in a thatched house!

TOUCHSTONE	When a mans verses cannot be understood, nor a
	mans good wit seconded with the forward child
	Understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a
	great reckoning in a little room. Truly, I would
	the gods had made thee poetical.

AUDREY	I do not know what poetical is: is it honest in
	deed and word? is it a true thing?

TOUCHSTONE	No, truly for the truest poetry is the most
	feigning and lovers are given to poetry, and what
	they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do feign.

AUDREY	Do you wish then that the gods had made me poetical?

TOUCHSTONE	I do, truly for thou swearest to me thou art
	honest: now, if thou wert a poet, I might have some
	hope thou didst feign.

AUDREY	Would you not have me honest?

TOUCHSTONE	No, truly, unless thou wert hardfavoured for
	honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.

JAQUES	Aside  A material fool!

AUDREY	 Well, I am not fair and therefore I pray the gods
	make me honest.

TOUCHSTONE	Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut
	were to put good meat into an unclean dish.

AUDREY	I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am foul.

TOUCHSTONE	Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness!
	sluttishness may come hereafter. But be it as it may
	be, I will marry thee, and to that end I have been
	with Sir Oliver Martext, the vicar of the next
	village, who hath promised to meet me in this place
	of the forest and to couple us.

JAQUES	Aside  I would fain see this meeting.

AUDREY	Well, the gods give us joy!

TOUCHSTONE	Amen. A man may, if he were of a fearful heart,
	stagger in this attempt for here we have no temple
	but the wood, no assembly but hornbeasts. But what
	though? Courage! As horns are odious, they are
	necessary. It is said, many a man knows no end of
	his goods: right many a man has good horns, and
	knows no end of them. Well, that is the dowry of
	his wife tis none of his own getting. Horns?
	Even so. Poor men alone? No, no the noblest deer
	hath them as huge as the rascal. Is the single man
	therefore blessed? No: as a walled town is more
	worthier than a village, so is the forehead of a
	married man more honourable than the bare brow of a
	bachelor and by how much defence is better than no
	skill, by so much is a horn more precious than to
	want. Here comes Sir Oliver.

	Enter SIR OLIVER MARTEXT

	Sir Oliver Martext, you are well met: will you
	dispatch us here under this tree, or shall we go
	with you to your chapel?

SIR OLIVER MARTEXT	Is there none here to give the woman?

TOUCHSTONE	I will not take her on gift of any man.

SIR OLIVER MARTEXT	Truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.

JAQUES	Advancing

	Proceed, proceed	Ill give her.

TOUCHSTONE	Good even, good Master Whatyecallt: how do you,
	sir? You are very well met: God ild you for your
	last company: I am very glad to see you: even a
	toy in hand here, sir: nay, pray be covered.

JAQUES	Will you be married, motley?

TOUCHSTONE	As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb and
	the falcon her bells, so man hath his desires and
	as pigeons bill, so wedlock would be nibbling.

JAQUES	And will you, being a man of your breeding, be
	married under a bush like a beggar? Get you to
	church, and have a good priest that can tell you
	what marriage is: this fellow will but join you
	together as they join wainscot then one of you will
	prove a shrunk panel and, like green timber, warp, warp.

TOUCHSTONE	Aside  I am not in the mind but I were better to be
	married of him than of another: for he is not like
	to marry me well and not being well married, it
	will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my wife.

JAQUES	Go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.

TOUCHSTONE	Come, sweet Audrey:
	We must be married, or we must live in bawdry.
	Farewell, good Master Oliver: not,
	O sweet Oliver,
	O brave Oliver,
	Leave me not behind thee: but,
	Wind away,
	Begone, I say,
	I will not to wedding with thee.

	Exeunt JAQUES, TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

SIR OLIVER MARTEXT	Tis no matter: neer a fantastical knave of them
	all shall flout me out of my calling.

	Exit




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE IV	The forest.


	Enter ROSALIND and CELIA

ROSALIND	Never talk to me I will weep.

CELIA	Do, I prithee but yet have the grace to consider
	that tears do not become a man.

ROSALIND	But have I not cause to weep?

CELIA	As good cause as one would desire therefore weep.

ROSALIND	His very hair is of the dissembling colour.

CELIA	Something browner than Judass marry, his kisses are
	Judass own children.

ROSALIND	I faith, his hair is of a good colour.

CELIA	An excellent colour: your chestnut was ever the only colour.

ROSALIND	And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch
	of holy bread.

CELIA	He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana: a nun
	of winters sisterhood kisses not more religiously
	the very ice of chastity is in them.

ROSALIND	But why did he swear he would come this morning, and
	comes not?

CELIA	Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.

ROSALIND	Do you think so?

CELIA	Yes I think he is not a pickpurse nor a
	horsestealer, but for his verity in love, I do
	think him as concave as a covered goblet or a
	wormeaten nut.

ROSALIND	Not true in love?

CELIA	Yes, when he is in but I think he is not in.

ROSALIND	You have heard him swear downright he was.

CELIA	Was is not is: besides, the oath of a lover is
	no stronger than the word of a tapster they are
	both the confirmer of false reckonings. He attends
	here in the forest on the duke your father.

ROSALIND	I met the duke yesterday and had much question with
	him: he asked me of what parentage I was I told
	him, of as good as he so he laughed and let me go.
	But what talk we of fathers, when there is such a
	man as Orlando?

CELIA	O, thats a brave man! he writes brave verses,
	speaks brave words, swears brave oaths and breaks
	them bravely, quite traverse, athwart the heart of
	his lover as a puisny tilter, that spurs his horse
	but on one side, breaks his staff like a noble
	goose: but alls brave that youth mounts and folly
	guides. Who comes here?

	Enter CORIN

CORIN	Mistress and master, you have oft inquired
	After the shepherd that complaind of love,
	Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,
	Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
	That was his mistress.

CELIA	Well, and what of him?

CORIN	If you will see a pageant truly playd,
	Between the pale complexion of true love
	And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
	Go hence a little and I shall conduct you,
	If you will mark it.

ROSALIND	O, come, let us remove:
	The sight of lovers feedeth those in love.
	Bring us to this sight, and you shall say
	Ill prove a busy actor in their play.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT III



SCENE V	Another part of the forest.


	Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE

SILVIUS	Sweet Phebe, do not scorn me do not, Phebe
	Say that you love me not, but say not so
	In bitterness. The common executioner,
	Whose heart the accustomd sight of death makes hard,
	Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck
	But first begs pardon: will you sterner be
	Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?

	Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and CORIN, behind

PHEBE	I would not be thy executioner:
	I fly thee, for I would not injure thee.
	Thou tellst me there is murder in mine eye:
	Tis pretty, sure, and very probable,
	That eyes, that are the frailst and softest things,
	Who shut their coward gates on atomies,
	Should be calld tyrants, butchers, murderers!
	Now I do frown on thee with all my heart
	And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee:
	Now counterfeit to swoon why now fall down
	Or if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,
	Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers!
	Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee:
	Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
	Some scar of it lean but upon a rush,
	The cicatrice and capable impressure
	Thy palm some moment keeps but now mine eyes,
	Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not,
	Nor, I am sure, there is no force in eyes
	That can do hurt.

SILVIUS	                  O dear Phebe,
	If ever,as that ever may be near,
	You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
	Then shall you know the wounds invisible
	That loves keen arrows make.

PHEBE	But till that time
	Come not thou near me: and when that time comes,
	Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not
	As till that time I shall not pity thee.

ROSALIND	And why, I pray you? Who might be your mother,
	That you insult, exult, and all at once,
	Over the wretched? What though you have no beauty,
	As, by my faith, I see no more in you
	Than without candle may go dark to bed
	Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
	Why, what means this? Why do you look on me?
	I see no more in you than in the ordinary
	Of natures salework. Ods my little life,
	I think she means to tangle my eyes too!
	No, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it:
	Tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
	Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream,
	That can entame my spirits to your worship.
	You foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her,
	Like foggy south puffing with wind and rain?
	You are a thousand times a properer man
	Than she a woman: tis such fools as you
	That makes the world full of illfavourd children:
	Tis not her glass, but you, that flatters her
	And out of you she sees herself more proper
	Than any of her lineaments can show her.
	But, mistress, know yourself: down on your knees,
	And thank heaven, fasting, for a good mans love:
	For I must tell you friendly in your ear,
	Sell when you can: you are not for all markets:
	Cry the man mercy love him take his offer:
	Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.
	So take her to thee, shepherd: fare you well.

PHEBE	Sweet youth, I pray you, chide a year together:
	I had rather hear you chide than this man woo.

ROSALIND	Hes fallen in love with your foulness and shell
	fall in love with my anger. If it be so, as fast as
	she answers thee with frowning looks, Ill sauce her
	with bitter words. Why look you so upon me?

PHEBE	For no ill will I bear you.

ROSALIND	I pray you, do not fall in love with me,
	For I am falser than vows made in wine:
	Besides, I like you not. If you will know my house,
	Tis at the tuft of olives here hard by.
	Will you go, sister? Shepherd, ply her hard.
	Come, sister. Shepherdess, look on him better,
	And be not proud: though all the world could see,
	None could be so abused in sight as he.
	Come, to our flock.

	Exeunt ROSALIND, CELIA and CORIN

PHEBE	Dead Shepherd, now I find thy saw of might,
	Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?

SILVIUS	Sweet Phebe,

PHEBE	                  Ha, what sayst thou, Silvius?

SILVIUS	Sweet Phebe, pity me.

PHEBE	Why, I am sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.

SILVIUS	Wherever sorrow is, relief would be:
	If you do sorrow at my grief in love,
	By giving love your sorrow and my grief
	Were both extermined.

PHEBE	Thou hast my love: is not that neighbourly?

SILVIUS	I would have you.

PHEBE	                  Why, that were covetousness.
	Silvius, the time was that I hated thee,
	And yet it is not that I bear thee love
	But since that thou canst talk of love so well,
	Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
	I will endure, and Ill employ thee too:
	But do not look for further recompense
	Than thine own gladness that thou art employd.

SILVIUS	So holy and so perfect is my love,
	And I in such a poverty of grace,
	That I shall think it a most plenteous crop
	To glean the broken ears after the man
	That the main harvest reaps: loose now and then
	A scatterd smile, and that Ill live upon.

PHEBE	Knowst now the youth that spoke to me erewhile?

SILVIUS	Not very well, but I have met him oft
	And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds
	That the old carlot once was master of.

PHEBE	Think not I love him, though I ask for him:
	Tis but a peevish boy yet he talks well
	But what care I for words? yet words do well
	When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.
	It is a pretty youth: not very pretty:
	But, sure, hes proud, and yet his pride becomes him:
	Hell make a proper man: the best thing in him
	Is his complexion and faster than his tongue
	Did make offence his eye did heal it up.
	He is not very tall yet for his years hes tall:
	His leg is but so so and yet tis well:
	There was a pretty redness in his lip,
	A little riper and more lusty red
	Than that mixd in his cheek twas just the difference
	Between the constant red and mingled damask.
	There be some women, Silvius, had they markd him
	In parcels as I did, would have gone near
	To fall in love with him but, for my part,
	I love him not nor hate him not and yet
	I have more cause to hate him than to love him:
	For what had he to do to chide at me?
	He said mine eyes were black and my hair black:
	And, now I am rememberd, scornd at me:
	I marvel why I answerd not again:
	But thats all one omittance is no quittance.
	Ill write to him a very taunting letter,
	And thou shalt bear it: wilt thou, Silvius?

SILVIUS	Phebe, with all my heart.

PHEBE	Ill write it straight
	The matters in my head and in my heart:
	I will be bitter with him and passing short.
	Go with me, Silvius.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT IV



SCENE I	The forest.


	Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and JAQUES

JAQUES	I prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted
	with thee.

ROSALIND	They say you are a melancholy fellow.

JAQUES	I am so I do love it better than laughing.

ROSALIND	Those that are in extremity of either are abominable
	fellows and betray themselves to every modern
	censure worse than drunkards.

JAQUES	Why, tis good to be sad and say nothing.

ROSALIND	Why then, tis good to be a post.

JAQUES	I have neither the scholars melancholy, which is
	emulation, nor the musicians, which is fantastical,
	nor the courtiers, which is proud, nor the
	soldiers, which is ambitious, nor the lawyers,
	which is politic, nor the ladys, which is nice, nor
	the lovers, which is all these: but it is a
	melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples,
	extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundrys
	contemplation of my travels, in which my often
	rumination wraps me m a most humorous sadness.

ROSALIND	A traveller! By my faith, you have great reason to
	be sad: I fear you have sold your own lands to see
	other mens then, to have seen much and to have
	nothing, is to have rich eyes and poor hands.

JAQUES	Yes, I have gained my experience.

ROSALIND	And your experience makes you sad: I had rather have
	a fool to make me merry than experience to make me
	sad and to travel for it too!

	Enter ORLANDO

ORLANDO	Good day and happiness, dear Rosalind!

JAQUES	Nay, then, God be wi you, an you talk in blank verse.

	Exit

ROSALIND	Farewell, Monsieur Traveller: look you lisp and
	wear strange suits, disable all the benefits of your
	own country, be out of love with your nativity and
	almost chide God for making you that countenance you
	are, or I will scarce think you have swam in a
	gondola. Why, how now, Orlando! where have you been
	all this while? You a lover! An you serve me such
	another trick, never come in my sight more.

ORLANDO	My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.

ROSALIND	Break an hours promise in love! He that will
	divide a minute into a thousand parts and break but
	a part of the thousandth part of a minute in the
	affairs of love, it may be said of him that Cupid
	hath clapped him o the shoulder, but Ill warrant
	him heartwhole.

ORLANDO	Pardon me, dear Rosalind.

ROSALIND	Nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight: I
	had as lief be wooed of a snail.

ORLANDO	Of a snail?

ROSALIND	Ay, of a snail for though he comes slowly, he
	carries his house on his head a better jointure,
	I think, than you make a woman: besides he brings
	his destiny with him.

ORLANDO	Whats that?

ROSALIND	Why, horns, which such as you are fain to be
	beholding to your wives for: but he comes armed in
	his fortune and prevents the slander of his wife.

ORLANDO	Virtue is no hornmaker and my Rosalind is virtuous.

ROSALIND	And I am your Rosalind.

CELIA	It pleases him to call you so but he hath a
	Rosalind of a better leer than you.

ROSALIND	Come, woo me, woo me, for now I am in a holiday
	humour and like enough to consent. What would you
	say to me now, an I were your very very Rosalind?

ORLANDO	I would kiss before I spoke.

ROSALIND	Nay, you were better speak first, and when you were
	gravelled for lack of matter, you might take
	occasion to kiss. Very good orators, when they are
	out, they will spit and for lovers lackingGod
	warn us!matter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss.

ORLANDO	How if the kiss be denied?

ROSALIND	Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.

ORLANDO	Who could be out, being before his beloved mistress?

ROSALIND	Marry, that should you, if I were your mistress, or
	I should think my honesty ranker than my wit.

ORLANDO	What, of my suit?

ROSALIND	Not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit.
	Am not I your Rosalind?

ORLANDO	I take some joy to say you are, because I would be
	talking of her.

ROSALIND	Well in her person I say I will not have you.

ORLANDO	Then in mine own person I die.

ROSALIND	No, faith, die by attorney. The poor world is
	almost six thousand years old, and in all this time
	there was not any man died in his own person,
	videlicit, in a lovecause. Troilus had his brains
	dashed out with a Grecian club yet he did what he
	could to die before, and he is one of the patterns
	of love. Leander, he would have lived many a fair
	year, though Hero had turned nun, if it had not been
	for a hot midsummer night for, good youth, he went
	but forth to wash him in the Hellespont and being
	taken with the cramp was drowned and the foolish
	coroners of that age found it was Hero of Sestos.
	But these are all lies: men have died from time to
	time and worms have eaten them, but not for love.

ORLANDO	I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind,
	for, I protest, her frown might kill me.

ROSALIND	By this hand, it will not kill a fly. But come, now
	I will be your Rosalind in a more comingon
	disposition, and ask me what you will. I will grant
	it.

ORLANDO	Then love me, Rosalind.

ROSALIND	Yes, faith, will I, Fridays and Saturdays and all.

ORLANDO	And wilt thou have me?

ROSALIND	Ay, and twenty such.

ORLANDO	What sayest thou?

ROSALIND	Are you not good?

ORLANDO	I hope so.

ROSALIND	Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing?
	Come, sister, you shall be the priest and marry us.
	Give me your hand, Orlando. What do you say, sister?

ORLANDO	Pray thee, marry us.

CELIA	I cannot say the words.

ROSALIND	You must begin, Will you, Orlando

CELIA	Go to. Will you, Orlando, have to wife this Rosalind?

ORLANDO	I will.

ROSALIND	Ay, but when?

ORLANDO	Why now as fast as she can marry us.

ROSALIND	Then you must say I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.

ORLANDO	I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.

ROSALIND	I might ask you for your commission but I do take
	thee, Orlando, for my husband: theres a girl goes
	before the priest and certainly a womans thought
	runs before her actions.

ORLANDO	So do all thoughts they are winged.

ROSALIND	Now tell me how long you would have her after you
	have possessed her.

ORLANDO	For ever and a day.

ROSALIND	Say a day, without the ever. No, no, Orlando
	men are April when they woo, December when they wed:
	maids are May when they are maids, but the sky
	changes when they are wives. I will be more jealous
	of thee than a Barbary cockpigeon over his hen,
	more clamorous than a parrot against rain, more
	newfangled than an ape, more giddy in my desires
	than a monkey: I will weep for nothing, like Diana
	in the fountain, and I will do that when you are
	disposed to be merry I will laugh like a hyen, and
	that when thou art inclined to sleep.

ORLANDO	But will my Rosalind do so?

ROSALIND	By my life, she will do as I do.

ORLANDO	O, but she is wise.

ROSALIND	Or else she could not have the wit to do this: the
	wiser, the waywarder: make the doors upon a womans
	wit and it will out at the casement shut that and
	twill out at the keyhole stop that, twill fly
	with the smoke out at the chimney.

ORLANDO	A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say
	Wit, whither wilt?

ROSALIND	Nay, you might keep that cheque for it till you met
	your wifes wit going to your neighbours bed.

ORLANDO	And what wit could wit have to excuse that?

ROSALIND	Marry, to say she came to seek you there. You shall
	never take her without her answer, unless you take
	her without her tongue. O, that woman that cannot
	make her fault her husbands occasion, let her
	never nurse her child herself, for she will breed
	it like a fool!

ORLANDO	For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave thee.

ROSALIND	Alas! dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours.

ORLANDO	I must attend the duke at dinner: by two oclock I
	will be with thee again.

ROSALIND	Ay, go your ways, go your ways I knew what you
	would prove: my friends told me as much, and I
	thought no less: that flattering tongue of yours
	won me: tis but one cast away, and so, come,
	death! Two oclock is your hour?

ORLANDO	Ay, sweet Rosalind.

ROSALIND	By my troth, and in good earnest, and so God mend
	me, and by all pretty oaths that are not dangerous,
	if you break one jot of your promise or come one
	minute behind your hour, I will think you the most
	pathetical breakpromise and the most hollow lover
	and the most unworthy of her you call Rosalind that
	may be chosen out of the gross band of the
	unfaithful: therefore beware my censure and keep
	your promise.

ORLANDO	With no less religion than if thou wert indeed my
	Rosalind: so adieu.

ROSALIND	Well, Time is the old justice that examines all such
	offenders, and let Time try: adieu.

	Exit ORLANDO

CELIA	You have simply misused our sex in your loveprate:
	we must have your doublet and hose plucked over your
	head, and show the world what the bird hath done to
	her own nest.

ROSALIND	O coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou
	didst know how many fathom deep I am in love! But
	it cannot be sounded: my affection hath an unknown
	bottom, like the bay of Portugal.

CELIA	Or rather, bottomless, that as fast as you pour
	affection in, it runs out.

ROSALIND	No, that same wicked bastard of Venus that was begot
	of thought, conceived of spleen and born of madness,
	that blind rascally boy that abuses every ones eyes
	because his own are out, let him be judge how deep I
	am in love. Ill tell thee, Aliena, I cannot be out
	of the sight of Orlando: Ill go find a shadow and
	sigh till he come.

CELIA	And Ill sleep.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT IV



SCENE II	The forest.


	Enter JAQUES, Lords, and Foresters

JAQUES	Which is he that killed the deer?

A Lord	Sir, it was I.

JAQUES	Lets present him to the duke, like a Roman
	conqueror and it would do well to set the deers
	horns upon his head, for a branch of victory. Have
	you no song, forester, for this purpose?

Forester	Yes, sir.

JAQUES	Sing it: tis no matter how it be in tune, so it
	make noise enough.

	SONG.
Forester	What shall he have that killd the deer?
	His leather skin and horns to wear.
	Then sing him home

	The rest shall bear this burden

	Take thou no scorn to wear the horn
	It was a crest ere thou wast born:
	Thy fathers father wore it,
	And thy father bore it:
	The horn, the horn, the lusty horn
	Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT IV



SCENE III	The forest.


	Enter ROSALIND and CELIA

ROSALIND	How say you now? Is it not past two oclock? and
	here much Orlando!

CELIA	I warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain, he
	hath taen his bow and arrows and is gone forth to
	sleep. Look, who comes here.

	Enter SILVIUS

SILVIUS	My errand is to you, fair youth
	My gentle Phebe bid me give you this:
	I know not the contents but, as I guess
	By the stern brow and waspish action
	Which she did use as she was writing of it,
	It bears an angry tenor: pardon me:
	I am but as a guiltless messenger.

ROSALIND	Patience herself would startle at this letter
	And play the swaggerer bear this, bear all:
	She says I am not fair, that I lack manners
	She calls me proud, and that she could not love me,
	Were man as rare as phoenix. Ods my will!
	Her love is not the hare that I do hunt:
	Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well,
	This is a letter of your own device.

SILVIUS	No, I protest, I know not the contents:
	Phebe did write it.

ROSALIND	Come, come, you are a fool
	And turnd into the extremity of love.
	I saw her hand: she has a leathern hand.
	A freestonecolourd hand I verily did think
	That her old gloves were on, but twas her hands:
	She has a huswifes hand but thats no matter:
	I say she never did invent this letter
	This is a mans invention and his hand.

SILVIUS	Sure, it is hers.

ROSALIND	Why, tis a boisterous and a cruel style.
	A style forchallengers why, she defies me,
	Like Turk to Christian: womens gentle brain
	Could not drop forth such giantrude invention
	Such Ethiope words, blacker in their effect
	Than in their countenance. Will you hear the letter?

SILVIUS	So please you, for I never heard it yet
	Yet heard too much of Phebes cruelty.

ROSALIND	She Phebes me: mark how the tyrant writes.

	Reads

	Art thou god to shepherd turnd,
	That a maidens heart hath burnd?
	Can a woman rail thus?

SILVIUS	Call you this railing?

ROSALIND	Reads

	Why, thy godhead laid apart,
	Warrst thou with a womans heart?
	Did you ever hear such railing?
	Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
	That could do no vengeance to me.
	Meaning me a beast.
	If the scorn of your bright eyne
	Have power to raise such love in mine,
	Alack, in me what strange effect
	Would they work in mild aspect!
	Whiles you chid me, I did love
	How then might your prayers move!
	He that brings this love to thee
	Little knows this love in me:
	And by him seal up thy mind
	Whether that thy youth and kind
	Will the faithful offer take
	Of me and all that I can make
	Or else by him my love deny,
	And then Ill study how to die.

SILVIUS	Call you this chiding?

CELIA	Alas, poor shepherd!

ROSALIND	Do you pity him? no, he deserves no pity. Wilt
	thou love such a woman? What, to make thee an
	instrument and play false strains upon thee! not to
	be endured! Well, go your way to her, for I see
	love hath made thee a tame snake, and say this to
	her: that if she love me, I charge her to love
	thee if she will not, I will never have her unless
	thou entreat for her. If you be a true lover,
	hence, and not a word for here comes more company.

	Exit SILVIUS

	Enter OLIVER

OLIVER	Good morrow, fair ones: pray you, if you know,
	Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
	A sheepcote fenced about with olive trees?

CELIA	West of this place, down in the neighbour bottom:
	The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
	Left on your right hand brings you to the place.
	But at this hour the house doth keep itself
	Theres none within.

OLIVER	If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
	Then should I know you by description
	Such garments and such years: The boy is fair,
	Of female favour, and bestows himself
	Like a ripe sister: the woman low
	And browner than her brother. Are not you
	The owner of the house I did inquire for?

CELIA	It is no boast, being askd, to say we are.

OLIVER	Orlando doth commend him to you both,
	And to that youth he calls his Rosalind
	He sends this bloody napkin. Are you he?

ROSALIND	I am: what must we understand by this?

OLIVER	Some of my shame if you will know of me
	What man I am, and how, and why, and where
	This handkercher was staind.

CELIA	I pray you, tell it.

OLIVER	When last the young Orlando parted from you
	He left a promise to return again
	Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,
	Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
	Lo, what befell! he threw his eye aside,
	And mark what object did present itself:
	Under an oak, whose boughs were mossd with age
	And high top bald with dry antiquity,
	A wretched ragged man, oergrown with hair,
	Lay sleeping on his back: about his neck
	A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself,
	Who with her head nimble in threats approachd
	The opening of his mouth but suddenly,
	Seeing Orlando, it unlinkd itself,
	And with indented glides did slip away
	Into a bush: under which bushs shade
	A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
	Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch,
	When that the sleeping man should stir for tis
	The royal disposition of that beast
	To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead:
	This seen, Orlando did approach the man
	And found it was his brother, his elder brother.

CELIA	O, I have heard him speak of that same brother
	And he did render him the most unnatural
	That lived amongst men.

OLIVER	And well he might so do,
	For well I know he was unnatural.

ROSALIND	But, to Orlando: did he leave him there,
	Food to the suckd and hungry lioness?

OLIVER	Twice did he turn his back and purposed so
	But kindness, nobler ever than revenge,
	And nature, stronger than his just occasion,
	Made him give battle to the lioness,
	Who quickly fell before him: in which hurtling
	From miserable slumber I awaked.

CELIA	Are you his brother?

ROSALIND	Wast you he rescued?

CELIA	Wast you that did so oft contrive to kill him?

OLIVER	Twas I but tis not I	I do not shame
	To tell you what I was, since my conversion
	So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.

ROSALIND	But, for the bloody napkin?

OLIVER	By and by.
	When from the first to last betwixt us two
	Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed,
	As how I came into that desert place:
	In brief, he led me to the gentle duke,
	Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,
	Committing me unto my brothers love
	Who led me instantly unto his cave,
	There strippd himself, and here upon his arm
	The lioness had torn some flesh away,
	Which all this while had bled and now he fainted
	And cried, in fainting, upon Rosalind.
	Brief, I recoverd him, bound up his wound
	And, after some small space, being strong at heart,
	He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
	To tell this story, that you might excuse
	His broken promise, and to give this napkin
	Dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth
	That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.

	ROSALIND swoons

CELIA	Why, how now, Ganymede! sweet Ganymede!

OLIVER	Many will swoon when they do look on blood.

CELIA	There is more in it. Cousin Ganymede!

OLIVER	Look, he recovers.

ROSALIND	I would I were at home.

CELIA	Well lead you thither.
	I pray you, will you take him by the arm?

OLIVER	Be of good cheer, youth: you a man! you lack a
	mans heart.

ROSALIND	I do so, I confess it. Ah, sirrah, a body would
	think this was well counterfeited! I pray you, tell
	your brother how well I counterfeited. Heighho!

OLIVER	This was not counterfeit: there is too great
	testimony in your complexion that it was a passion
	of earnest.

ROSALIND	Counterfeit, I assure you.

OLIVER	Well then, take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man.

ROSALIND	So I do: but, i faith, I should have been a woman by right.

CELIA	Come, you look paler and paler: pray you, draw
	homewards. Good sir, go with us.

OLIVER	That will I, for I must bear answer back
	How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.

ROSALIND	I shall devise something: but, I pray you, commend
	my counterfeiting to him. Will you go?

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT V



SCENE I	The forest.


	Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

TOUCHSTONE	We shall find a time, Audrey patience, gentle Audrey.

AUDREY	Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old
	gentlemans saying.

TOUCHSTONE	A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile
	Martext. But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the
	forest lays claim to you.

AUDREY	Ay, I know who tis he hath no interest in me in
	the world: here comes the man you mean.

TOUCHSTONE	It is meat and drink to me to see a clown: by my
	troth, we that have good wits have much to answer
	for we shall be flouting we cannot hold.

	Enter WILLIAM

WILLIAM	Good even, Audrey.

AUDREY	God ye good even, William.

WILLIAM	And good even to you, sir.

TOUCHSTONE	Good even, gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy
	head nay, prithee, be covered. How old are you, friend?

WILLIAM	Five and twenty, sir.

TOUCHSTONE	A ripe age. Is thy name William?

WILLIAM	William, sir.

TOUCHSTONE	A fair name. Wast born i the forest here?

WILLIAM	Ay, sir, I thank God.

TOUCHSTONE	Thank God a good answer. Art rich?

WILLIAM	Faith, sir, so so.

TOUCHSTONE	So so is good, very good, very excellent good and
	yet it is not it is but so so. Art thou wise?

WILLIAM	Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.

TOUCHSTONE	Why, thou sayest well. I do now remember a saying,
	The fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man
	knows himself to be a fool. The heathen
	philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape,
	would open his lips when he put it into his mouth
	meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and
	lips to open. You do love this maid?

WILLIAM	I do, sir.

TOUCHSTONE	Give me your hand. Art thou learned?

WILLIAM	No, sir.

TOUCHSTONE	Then learn this of me: to have, is to have for it
	is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured out
	of a cup into a glass, by filling the one doth empty
	the other for all your writers do consent that ipse
	is he: now, you are not ipse, for I am he.

WILLIAM	Which he, sir?

TOUCHSTONE	He, sir, that must marry this woman. Therefore, you
	clown, abandon,which is in the vulgar leave,the
	society,which in the boorish is company,of this
	female,which in the common is woman which
	together is, abandon the society of this female, or,
	clown, thou perishest or, to thy better
	understanding, diest or, to wit I kill thee, make
	thee away, translate thy life into death, thy
	liberty into bondage: I will deal in poison with
	thee, or in bastinado, or in steel I will bandy
	with thee in faction I will oerrun thee with
	policy I will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways:
	therefore tremble and depart.

AUDREY	Do, good William.

WILLIAM	God rest you merry, sir.

	Exit

	Enter CORIN

CORIN	Our master and mistress seeks you come, away, away!

TOUCHSTONE	Trip, Audrey! trip, Audrey! I attend, I attend.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT V



SCENE II	The forest.


	Enter ORLANDO and OLIVER

ORLANDO	Ist possible that on so little acquaintance you
	should like her? that but seeing you should love
	her? and loving woo? and, wooing, she should
	grant? and will you persever to enjoy her?

OLIVER	Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the
	poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden
	wooing, nor her sudden consenting but say with me,
	I love Aliena say with her that she loves me
	consent with both that we may enjoy each other: it
	shall be to your good for my fathers house and all
	the revenue that was old Sir Rowlands will I
	estate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.

ORLANDO	You have my consent. Let your wedding be tomorrow:
	thither will I invite the duke and alls contented
	followers. Go you and prepare Aliena for look
	you, here comes my Rosalind.

	Enter ROSALIND

ROSALIND	God save you, brother.

OLIVER	And you, fair sister.

	Exit

ROSALIND	O, my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee
	wear thy heart in a scarf!

ORLANDO	It is my arm.

ROSALIND	I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws
	of a lion.

ORLANDO	Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.

ROSALIND	Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to
	swoon when he showed me your handkerchief?

ORLANDO	Ay, and greater wonders than that.

ROSALIND	O, I know where you are: nay, tis true: there was
	never any thing so sudden but the fight of two rams
	and Caesars thrasonical brag of I came, saw, and
	overcame: for your brother and my sister no sooner
	met but they looked, no sooner looked but they
	loved, no sooner loved but they sighed, no sooner
	sighed but they asked one another the reason, no
	sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy
	and in these degrees have they made a pair of stairs
	to marriage which they will climb incontinent, or
	else be incontinent before marriage: they are in
	the very wrath of love and they will together clubs
	cannot part them.

ORLANDO	They shall be married tomorrow, and I will bid the
	duke to the nuptial. But, O, how bitter a thing it
	is to look into happiness through another mans
	eyes! By so much the more shall I tomorrow be at
	the height of heartheaviness, by how much I shall
	think my brother happy in having what he wishes for.

ROSALIND	Why then, tomorrow I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?

ORLANDO	I can live no longer by thinking.

ROSALIND	I will weary you then no longer with idle talking.
	Know of me then, for now I speak to some purpose,
	that I know you are a gentleman of good conceit: I
	speak not this that you should bear a good opinion
	of my knowledge, insomuch I say I know you are
	neither do I labour for a greater esteem than may in
	some little measure draw a belief from you, to do
	yourself good and not to grace me. Believe then, if
	you please, that I can do strange things: I have,
	since I was three year old, conversed with a
	magician, most profound in his art and yet not
	damnable. If you do love Rosalind so near the heart
	as your gesture cries it out, when your brother
	marries Aliena, shall you marry her: I know into
	what straits of fortune she is driven and it is
	not impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient
	to you, to set her before your eyes tomorrow human
	as she is and without any danger.

ORLANDO	Speakest thou in sober meanings?

ROSALIND	By my life, I do which I tender dearly, though I
	say I am a magician. Therefore, put you in your
	best array: bid your friends for if you will be
	married tomorrow, you shall, and to Rosalind, if you will.

	Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE

	Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.

PHEBE	Youth, you have done me much ungentleness,
	To show the letter that I writ to you.

ROSALIND	I care not if I have: it is my study
	To seem despiteful and ungentle to you:
	You are there followed by a faithful shepherd
	Look upon him, love him he worships you.

PHEBE	Good shepherd, tell this youth what tis to love.

SILVIUS	It is to be all made of sighs and tears
	And so am I for Phebe.

PHEBE	And I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO	And I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND	And I for no woman.

SILVIUS	It is to be all made of faith and service
	And so am I for Phebe.

PHEBE	And I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO	And I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND	And I for no woman.

SILVIUS	It is to be all made of fantasy,
	All made of passion and all made of wishes,
	All adoration, duty, and observance,
	All humbleness, all patience and impatience,
	All purity, all trial, all observance
	And so am I for Phebe.

PHEBE	And so am I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO	And so am I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND	And so am I for no woman.

PHEBE	If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

SILVIUS	If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

ORLANDO	If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

ROSALIND	Who do you speak to, Why blame you me to love you?

ORLANDO	To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.

ROSALIND	Pray you, no more of this tis like the howling
	of Irish wolves against the moon.

	To SILVIUS

	I will help you, if I can:

	To PHEBE

	I would love you, if I could. Tomorrow meet me all together.

	To PHEBE

	I will marry you, if ever I marry woman, and Ill be
	married tomorrow:

	To ORLANDO

	I will satisfy you, if ever I satisfied man, and you
	shall be married tomorrow:

	To SILVIUS

	I will content you, if what pleases you contents
	you, and you shall be married tomorrow.

	To ORLANDO

	As you love Rosalind, meet:

	To SILVIUS

	as you love Phebe, meet: and as I love no woman,
	Ill meet. So fare you well: I have left you commands.

SILVIUS	Ill not fail, if I live.

PHEBE	Nor I.

ORLANDO	Nor I.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT V



SCENE III	The forest.


	Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

TOUCHSTONE	Tomorrow is the joyful day, Audrey tomorrow will
	we be married.

AUDREY	I do desire it with all my heart and I hope it is
	no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the
	world. Here comes two of the banished dukes pages.

	Enter two Pages

First Page	Well met, honest gentleman.

TOUCHSTONE	By my troth, well met. Come, sit, sit, and a song.

Second Page	We are for you: sit i the middle.

First Page	Shall we clap intot roundly, without hawking or
	spitting or saying we are hoarse, which are the only
	prologues to a bad voice?

Second Page	Ifaith, ifaith and both in a tune, like two
	gipsies on a horse.

	SONG.
	It was a lover and his lass,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
	That oer the green cornfield did pass
	In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,
	When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding:
	Sweet lovers love the spring.

	Between the acres of the rye,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino
	These pretty country folks would lie,
	In spring time, c.

	This carol they began that hour,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
	How that a life was but a flower
	In spring time, c.

	And therefore take the present time,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino
	For love is crowned with the prime
	In spring time, c.

TOUCHSTONE	Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great
	matter in the ditty, yet the note was very
	untuneable.

First Page	You are deceived, sir: we kept time, we lost not our time.

TOUCHSTONE	By my troth, yes I count it but time lost to hear
	such a foolish song. God be wi you and God mend
	your voices! Come, Audrey.

	Exeunt




	AS YOU LIKE IT


ACT V



SCENE IV	The forest.


	Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, JAQUES, ORLANDO, OLIVER,
	and CELIA

DUKE SENIOR	Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
	Can do all this that he hath promised?

ORLANDO	I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not
	As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.

	Enter ROSALIND, SILVIUS, and PHEBE

ROSALIND	Patience once more, whiles our compact is urged:
	You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,
	You will bestow her on Orlando here?

DUKE SENIOR	That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.

ROSALIND	And you say, you will have her, when I bring her?

ORLANDO	That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.

ROSALIND	You say, youll marry me, if I be willing?

PHEBE	That will I, should I die the hour after.

ROSALIND	But if you do refuse to marry me,
	Youll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?

PHEBE	So is the bargain.

ROSALIND	You say, that youll have Phebe, if she will?

SILVIUS	Though to have her and death were both one thing.

ROSALIND	I have promised to make all this matter even.
	Keep you your word, O duke, to give your daughter
	You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter:
	Keep your word, Phebe, that youll marry me,
	Or else refusing me, to wed this shepherd:
	Keep your word, Silvius, that youll marry her.
	If she refuse me: and from hence I go,
	To make these doubts all even.

	Exeunt ROSALIND and CELIA

DUKE SENIOR	I do remember in this shepherd boy
	Some lively touches of my daughters favour.

ORLANDO	My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
	Methought he was a brother to your daughter:
	But, my good lord, this boy is forestborn,
	And hath been tutord in the rudiments
	Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
	Whom he reports to be a great magician,
	Obscured in the circle of this forest.

	Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

JAQUES	There is, sure, another flood toward, and these
	couples are coming to the ark. Here comes a pair of
	very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called fools.

TOUCHSTONE	Salutation and greeting to you all!

JAQUES	Good my lord, bid him welcome: this is the
	motleyminded gentleman that I have so often met in
	the forest: he hath been a courtier, he swears.

TOUCHSTONE	If any man doubt that, let him put me to my
	purgation. I have trod a measure I have flattered
	a lady I have been politic with my friend, smooth
	with mine enemy I have undone three tailors I have
	had four quarrels, and like to have fought one.

JAQUES	And how was that taen up?

TOUCHSTONE	Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the
	seventh cause.

JAQUES	How seventh cause? Good my lord, like this fellow.

DUKE SENIOR	I like him very well.

TOUCHSTONE	God ild you, sir I desire you of the like. I
	press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country
	copulatives, to swear and to forswear: according as
	marriage binds and blood breaks: a poor virgin,
	sir, an illfavoured thing, sir, but mine own a poor
	humour of mine, sir, to take that that no man else
	will: rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a
	poor house as your pearl in your foul oyster.

DUKE SENIOR	By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.

TOUCHSTONE	According to the fools bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.

JAQUES	But, for the seventh cause how did you find the
	quarrel on the seventh cause?

TOUCHSTONE	Upon a lie seven times removed:bear your body more
	seeming, Audrey:as thus, sir. I did dislike the
	cut of a certain courtiers beard: he sent me word,
	if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the
	mind it was: this is called the Retort Courteous.
	If I sent him word again it was not well cut, he
	would send me word, he cut it to please himself:
	this is called the Quip Modest. If again it was
	not well cut, he disabled my judgment: this is
	called the Reply Churlish. If again it was not
	well cut, he would answer, I spake not true: this
	is called the Reproof Valiant. If again it was not
	well cut, he would say I lied: this is called the
	Countercheque Quarrelsome: and so to the Lie
	Circumstantial and the Lie Direct.

JAQUES	And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?

TOUCHSTONE	I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial,
	nor he durst not give me the Lie Direct and so we
	measured swords and parted.

JAQUES	Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?

TOUCHSTONE	O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book as you have
	books for good manners: I will name you the degrees.
	The first, the Retort Courteous the second, the
	Quip Modest the third, the Reply Churlish the
	fourth, the Reproof Valiant the fifth, the
	Countercheque Quarrelsome the sixth, the Lie with
	Circumstance the seventh, the Lie Direct. All
	these you may avoid but the Lie Direct and you may
	avoid that too, with an If. I knew when seven
	justices could not take up a quarrel, but when the
	parties were met themselves, one of them thought but
	of an If, as, If you said so, then I said so and
	they shook hands and swore brothers. Your If is the
	only peacemaker much virtue in If.

JAQUES	Is not this a rare fellow, my lord? hes as good at
	any thing and yet a fool.

DUKE SENIOR	He uses his folly like a stalkinghorse and under
	the presentation of that he shoots his wit.

	Enter HYMEN, ROSALIND, and CELIA

	Still Music

HYMEN	        Then is there mirth in heaven,
	When earthly things made even
	Atone together.
	Good duke, receive thy daughter
	Hymen from heaven brought her,
	Yea, brought her hither,
	That thou mightst join her hand with his
	Whose heart within his bosom is.

ROSALIND	To DUKE SENIOR  To you I give myself, for I am yours.

	To ORLANDO

	To you I give myself, for I am yours.

DUKE SENIOR	If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.

ORLANDO	If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.

PHEBE	If sight and shape be true,
	Why then, my love adieu!

ROSALIND	Ill have no father, if you be not he:
	Ill have no husband, if you be not he:
	Nor neer wed woman, if you be not she.

HYMEN	        Peace, ho! I bar confusion:
	Tis I must make conclusion
	Of these most strange events:
	Heres eight that must take hands
	To join in Hymens bands,
	If truth holds true contents.
	You and you no cross shall part:
	You and you are heart in heart
	You to his love must accord,
	Or have a woman to your lord:
	You and you are sure together,
	As the winter to foul weather.
	Whiles a wedlockhymn we sing,
	Feed yourselves with questioning
	That reason wonder may diminish,
	How thus we met, and these things finish.

	SONG.
	Wedding is great Junos crown:
	O blessed bond of board and bed!
	Tis Hymen peoples every town
	High wedlock then be honoured:
	Honour, high honour and renown,
	To Hymen, god of every town!

DUKE SENIOR	O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me!
	Even daughter, welcome, in no less degree.

PHEBE	I will not eat my word, now thou art mine
	Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.

	Enter JAQUES DE BOYS

JAQUES DE BOYS	Let me have audience for a word or two:
	I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
	That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
	Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
	Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
	Addressd a mighty power which were on foot,
	In his own conduct, purposely to take
	His brother here and put him to the sword:
	And to the skirts of this wild wood he came
	Where meeting with an old religious man,
	After some question with him, was converted
	Both from his enterprise and from the world,
	His crown bequeathing to his banishd brother,
	And all their lands restored to them again
	That were with him exiled. This to be true,
	I do engage my life.

DUKE SENIOR	Welcome, young man
	Thou offerst fairly to thy brothers wedding:
	To one his lands withheld, and to the other
	A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.
	First, in this forest, let us do those ends
	That here were well begun and well begot:
	And after, every of this happy number
	That have endured shrewd days and nights with us
	Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
	According to the measure of their states.
	Meantime, forget this newfalln dignity
	And fall into our rustic revelry.
	Play, music! And you, brides and bridegrooms all,
	With measure heapd in joy, to the measures fall.

JAQUES	Sir, by your patience. If I heard you rightly,
	The duke hath put on a religious life
	And thrown into neglect the pompous court?

JAQUES DE BOYS	He hath.

JAQUES	To him will I : out of these convertites
	There is much matter to be heard and learnd.

	To DUKE SENIOR

	You to your former honour I bequeath
	Your patience and your virtue well deserves it:

	To ORLANDO

	You to a love that your true faith doth merit:

	To OLIVER

	You to your land and love and great allies:

	To SILVIUS

	You to a long and welldeserved bed:

	To TOUCHSTONE

	And you to wrangling for thy loving voyage
	Is but for two months victualld. So, to your pleasures:
	I am for other than for dancing measures.

DUKE SENIOR	Stay, Jaques, stay.

JAQUES	To see no pastime I	what you would have
	Ill stay to know at your abandond cave.

	Exit

DUKE SENIOR	Proceed, proceed: we will begin these rites,
	As we do trust theyll end, in true delights.

	A dance




	AS YOU LIKE IT

	EPILOGUE


ROSALIND	It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue
	but it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord
	the prologue. If it be true that good wine needs
	no bush, tis true that a good play needs no
	epilogue yet to good wine they do use good bushes,
	and good plays prove the better by the help of good
	epilogues. What a case am I in then, that am
	neither a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with
	you in the behalf of a good play! I am not
	furnished like a beggar, therefore to beg will not
	become me: my way is to conjure you and Ill begin
	with the women. I charge you, O women, for the love
	you bear to men, to like as much of this play as
	please you: and I charge you, O men, for the love
	you bear to womenas I perceive by your simpering,
	none of you hates themthat between you and the
	women the play may please. If I were a woman I
	would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased
	me, complexions that liked me and breaths that I
	defied not: and, I am sure, as many as have good
	beards or good faces or sweet breaths will, for my
	kind offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell.

	Exeunt


The Project Gutenberg Etext of LOC WORKSHOP ON ELECTRONIC TEXTS




                      WORKSHOP ON ELECTRONIC TEXTS

                               PROCEEDINGS



                          Edited by James Daly







                             910 June 1992


                           Library of Congress
                            Washington, D.C.



    Supported by a Grant from the David and Lucile Packard Foundation


                                 


                            TABLE OF CONTENTS


Acknowledgements

Introduction

Proceedings
   Welcome
      Prosser Gifford and Carl Fleischhauer

   Session I.  Content in a New Form:  Who Will Use It and What Will They Do?
      James Daly Moderator
      Avra Michelson, Overview
      Susan H. Veccia, User Evaluation
      Joanne Freeman, Beyond the Scholar
         Discussion

   Session II.  Show and Tell
      Jacqueline Hess Moderator
      Elli Mylonas, Perseus Project
         Discussion
      Eric M. Calaluca, Patrologia Latina Database
      Carl Fleischhauer and Ricky Erway, American Memory
         Discussion
      Dorothy Twohig, The Papers of George Washington
         Discussion
      Maria L. Lebron, The Online Journal of Current Clinical Trials
         Discussion
      Lynne K. Personius, Cornell mathematics books
         Discussion

   Session III.  Distribution, Networks, and Networking:
                 Options for Dissemination
      Robert G. Zich Moderator
      Clifford A. Lynch
         Discussion
      Howard Besser
         Discussion
      Ronald L. Larsen
      Edwin B. Brownrigg
         Discussion

   Session IV.  Image Capture, Text Capture, Overview of Text and
                Image Storage Formats
         William L. Hooton Moderator
      A Principal Methods for Image Capture of Text:
            direct scanning, use of microform
         Anne R. Kenney
         Pamela Q.J. Andre
         Judith A. Zidar
         Donald J. Waters
            Discussion
      B Special Problems:  bound volumes, conservation,
                            reproducing printed halftones
         George Thoma
         Carl Fleischhauer
            Discussion
      C Image Standards and Implications for Preservation
         Jean Baronas
         Patricia Battin
            Discussion
      D Text Conversion:  OCR vs. rekeying, standards of accuracy
                           and use of imperfect texts, service bureaus
         Michael Lesk
         Ricky Erway
         Judith A. Zidar
            Discussion

   Session V.  Approaches to Preparing Electronic Texts
      Susan Hockey Moderator
      Stuart Weibel
         Discussion
      C.M. SperbergMcQueen
         Discussion
      Eric M. Calaluca
         Discussion

   Session VI.  Copyright Issues
      Marybeth Peters

   Session VII.  Conclusion
      Prosser Gifford Moderator
      General discussion

Appendix I:  Program

Appendix II:  Abstracts

Appendix III:  Directory of Participants


                                 


                            Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Carl Fleischhauer and Prosser Gifford for the
opportunity to learn about areas of human activity unknown to me a scant
ten months ago, and the David and Lucile Packard Foundation for
supporting that opportunity.  The help given by others is acknowledged on
a separate page.

                                                          19 October 1992


                                 


                              INTRODUCTION

The Workshop on Electronic Texts 1 drew together representatives of
various projects and interest groups to compare ideas, beliefs,
experiences, and, in particular, methods of placing and presenting
historical textual materials in computerized form.  Most attendees gained
much in insight and outlook from the event.  But the assembly did not
form a new nation, or, to put it another way, the diversity of projects
and interests was too great to draw the representatives into a cohesive,
actionoriented body.2

Everyone attending the Workshop shared an interest in preserving and
providing access to historical texts.  But within this broad field the
attendees represented a variety of formal, informal, figurative, and
literal groups, with many individuals belonging to more than one.  These
groups may be defined roughly according to the following topics or
activities:

 Imaging
 Searchable coded texts
 National and international computer networks
 CDROM production and dissemination
 Methods and technology for converting older paper materials into
electronic form
 Study of the use of digital materials by scholars and others

This summary is arranged thematically and does not follow the actual
sequence of presentations.

NOTES:
     1  In this document, the phrase electronic text is used to mean
     any computerized reproduction or version of a document, book,
     article, or manuscript including images, and not merely a machine
     readable or machinesearchable text.

     2  The Workshop was held at the Library of Congress on 910 June
     1992, with funding from the David and Lucile Packard Foundation.
     The document that follows represents a summary of the presentations
     made at the Workshop and was compiled by James DALY.  This
     introduction was written by DALY and Carl FLEISCHHAUER.


PRESERVATION AND IMAGING

Preservation, as that term is used by archivists,3 was most explicitly
discussed in the context of imaging.  Anne KENNEY and Lynne PERSONIUS
explained how the concept of a faithful copy and the userfriendliness of
the traditional book have guided their project at Cornell University.4
Although interested in computerized dissemination, participants in the
Cornell project are creating digital image sets of older books in the
public domain as a source for a fresh paper facsimile or, in a future
phase, microfilm.  The books returned to the library shelves are
highquality and useful replacements on acidfree paper that should last
a long time.  To date, the Cornell project has placed little or no
emphasis on creating searchable texts one would not be surprised to find
that the project participants view such texts as new editions, and thus
not as faithful reproductions.

In her talk on preservation, Patricia BATTIN struck an ecumenical and
flexible note as she endorsed the creation and dissemination of a variety
of types of digital copies.  Do not be too narrow in defining what counts
as a preservation element, BATTIN counseled for the present, at least,
digital copieH NZWV DRGS KIVHVIEZGRLM RM NRMW XZMMLG YV ZH MZIILDOB
HGZMWZIWRAVW ZH, HZB, NRXILURON XLKRVH DRGS GSV HZNV LYQVXGREV.  HVGGRMT
HGZMWZIWH KIVXRKRGLFHOB XZM RMSRYRG XIVZGRERGB, YFG WVOZB XZM IVHFOG RM
XSZLH, HSV ZWERHVW.

RM KZIG, YZGGRMH KLHRGRLM IVUOVXGVW GSV FMHVGGOVW MZGFIV LU RNZTVULINZG
HGZMWZIWH, ZMW ZGGVMWVVH XLFOW SVZI VXSLVH LU GSRH FMHVGGOVWMVHH RM GSV
XLNNVMGH LU EZIRLFH HKVZPVIH.  ULI VCZNKOV, QVZM YZILMZH IVERVDVW GSV
HGZGFH LU HVEVIZO ULINZO HGZMWZIWH NLERMT GSILFTS XLNNRGGVVH LU VCKVIGH
ZMW XORUULIW OBMXS VMXLFIZTVW GSV FHV LU Z MVD TFRWVORMV ULI GIZMHNRGGRMT
WLXFNVMG RNZTVH LM RMGVIMVG.  GVHGRNLMB UILN KZIGRXRKZMGH RM GSV MZGRLMZO
ZTIRXFOGFIZO ORYIZIBH MZO GVCG WRTRGRAZGRLM KILTIZN ZMW OXH ZNVIRXZM
NVNLIB KILQVXG SRTSORTSGVW HLNV LU GSV XSZOOVMTVH GL GSV ZXGFZO XIVZGRLM
LI RMGVIXSZMTV LU RNZTVH, RMXOFWRMT WRUURXFOGRVH RM XLMEVIGRMT
KIVHVIEZGRLM NRXILURON GL WRTRGZO ULIN.  WLMZOW DZGVIH IVKLIGVW LM GSV
KILTIVHH LU Z NZHGVI KOZM ULI Z KILQVXG ZG BZOV FMREVIHRGB GL XLMEVIG
YLLPH LM NRXILURON GL WRTRGZO RNZTV HVGH, KILQVXG LKVM YLLP KLY.

GSV DLIPHSLK LUUVIVW IZGSVI OVHH LU ZM RNZTRMT KIZXGRXFN GSZM KOZMMVW,
YFG "SLDGL" SRMGH VNVITV ZG EZIRLFH KLRMGH, ULI VCZNKOV, GSILFTSLFG
PVMMVBH KIVHVMGZGRLM ZMW RM GSV WRHXFHHRLM LU ZIXZMZ HFXS ZH
GSIVHSLOWRMT ZMW WRGSVIRMT LUUVIVW YB TVLITV GSLNZ ZMW UOVRHXSSZFVI.

MLGVH:
     3  ZOGSLFTS GSVIV RH Z HVMHV RM DSRXS ZMB IVKILWFXGRLMH LU
     SRHGLIRXZO NZGVIRZOH KIVHVIEV GSV SFNZM IVXLIW, HKVXRZORHGH RM GSV
     URVOW SZEV WVEVOLKVW KZIGRXFOZI TFRWVORMVH ULI GSV XIVZGRLM LU
     ZXXVKGZYOV KIVHVIEZGRLM XLKRVH.

     4  GRGOVH ZMW ZUURORZGRLMH LU KIVHVMGVIH ZIV TREVM ZG GSV
     YVTRMMRMT LU GSVRI IVHKVXGREV GZOPH ZMW RM GSV WRIVXGLIB LU
     KZIGRXRKZMGH ZKKVMWRC RRR.


GSV NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV GVCG:  NZIPFK ZMW FHV

GSV HVXGRLMH LU GSV DLIPHSLK GSZG WVZOG DRGS NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV GVCG GVMWVW
GL YV NLIV XLMXVIMVW DRGS ZXXVHH ZMW FHV GSZM DRGS KIVHVIEZGRLM, ZG OVZHG
RM GSV MZIILD GVXSMRXZO HVMHV.  NRXSZVO HKVIYVITNXJFVVM NZWV Z ULIXVUFO
KIVHVMGZGRLM LM GSV GVCG VMXLWRMT RMRGRZGREVH GVR RNKOVNVMGZGRLM LU
GSV HGZMWZIW TVMVIZORAVW NZIPFK OZMTFZTV HTNO.  SRH RWVZH DVIV VXSLVW
YB HFHZM SLXPVB, VOOR NBOLMZH, ZMW HGFZIG DVRYVO.  DSROV GSV
KIVHVMGZGRLMH NZWV YB GSV GVR ZWELXZGVH XLMGZRMVW ML KIZXGRXFN, GSVRI
WRHXFHHRLM ULXFHVW LM GSV EZOFV LU GSV URMRHSVW KILWFXG, DSZG GSV
VFILKVZM XLNNFMRGB XZOOH IVFHZYRORGB, YFG DSZG NZB ZOHL YV GVINVW
WFIZYRORGB.  GSVB ZITFVW GSZG NZIPRMT FKGSZG RH, XLWRMTZ GVCG RM Z
DVOOXLMXVREVW DZB DROO KVINRG RG GL YV NLEVW UILN LMV XLNKFGVI
VMERILMNVMG GL ZMLGSVI, ZH DVOO ZH GL YV FHVW YB EZIRLFH FHVIH.  GDL
PRMWH LU NZIPFK DVIV WRHGRMTFRHSVW:  1 KILXVWFIZO NZIPFK, DSRXS
WVHXIRYVH GSV UVZGFIVH LU Z GVCG V.T., WLGH LM Z KZTV, ZMW 2
WVHXIRKGREV NZIPFK, DSRXS WVHXIRYVH GSV HGIFXGFIV LI VOVNVMGH LU Z
WLXFNVMG V.T., XSZKGVIH, KZIZTIZKSH, ZMW UILMG NZGGVI.

GSV GVR KILKLMVMGH VNKSZHRAVW GSV RNKLIGZMXV LU GVCGH GL HXSLOZIHSRK.
GSVB VCKOZRMVW SLD SVZEROB XLWVW ZMW GSFH ZMZOBAVW ZMW ZMMLGZGVW GVCGH
XZM FMWVIORV IVHVZIXS, KOZB Z ILOV RM HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM, ZMW
UZXRORGZGV XOZHHILLN GVZXSRMT.  HKVIYVITNXJFVVM IVNRMWVW ORHGVMVIH GSZG
Z DIRGGVM LI KIRMGVW RGVN V.T., Z KZIGRXFOZI VWRGRLM LU Z YLLP RH
NVIVOB Z IVKIVHVMGZGRLM LU GSV ZYHGIZXGRLM DV XZOO Z GVCG.  GL XLMXVIM
LFIHVOEVH DRGS UZRGSUFOOB IVKILWFXRMT Z KIRMGVW RMHGZMXV LU GSV GVCG,
HKVIYVITNXJFVVM ZITFVW, RH GL XLMXVIM LFIHVOEVH DRGS GSV IVKIVHVMGZGRLM
LU Z IVKIVHVMGZGRLM "RNZTVH ZH HRNFOZXIZ ULI GSV GVCG".  GSV GVR KILKLMVMGH
RMGVIVHG RM RNZTVH GVMWH GL ULXFH LM XLILOOZIB NZGVIRZOH ULI FHV RM GVZXSRMT,
ULI VCZNKOV, KSLGLTIZKSH LU GSV ZXILKLORH GL ZXXLNKZMB Z TIVVP GVCG.

YB GSV VMW LU GSV DLIPHSLK, HKVIYVITNXJFVVM XLMUVHHVW GL SZERMT YVVM
XLMEVIGVW GL Z ORNRGVW VCGVMG GL GSV ERVD GSZG VOVXGILMRX RNZTVH
XLMHGRGFGV Z KILNRHRMT ZOGVIMZGREV GL NRXILURONRMT RMWVVW, ZM
ZOGVIMZGREV KILYZYOB HFKVIRLI GL NRXILURONRMT.  YFG SV DZH MLG XLMERMXVW
GSZG VOVXGILMRX RNZTVH XLMHGRGFGV Z HVIRLFH ZGGVNKG GL IVKIVHVMG GVCG RM
VOVXGILMRX ULIN.  SLXPVB ZMW NBOLMZH ZOHL XLMXVWVW GSZG GSVRI VCKVIRVMXV
ZG GSV KRVIXV HBNKLHRFN GSV KIVERLFH DVVP ZG TVLITVGLDM FMREVIHRGB ZMW
GSV KIVHVMG XLMUVIVMXV ZG GSV ORYIZIB LU XLMTIVHH SZW XLNKVOOVW GSVN GL
IVVEZOFZGV GSVRI KVIHKVXGREV LM GSV FHVUFOMVHH LU GVCG ZH RNZTVH.
ZGGVMWVVH XLFOW HVV GSZG GSV GVCG ZMW RNZTV ZWELXZGVH DVIV RM
XLMHGIFXGREV GVMHRLM, HL GL HZB.

GSIVV MLMGVR KIVHVMGZGRLMH WVHXIRYVW ZKKILZXSVH GL KIVKZIRMT
NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV GVCG GSZG ZIV OVHH IRTLILFH ZMW GSFH OVHH VCKVMHREV.  RM
GSV XZHV LU GSV KZKVIH LU TVLITV DZHSRMTGLM, WLILGSB GDLSRT VCKOZRMVW
GSZG GSV WRTRGZO EVIHRLM DROO KILERWV Z MLGJFRGVKVIUVXG IVMWVIRMT LU
GSV GIZMHXIRYVW GVCGHLNV 135,000 WLXFNVMGH, ZEZROZYOV ULI IVHVZIXS
WFIRMT GSV WVXZWVH DSROV GSV KVIUVXG LI KIRMG EVIHRLM RH XLNKOVGVW.
NVNYVIH LU GSV ZNVIRXZM NVNLIB GVZN ZMW GSV HGZUU LU MZOH GVCG
WRTRGRAZGRLM KILTIZN HVV YVOLD ZOHL LFGORMVW Z NRWWOV TILFMW XLMXVIMRMT
HVZIXSZYOV GVCGH.  RM GSV XZHV LU ZNVIRXZM NVNLIB, XLMGIZXGLIH KILWFXV
GVCGH DRGS ZYLFG 99KVIXVMG ZXXFIZXB GSZG HVIEV ZH "YILDHV" LI
"IVUVIVMXV" EVIHRLMH LU DIRGGVM LI KIRMGVW LIRTRMZOH.  VMW FHVIH DSL MVVW
UZRGSUFO XLKRVH LI KVIUVXG IVMWRGRLMH NFHG IVUVI GL ZXXLNKZMBRMT HVGH LU
WRTRGZO UZXHRNROV RNZTVH LI XLMHFOG XLKRVH LU GSV LIRTRMZOH RM Z MVZIYB
ORYIZIB LI ZIXSREV.  ZNVIRXZM NVNLIB HGZUU ZITFVW GSZG GSV SRTS XLHG LU
KILWFXRMT 100KVIXVMG ZXXFIZGV XLKRVH DLFOW KIVEVMG OX UILN LUUVIRMT
ZXXVHH GL OZITV KZIGH LU RGH XLOOVXGRLMH.


GSV NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV GVCG:  NVGSLWH LU XLMEVIHRLM

ZOGSLFTS GSV DLIPHSLK WRW MLG RMXOFWV Z HBHGVNZGRX VCZNRMZGRLM LU GSV
NVGSLWH ULI XLMEVIGRMT GVCGH UILN KZKVI LI UILN UZXHRNROV RNZTVH RMGL
NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV ULIN, MVEVIGSVOVHH, EZIRLFH HKVZPVIH GLFXSVW FKLM GSRH
NZGGVI.  ULI VCZNKOV, DVRYVO IVKLIGVW GSZG LXOX SZH VCKVIRNVMGVW DRGS Z
NVITRMT LU NFOGRKOV LKGRXZO XSZIZXGVI IVXLTMRGRLM HBHGVNH GSZG DROO
IVWFXV VIILIH UILN ZM FMZXXVKGZYOV IZGV LU 5 XSZIZXGVIH LFG LU VEVIB
O,000 GL ZM FMZXXVKGZYOV IZGV LU 2 XSZIZXGVIH LFG LU VEVIB O,000.

KZNVOZ ZMWIV KIVHVMGVW ZM LEVIERVD LU MZOH GVCG WRTRGRAZGRLM KILTIZN ZMW
QFWRGS ARWZI WRHXFHHVW GSV GVXSMRXZO WVGZROH.  ARWZI VCKOZRMVW SLD MZO
KFIXSZHVW SZIWDZIV ZMW HLUGDZIV XZKZYOV LU KVIULINRMT LKGRXZO XSZIZXGVI
IVXLTMRGRLM LXI ZMW GVCG XLMEVIHRLM ZMW FHVW RGH LDM HGZUU GL XLMEVIG
GVCGH.  GSV KILXVHH, ARWZI HZRW, IVJFRIVW VCGVMHREV VWRGRMT ZMW KILQVXG
HGZUU ULFMW GSVNHVOEVH XLMHRWVIRMT ZOGVIMZGREVH, RMXOFWRMT IVPVBRMT
ZMWLI XIVZGRMT ZYHGIZXGH LI HFNNZIRVH LU GVCGH.  MZO IVXPLMVW XLHGH ZG
7 KVI KZTV.  YB DZB LU XLMGIZHG, IRXPB VIDZB VCKOZRMVW GSZG ZNVIRXZM
NVNLIB SZW WVXRWVW UILN GSV HGZIG GL XLMGIZXG LFG XLMEVIHRLM GL VCGVIMZO
HVIERXV YFIVZFH.  GSV XIRGVIRZ FHVW GL HVOVXG GSVHV XLMGIZXGLIH DVIV XLHG
ZMW JFZORGB LU IVHFOGH, ZH LKKLHVW GL NVGSLWH LU XLMEVIHRLM.  VIDZB MLGVW
GSZG SRHGLIRXZO WLXFNVMGH LI YLLPH LUGVM WL MLG OVMW GSVNHVOEVH GL LXI.
YLFMW NZGVIRZOH IVKIVHVMG Z HKVXRZO KILYOVN.  RM SVI VCKVIRVMXV, JFZORGB
XLMGILORMHKVXGRMT RMXLNRMT NZGVIRZOH, XLFMGRMT VIILIH RM HZNKOVHKLHVW
GSV NLHG GRNVXLMHFNRMT ZHKVXG LU XLMGIZXGRMT LFG XLMEVIHRLM.  VIDZB
IVXPLMVW ZNVIRXZM NVNLIBH XLHGH ZG 4 KVI KZTV, YFG XZFGRLMVW GSZG UVDVI
XLHGVOVNVMGH SZW YVVM RMXOFWVW GSZM RM MZOH URTFIV.


LKGRLMH ULI WRHHVNRMZGRLM

GSV GLKRX LU WRHHVNRMZGRLM KILKVI VNVITVW ZG EZIRLFH KLRMGH WFIRMT GSV
DLIPHSLK.  ZG GSV HVHHRLM WVELGVW GL MZGRLMZO ZMW RMGVIMZGRLMZO XLNKFGVI
MVGDLIPH, OBMXS, SLDZIW YVHHVI, ILMZOW OZIHVM, ZMW VWDRM YILDMIRTT
SRTSORTSGVW GSV ERIGFVH LU RMGVIMVG GLWZB ZMW LU GSV MVGDLIP GSZG DROO
VELOEV UILN RMGVIMVG.  ORHGVMVIH XLFOW WRHXVIM RM GSVHV MZIIZGREVH Z
ERHRLM LU ZM RMULINZGRLM WVNLXIZXB RM DSRXS NROORLMH LU XRGRAVMH UIVVOB
URMW ZMW FHV DSZG GSVB MVVW.  OBMXS MLGVW GSZG Z OZXP LU HGZMWZIWH
RMSRYRGH WRHHVNRMZGRMT NFOGRNVWRZ LM GSV MVGDLIP, Z GLKRX ZOHL WRHXFHHVW
YB YVHHVI.  OZIHVM ZWWIVHHVW GSV RHHFVH LU MVGDLIP HXZOZYRORGB ZMW
NLWFOZIRGB ZMW XLNNVMGVW FKLM GSV WRUURXFOGB LU ZMGRXRKZGRMT GSV VUUVXGH
LU TILDGS RM LIWVIH LU NZTMRGFWV.  YILDMIRTT GZOPVW ZYLFG GSV ZYRORGB LU
KZXPVG IZWRL GL KILERWV XVIGZRM ORMPH RM Z MVGDLIP DRGSLFG GSV MVVW ULI
DRIRMT.  SLDVEVI, GSV KIVHVMGVIH ZOHL XZOOVW ZGGVMGRLM GL GSV
HSLIGXLNRMTH ZMW RMXLMTIFRGRVH LU KIVHVMGWZB XLNKFGVI MVGDLIPH.  ULI
VCZNKOV:  1 MVGDLIP FHV RH TILDRMT WIZNZGRXZOOB, YFG NFXS MVGDLIP
GIZUURX XLMHRHGH LU KVIHLMZO XLNNFMRXZGRLM VNZRO.  2 OZITV YLWRVH LU
RMULINZGRLM ZIV ZEZROZYOV, YFG Z FHVIH ZYRORGB GL HVZIXS ZXILHH GSVRI
VMGRIVGB RH ORNRGVW.  3 GSVIV ZIV HRTMRURXZMG IVHLFIXVH ULI HXRVMXV ZMW
GVXSMLOLTB, YFG UVD MVGDLIP HLFIXVH KILERWV XLMGVMG RM GSV SFNZMRGRVH.
4 NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV GVCGH ZIV XLNNLMKOZXV, YFG GSV XZKZYRORGB LU GSV
HBHGVN GL WVZO DRGS RNZTVH OVG ZOLMV LGSVI NVWRZ ULINZGH OZTH YVSRMW.
Z TORNKHV LU Z NFOGRNVWRZ UFGFIV ULI MVGDLIPH, SLDVEVI, DZH KILERWVW YB
NZIRZ OVYILM RM SVI LEVIERVD LU GSV LMORMV QLFIMZO LU XFIIVMG XORMRXZO
GIRZOH LQXXG, ZMW GSV KILXVHH LU HXSLOZIOB KFYORHSRMT LMORMV.

GSV XLMGIZHGRMT ULIN LU GSV XWILN WRHP DZH MVEVI HBHGVNZGRXZOOB
ZMZOBAVW, YFG ZGGVMWVVH XLFOW TOVZM ZM RNKIVHHRLM UILN HVEVIZO LU GSV
HSLDZMWGVOO KIVHVMGZGRLMH.  GSV KVIHVFH ZMW ZNVIRXZM NVNLIB VCZNKOVH
WVNLMHGIZGVW IVXVMGOB KFYORHSVW WRHPH, DSROV GSV WVHXIRKGRLMH LU GSV
RYBXFH EVIHRLM LU GSV KZKVIH LU TVLITV DZHSRMTGLM ZMW XSZWDBXPSVZOVBH
KZGILOLTRZ OZGRMZ WZGZYZHV KOW GLOW LU WRHPH GL XLNV.  ZXXLIWRMT GL
VIRX XZOZOFXZ, KOWH KIRMXRKZO ULXFH SZH YVVM LM XLMEVIGRMT QZXJFVHKZFO
NRTMVH WVURMRGREV XLOOVXGRLM LU OZGRM GVCGH GL NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV ULIN.
ZOGSLFTS VEVIBLMV XLFOW HSZIV GSV MVGDLIP ZWELXZGVH VMGSFHRZHN ULI ZM
LMORMV UFGFIV, GSV KLHHRYRORGB LU ILOORMT FK LMVH HOVVEVH ULI Z HVHHRLM
DRGS Z XWILN XLMGZRMRMT YLGS GVCGFZO NZGVIRZOH ZMW Z KLDVIUFO IVGIRVEZO
VMTRMV NZWV GSV WRHP HVVN ZM ZKKVZORMT EVHHVO RMWVVW.  GSV LEVIZOO
WRHXFHHRLM HFTTVHGVW GSZG GSV GIZMHRGRLM UILN XWILN GL LMORMV MVGDLIPVW
ZXXVHH NZB KILEV UZI HOLDVI ZMW NLIV WRUURXFOG GSZM SZH YVVM ZMGRXRKZGVW.


DSL ZIV GSV FHVIH ZMW DSZG WL GSVB WL?

ZOGSLFTS XLMXVIMVW DRGS GSV GVXSMRXZORGRVH LU KILWFXGRLM, GSV DLIPHSLK
MVEVI OLHG HRTSG LU GSV KFIKLHVH ZMW FHVH LU VOVXGILMRX EVIHRLMH LU
GVCGFZO NZGVIRZOH.  ZH MLGVW ZYLEV, GSLHV RMGVIVHGVW RM RNZTRMT WRHXFHHVW
GSV KILYOVNZGRXZO NZGGVI LU WRTRGZO KIVHVIEZGRLM, DSROV GSV GVR KILKLMVMGH
WVHXIRYVW SLD NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV GVCGH XZM YV FHVW RM IVHVZIXS.  GSRH OZGGVI
GLKRX IVXVREVW GSLILFTS GIVZGNVMG RM GSV KZKVI IVZW YB ZEIZ NRXSVOHLM.
HSV KOZXVW GSV KSVMLNVMLM LU VOVXGILMRX GVCGH DRGSRM GSV XLMGVCG LU
YILZWVI GIVMWH RM RMULINZGRLM GVXSMLOLTB ZMW HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM.

ZNLMT LGSVI GSRMTH, NRXSVOHLM WVHXIRYVW LMORMV XLMUVIVMXVH GSZG
IVKIVHVMG Z ERTLILFH ZMW RNKLIGZMG RMGVOOVXGFZO ULIFN ULI XVIGZRM
WRHXRKORMVH.  RMGVIMVG MLD XZIIRVH NLIV GSZM 700 XLMUVIVMXVH, DRGS ZYLFG
80 KVIXVMG LU GSVHV WVELGVW GL GLKRXH RM GSV HLXRZO HXRVMXVH ZMW GSV
SFNZMRGRVH.  LGSVI HXSLOZIH FHV LMORMV MVGDLIPH ULI "WRHGZMXV OVZIMRMT."
NVZMDSROV, GSVIV SZH YVVM Z GIVNVMWLFH TILDGS RM VMWFHVI XLNKFGRMT
KILUVHHLIH GLWZB ZIV OVHH ORPVOB GSZM GSVRI KIVWVXVHHLIH GL ZHP GSV
XZNKFH XLNKFGVI XVMGVI GL KILXVHH GSVRI WZGZ.  VOVXGILMRX GVCGH ZIV LMV
PVB GL GSVHV HLKSRHGRXZGVW ZKKORXZGRLMH, NRXSVOHLM IVKLIGVW, ZMW NLIV ZMW
NLIV HXSLOZIH RM GSV SFNZMRGRVH MLD DLIP RM ZM LMORMV VMERILMNVMG.
GLDZIW GSV VMW LU GSV DLIPHSLK, NRXSZVO OVHP KIVHVMGVW Z XLILOOZIB GL
NRXSVOHLMH GZOP, IVKLIGRMT GSV IVHFOGH LU ZM VCKVIRNVMG GSZG XLNKZIVW
GSV DLIP LU LMV TILFK LU XSVNRHGIB HGFWVMGH FHRMT GIZWRGRLMZO KIRMGVW
GVCGH ZMW GDL TILFKH FHRMT VOVXGILMRX HLFIXVH.  GSV VCKVIRNVMG
WVNLMHGIZGVW GSZG RM GSV VEVMG LMV WLVH MLG PMLD DSZG GL IVZW, LMV MVVWH
GSV VOVXGILMRX HBHGVNH GSV VOVXGILMRX HBHGVNH SLOW ML ZWEZMGZTV ZG GSV
NLNVMG RU LMV PMLDH DSZG GL IVZW, YFG MVRGSVI WL GSVB RNKLHV Z KVMZOGB.

WZOB KILERWVW ZM ZMVXWLGZO ZXXLFMG LU GSV IVELOFGRLMRARMT RNKZXG LU GSV
MVD GVXSMLOLTB LM SRH KIVERLFH NVGSLWH LU IVHVZIXS RM GSV URVOW LU XOZHHRXH.
SRH ZXXLFMG, YB VCGIZKLOZGRLM, HVIEVW GL ROOFHGIZGV RM KZIG GSV ZITFNVMGH
NZWV YB NRXSVOHLM XLMXVIMRMT GSV KLHRGREV VUUVXGH LU GSV HFWWVM ZMW IZWRXZO
GIZMHULINZGRLM YVRMT DILFTSG RM GSV DZBH HXSLOZIH DLIP.

HFHZM EVXXRZ ZMW QLZMMV UIVVNZM WVORMVZGVW GSV FHV LU VOVXGILMRX
NZGVIRZOH LFGHRWV GSV FMREVIHRGB.  GSV NLHG RMGVIVHGRMT ZHKVXG LU GSVRI
FHV, UIVVNZM HZRW, XLFOW YV HVVM ZH Z KZIZWLC:  GVZXSVIH RM VOVNVMGZIB
ZMW HVXLMWZIB HXSLLOH IVJFVHGVW ZXXVHH GL KIRNZIB HLFIXV NZGVIRZOH YFG,
ZG GSV HZNV GRNV, ULFMW GSZG "KIRNZIRMVHH" RGHVOU NZWV GSVHV NZGVIRZOH
WRUURXFOG ULI GSVRI HGFWVMGH GL FHV.


LGSVI GLKRXH

NZIBYVGS KVGVIH IVERVDVW XLKBIRTSG OZD RM GSV FMRGVW HGZGVH ZMW LUUVIVW
ZWERXV WFIRMT Z OREVOB WRHXFHHRLM LU GSRH HFYQVXG.  YFG FMXVIGZRMGB
IVNZRMH XLMXVIMRMT GSV KIRXV LU XLKBIRTSG RM Z WRTRGZO NVWRFN, YVXZFHV Z
HLOFGRLM IVNZRMH GL YV DLIPVW LFG XLMXVIMRMT NZMZTVNVMG ZMW HBMGSVHRH LU
XLKBIRTSGVW ZMW LFGLUXLKBIRTSG KRVXVH LU Z WZGZYZHV.

ZH NLWVIZGLI LU GSV URMZO HVHHRLM LU GSV DLIPHSLK, KILHHVI TRUULIW WRIVXGVW
WRHXFHHRLM GL UFGFIV XLFIHVH LU ZXGRLM ZMW GSV KLGVMGRZO ILOV LU OX RM
ZWEZMXRMT GSVN.  ZNLMT GSV IVXLNNVMWZGRLMH GSZG VNVITVW DVIV GSV ULOOLDRMT:

      DLIPHSLK KZIGRXRKZMGH HSLFOW 1 YVTRM GL GSRMP ZYLFG DLIPRMT
     DRGS RNZTV NZGVIRZO, YFG HGIFXGFIV ZMW WRTRGRAV RG RM HFXS Z
     DZB GSZG ZG Z OZGVI HGZTV RG XZM YV RMGVIKIVGVW RMGL GVCG, ZMW
     2 URMW Z XLNNLM DZB GL YFROW GVCG ZMW RNZTVH GLTVGSVI HL GSZG
     GSVB XZM YV FHVW QLRMGOB ZG HLNV HGZTV RM GSV UFGFIV, DRGS
     ZKKILKIRZGV MVGDLIP HFKKLIG, YVXZFHV GSZG RH SLD FHVIH DROO DZMG
     GL ZXXVHH GSVHV NZGVIRZOH.  GSV ORYIZIB NRTSG VMXLFIZTV ZGGVNKGH
     GL YIRMT GLTVGSVI KVLKOV DSL ZIV DLIPRMT LM GVCGH ZMW RNZTVH.

      Z MVGDLIP EVIHRLM LU ZNVIRXZM NVNLIB HSLFOW YV WVEVOLKVW LI
     XLMHRWVIZGRLM HSLFOW YV TREVM GL NZPRMT GSV WZGZ RM RG
     ZEZROZYOV GL KVLKOV RMGVIVHGVW RM WLRMT MVGDLIP NFOGRNVWRZ.
     TREVM GSV XFIIVMG WVZIGS LU WRTRGZO WZGZ GSZG RH ZKKVZORMT ZMW
     FMVMXFNYVIVW YB VCGIVNVOB XLNKOVC IRTSGH KILYOVNH, WVEVOLKRMT Z
     MVGDLIP EVIHRLM LU ZNVIRXZM NVNLIB XLFOW WL NFXS GL SVOK NZPV
     MVGDLIP NFOGRNVWRZ Z IVZORGB.

      XLMXVIMRMT GSV GSLIMB RHHFV LU VOVXGILMRX WVKLHRG, OX HSLFOW
     RMRGRZGV Z XZGZOBGRX KILXVHH RM GVINH LU WRHGIRYFGVW
     IVHKLMHRYRORGB, GSZG RH, YIRMT GLTVGSVI GSV WRHGIRYFGVW
     LITZMRAZGRLMH ZMW HVG FK Z HGFWB TILFK GL OLLP ZG ZOO GSV
     RHHFVH IVOZGVW GL VOVXGILMRX WVKLHRG ZMW HVV DSVIV DV ZH Z
     MZGRLM HSLFOW NLEV.  ULI VCZNKOV, OX NRTSG ZGGVNKG GL KVIHFZWV
     LMV NZQLI ORYIZIB RM VZXS HGZGV GL WVZO DRGS RGH HGZGV
     VJFREZOVMG KFYORHSVI, DSRXS NRTSG KILWFXV Z XLLKVIZGREV KILQVXG
     GSZG DLFOW YV VJFRGZYOB WRHGIRYFGVW ZILFMW GSV XLFMGIB, ZMW LMV
     RM DSRXS OX DLFOW YV WVZORMT DRGS Z NRMRNZO MFNYVI LU KFYORHSVIH
     ZMW NRMRNZO XLKBIRTSG KILYOVNH.  OX NFHG ZOHL WVZO DRGS GSV
     XLMXVKG LU LMORMV KFYORHSRMT, WVGVINRMRMT, ZNLMT LGSVI GSRMTH,
     SLD HVIRZOH HFXS ZH LQXXG NRTSG YV WVKLHRGVW ULI XLKBIRTSG.

      HRMXV Z MFNYVI LU KILQVXGH ZIV KOZMMRMT GL XZIIB LFG
     KIVHVIEZGRLM YB XIVZGRMT WRTRGZO RNZTVH GSZG DROO VMW FK RM
     LMORMV LI MVZIORMV HGLIZTV ZG HLNV RMHGRGFGRLM, OX NRTSG KOZB
     Z SVOKUFO ILOV, ZG OVZHG RM GSV MVZI GVIN, YB ZXXVOVIZGRMT SLD
     GL XZGZOLT GSZG RMULINZGRLM RMGL GSV IVHVZIXS ORYIZIB RMULINZGRLM
     MVGDLIP IORM ZMW GSVM RMGL LXOX, HL GSZG RG DLFOW YV ZXXVHHRYOV.
     GSRH DLFOW IVWFXV GSV KLHHRYRORGB LU NFOGRKOV RMHGRGFGRLMH WRTRGRARMT
     GSV HZNV DLIP.


XLMXOFHRLM

GSV DLIPHSLK DZH EZOFZYOV YVXZFHV RG YILFTSG GLTVGSVI KZIGRHZMH UILN
EZIRLFH TILFKH ZMW KILERWVW ZM LXXZHRLM GL XLNKZIV TLZOH ZMW NVGSLWH.
GSV NLIV XLNNRGGVW KZIGRHZMH UIVJFVMGOB XLNNFMRXZGV DRGS LGSVIH RM GSVRI
TILFKH, YFG OVHH LUGVM ZXILHH TILFK YLFMWZIRVH.  GSV DLIPHSLK DZH ZOHL
EZOFZYOV GL ZGGVMWVVHRMXOFWRMT GSLHV RMELOEVW DRGS ZNVIRXZM NVNLIBDSL
XZNV OVHH XLNNRGGVW GL KZIGRXFOZI ZKKILZXSVH LI XLMXVKGH.  GSVHV
ZGGVMWVVH OVZIMVW Z TIVZG WVZO, ZMW KOZM GL HVOVXG ZMW VNKOLB VOVNVMGH LU
RNZTRMT, GVCGXLWRMT, ZMW MVGDLIPVW WRHGIRYFGRLM GSZG HFRG GSVRI
IVHKVXGREV KILQVXGH ZMW KFIKLHVH.

HGROO, IVZORGB IVZIH RGH FTOB SVZW:  ML YIVZPGSILFTS SZH YVVM ZXSRVEVW.
LM GSV RNZTRMT HRWV, LMV XLMUILMGH Z KILORUVIZGRLM LU XLNKVGRMT
WZGZRMGVIXSZMTV HGZMWZIWH ZMW Z OZXP LU XLMHVMHFH LM GSV ILOV LU WRTRGZO
UZXHRNROVH RM KIVHVIEZGRLM.  RM GSV IVZON LU NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV GVCGH, LMV
VMXLFMGVIH Z IVZHLMZYOB NZGFIV HGZMWZIW YFG NVGSLWLOLTRXZO WRUURXFOGRVH
ZMW SRTS XLHGH.  GSVHV OZGGVI KILYOVNH, LU XLFIHV, IVKIVHVMG Z HKVXRZO
RNKVWRNVMG GL GSV WVHRIV, ZH RG RH HLNVGRNVH VCKIVHHVW RM GSV KLKFOZI
KIVHH, "GL KFG GSV XLMGVMGH LU GSV ORYIZIB LU XLMTIVHH LM ORMV."  RM
GSV DLIWH LU LMV KZIGRXRKZMG, GSVIV DZH "ML HLOFGRLM GL GSV VXLMLNRX
KILYOVNHGSV KILQVXGH GSZG ZIV LFG GSVIV ZIV HFIERERMT, YFG RG RH TLRMT
GL YV Z OLG LU DLIP GL GIZMHULIN GSV RMULINZGRLM RMWFHGIB, ZMW HL UZI GSV
RMEVHGNVMG GL WL GSZG RH MLG ULIGSXLNRMT" OVHP, KVI ORGGVIZH.


                                 


                               KILXVVWRMTH


DVOXLNV


TRUULIW  LIRTRM LU DLIPHSLK RM XFIIVMG ORYIZIRZMH WVHRIV GL NZPV OXH
XLOOVXGRLMH NLIV DRWVOB ZEZROZYOV  WVHRWVIZGZ ZIRHRMT UILN GSV KILHKVXG
LU TIVZGVI RMGVIXLMMVXGVWMVHH 


ZUGVI DVOXLNRMT KZIGRXRKZMGH LM YVSZOU LU GSV ORYIZIB LU XLMTIVHH,
ZNVIRXZM NVNLIB ZN, ZMW GSV MZGRLMZO WVNLMHGIZGRLM OZY, KILHHVI
TRUULIW, WRIVXGLI ULI HXSLOZIOB KILTIZNH, ORYIZIB LU XLMTIVHH, OLXZGVW
GSV LIRTRM LU GSV DLIPHSLK LM VOVXGILMRX GVCGH RM Z XLMEVIHZGRLM SV SZW
SZW XLMHRWVIZYOB NLIV GSZM Z BVZI ZTL DRGS XZIO UOVRHXSSZFVI XLMXVIMRMT
HLNV LU GSV RHHFVH UZXVW YB ZN.  LM GSV ZHHFNKGRLM GSZG MFNVILFH LGSVI
KVLKOV DVIV ZHPRMT GSV HZNV JFVHGRLMH, GSV WVXRHRLM DZH NZWV GL YIRMT
GLTVGSVI ZH NZMB LU GSVHV KVLKOV ZH KLHHRYOV GL ZHP GSV HZNV JFVHGRLMH
GLTVGSVI.  RM Z WVVKVI HVMHV, TRUULIW HZRW, GSV LIRTRM LU GSV DLIPHSLK
OZB RM GSV WVHRIV LU GSV XFIIVMG ORYIZIRZM LU XLMTIVHH, QZNVH S.
YROORMTGLM, GL NZPV GSV XLOOVXGRLMH LU GSV ORYIZIB, VHKVXRZOOB GSLHV
LUUVIRMT FMRJFV LI FMFHFZO GVHGRNLMB LM ZHKVXGH LU GSV ZNVIRXZM
VCKVIRVMXV, ZEZROZYOV GL Z NFXS DRWVI XRIXOV LU FHVIH GSZM GSLHV UVD
KVLKOV DSL XZM XLNV GL DZHSRMTGLM GL FHV GSVN.  GSRH NVZMG GSZG GSV
VNKSZHRH LU ZN, UILN GSV LFGHVG, SZH YVVM LM ZIXSREZO XLOOVXGRLMH LU GSV
YZHRX NZGVIRZO, ZMW LM NZPRMT GSVHV XLOOVXGRLMH GSVNHVOEVH ZEZROZYOV,
IZGSVI GSZM HVOVXGVW LI SVZEROB VWRGVW KILWFXGH.

UILN ZNH VNKSZHRH ULOOLDVW GSV JFVHGRLMH DRGS DSRXS GSV DLIPHSLK YVTZM:
DSL DROO FHV GSVHV NZGVIRZOH, ZMW RM DSZG ULIN DROO GSVB DRHS GL FHV
GSVN.  YFG ZM VEVM OZITVI RHHFV WVHVIERMT NVMGRLM, RM TRUULIWH ERVD, DZH
GSV KSVMLNVMZO TILDGS RM RMGVIMVG XLMMVXGRERGB.  SV VCKIVHHVW GSV SLKV
GSZG GSV KILHKVXG LU TIVZGVI RMGVIXLMMVXGVWMVHH GSZM VEVI YVULIV DLFOW
OVZW GL:  1 NFXS NLIV XLLKVIZGREV ZMW NFGFZOOB HFKKLIGREV VMWVZELIH 2
WVEVOLKNVMG LU HBHGVNH LU HSZIVW ZMW WRHGIRYFGVW IVHKLMHRYRORGRVH GL
ZELRW WFKORXZGRLM ZMW GL VMHFIV ZXXFIZXB ZMW KIVHVIEZGRLM LU FMRJFV
NZGVIRZOH ZMW 3 ZTIVVNVMG LM GSV MVXVHHZIB HGZMWZIWH ZMW WVEVOLKNVMG LU
GSV ZKKILKIRZGV WRIVXGLIRVH ZMW RMWRXVH GL NZPV MZERTZGRLM
HGIZRTSGULIDZIW ZNLMT GSV EZIRVW IVHLFIXVH GSZG ZIV, ZMW RMXIVZHRMTOB
DROO YV, ZEZROZYOV.  RM GSRH XLMMVXGRLM, TRUULIW IVJFVHGVW GSZG
KZIGRXRKZMGH IVUOVXG UILN GSV LFGHVG FKLM GSV HLIGH LU LFGXLNVH GSVB
GSLFTSG GSV DLIPHSLK NRTSG SZEV.  WRW GSLHV KIVHVMG XLMHGRGFGV Z TILFK
DRGS HFUURXRVMG XLNNLM RMGVIVHGH GL KILKLHV Z MVCG HGVK LI MVCG HGVKH,
ZMW RU HL, DSZG NRTSG GSLHV YV?  GSVB DLFOW IVGFIM GL GSVHV JFVHGRLMH GSV
ULOOLDRMT ZUGVIMLLM.

                                 


UOVRHXSSZFVI  XLIV LU DLIPHSLK XLMXVIMH KIVKZIZGRLM ZMW KILWFXGRLM LU
NZGVIRZOH  HKVXRZO XSZOOVMTV RM XLMEVIHRLM LU GVCGFZO NZGVIRZOH 
JFZORGB EVIHFH JFZMGRGB  WL GSV HVEVIZO TILFKH IVKIVHVMGVW HSZIV XLNNLM
RMGVIVHGH? 


XZIO UOVRHXSSZFVI, XLLIWRMZGLI, ZNVIRXZM NVNLIB, ORYIZIB LU XLMTIVHH,
VNKSZHRAVW GSZG SV DLFOW ZGGVNKG GL IVKIVHVMG GSV KVLKOV DSL KVIULIN HLNV
LU GSV DLIP LU XLMEVIGRMT LI KIVKZIRMT  NZGVIRZOH ZMW GSZG GSV XLIV LU
GSV DLIPHSLK SZW GL WL DRGS KIVKZIZGRLM ZMW KILWFXGRLM.  UOVRHXSSZFVI
GSVM WIVD Z WRHGRMXGRLM YVGDVVM GSV OLMT GVIN, DSVM NZMB GSRMTH DLFOW YV
ZEZROZYOV ZMW XLMMVXGVW RM GSV DZBH GSZG TRUULIW WVHXIRYVW, ZMW GSV HSLIG
GVIN, RM DSRXS ZN MLG LMOB SZH DIVHGOVW DRGS GSV RHHFV LU DSZG RH GSV
YVHG XLFIHV GL KFIHFV YFG ZOHL SZH UZXVW Z EZIRVGB LU GVXSMRXZO
XSZOOVMTVH.

UOVRHXSSZFVI IVNZIPVW ZNH VMWVZELIH GL WVZO DRGS Z DRWV IZMTV LU ORYIZIB
ULINZGH, HFXS ZH NLGRLM KRXGFIV XLOOVXGRLMH, HLFMWIVXLIWRMT XLOOVXGRLMH,
ZMW KRXGLIRZO XLOOVXGRLMH LU EZIRLFH HLIGH, VHKVXRZOOB XLOOVXGRLMH LU
KSLGLTIZKSH.  RM GSV XLFIHV LU GSVHV VUULIGH, ZN PVKG XLNRMT YZXP GL
GVCGFZO NZGVIRZOHNZMFHXIRKGH LI IZIV KIRMGVW NZGGVI, YLFMW NZGVIRZOH,
VGX.  GVCG KLHVW GSV TIVZGVHG XLMEVIHRLM XSZOOVMTV LU ZOO.  GSFH, GSV
TVMVHRH LU GSV DLIPHSLK, DSRXS IVUOVXGH GSV KILYOVNH UZXVW YB ZN.  GSVHV
KILYOVNH RMXOFWV KSBHRXZO KILYOVNH.  ULI VCZNKOV, GSLHV RM GSV ORYIZIB
ZMW ZIXSREV YFHRMVHH WVZO DRGS XLOOVXGRLMH NZWV FK LU UIZTROV ZMW IZIV
NZMFHXIRKG RGVNH, YLFMW NZGVIRZOH, VHKVXRZOOB GSV MLGLIRLFHOB YIRGGOV
YLFMW NZGVIRZOH LU GSV OZGV MRMVGVVMGS XVMGFIB.  GSVHV ZIV KIVXRLFH
XFOGFIZO ZIGRUZXGH, SLDVEVI, ZH DVOO ZH RMGVIVHGRMT HLFIXVH LU
RMULINZGRLM, ZMW OX WVHRIVH GL IVGZRM ZMW XLMHVIEV GSVN.  ZN MVVWH GL
SZMWOV GSRMTH DRGSLFG WZNZTRMT GSVN.  TFROOLGRMRMT Z YLLP GL IFM RG
GSILFTS Z HSVVG UVVWVI NFHG YV ZELRWVW ZG ZOO XLHGH.

YVBLMW KSBHRXZO KILYOVNH, RHHFVH KVIGZRMRMT GL JFZORGB ZILHV.  ULI
VCZNKOV, GSV WVHRIV GL KILERWV FHVIH DRGS Z HVZIXSZYOV GVCG RH ZUUVXGVW
YB GSV JFVHGRLM LU ZXXVKGZYOV OVEVO LU ZXXFIZXB.  LMV SFMWIVW KVIXVMG
ZXXFIZXB RH GIVNVMWLFHOB VCKVMHREV.  LM GSV LGSVI SZMW, GSV LFGKFG LU
LKGRXZO XSZIZXGVI IVXLTMRGRLM LXI XZM YV GIVNVMWLFHOB RMZXXFIZGV.
ZOGSLFTS ZN SZH ZGGVNKGVW GL URMW Z NRWWOV TILFMW, FMXVIGZRMGB KVIHRHGH
ZH GL DSVGSVI LI MLG RG SZH WRHXLEVIVW GSV IRTSG HLOFGRLM.

JFVHGRLMH LU JFZORGB ZILHV XLMXVIMRMT RNZTVH ZH DVOO.  UOVRHXSSZFVI
XLMGIZHGVW GSV VCGIVNVOB SRTS OVEVO LU JFZORGB LU GSV WRTRGZO RNZTVH RM
GSV XLIMVOO CVILC KILQVXG DRGS ZNH VUULIGH GL KILERWV Z YILDHVJFZORGB
LI ZXXVHHJFZORGB RNZTV, ZH LKKLHVW GL ZM ZIXSREZO LI KIVHVIEZGRLM RNZTV.
UOVRHXSSZFVI GSVIVULIV DVOXLNVW GSV LKKLIGFMRGB GL XLNKZIV MLGVH.

UOVRHXSSZFVI LYHVIEVW RM KZHHRMT GSZG XLMEVIHZGRLMH SV SZW SZW ZYLFG
MVGDLIPH SZEV YVTFM GL HRTMZO GSZG ULI EZIRLFH ULINH LU NVWRZ Z
WVGVINRMZGRLM NZB YV NZWV GSZG GSVIV RH Z YILDHVJFZORGB RGVN, LI Z
WRHGIRYFGRLMZMWZXXVHHJFZORGB RGVN GSZG NZB XLVCRHG RM HLNV HBHGVNH
DRGS Z SRTSVI JFZORGB ZIXSREZO RGVN GSZG DLFOW YV RMXLMEVMRVMG GL HVMW
GSILFTS GSV MVGDLIP YVXZFHV LU RGH HRAV.  UOVRHXSSZFVI IVUVIIVW, LU
XLFIHV, GL RNZTVH NLIV GSZM GL HVZIXSZYOV GVCG.

ZH ZN XLMHRWVIVW GSLHV JFVHGRLMH, HVEVIZO XLMXVKGFZO RHHFVH ZILHV:  LFTSG
ZN LXXZHRLMZOOB GL IVKILWFXV NZGVIRZOH VMGRIVOB GSILFTS ZM RNZTV HVG, ZG
LGSVI GRNVH, VMGRIVOB GSILFTS Z GVCG HVG, ZMW RM HLNV XZHVH, Z NRC?
GSVIV KILYZYOB DLFOW YV GRNVH DSVM GSV SRHGLIRXZO ZFGSVMGRXRGB LU ZM
ZIGRUZXG DLFOW IVJFRIV GSZG RGH RNZTV YV FHVW.  ZM RNZTV NRTSG YV
WVHRIZYOV ZH Z IVXLFIHV ULI FHVIH RU LMV XLFOW MLG KILERWV 100KVIXVMG
ZXXFIZGV GVCG.  ZTZRM, ZN DLMWVIVW, ZH Z KIZXGRXZO NZGGVI, RU Z
WRHGRMXGRLM XLFOW YV WIZDM YVGDVVM IZIV KIRMGVW NZGGVI GSZG NRTSG VCRHG
RM NFOGRKOV XLOOVXGRLMHGSZG RH, RM GVM LI URUGVVM ORYIZIRVH.  RM HFXS
XZHVH, GSV MVVW ULI KVIUVXG IVKILWFXGRLM DLFOW YV OVHH GSZM ULI FMRJFV
RGVNH.  RNKORXRG RM SRH IVNZIPH, UOVRHXSSZFVI XLMXVWVW, DZH GSV ZWNRHHRLM
GSZG ZN SZH YVVM GROGRMT HGILMTOB GLDZIWH JFZMGRGB ZMW WIZDRMT YZXP Z
ORGGOV UILN KVIUVXG JFZORGB.  GSZG RH, RG HVVNVW GL ZN GSZG HLXRVGB DLFOW
YV YVGGVI HVIEVW RU NLIV GSRMTH DVIV WRHGIRYFGVW YB OXVEVM RU GSVB DVIV
MLG JFRGV KVIUVXGGSZM RU UVDVI GSRMTH, KVIUVXGOB IVKIVHVMGVW, DVIV
WRHGIRYFGVW.  GSRH DZH HGZGVW ZH Z KILKLHRGRLM GL YV GVHGVW, DRGS
IVHKLMHVH GL YV TZGSVIVW UILN FHVIH.

RM GSRMPRMT ZYLFG RHHFVH IVOZGVW GL IVKILWFXGRLM LU NZGVIRZOH ZMW HVVRMT
LGSVI KVLKOV VMTZTVW RM KZIZOOVO ZXGRERGRVH, ZN WVVNVW RG FHVUFO GL
XLMEVMV Z XLMUVIVMXV.  SVMXV, GSV DLIPHSLK.  UOVRHXSSZFVI GSVIVFKLM
HFIEVBVW GSV HVEVIZO TILFKH IVKIVHVMGVW:  1 GSV DLIOW LU RNZTVH RNZTV
FHVIH ZMW RNZTV NZPVIH 2 GSV DLIOW LU GVCG ZMW HXSLOZIHSRK ZMW, DRGSRM
GSRH TILFK, GSLHV XLMXVIMVW DRGS OZMTFZTVUOVRHXSSZFVI XLMUVHHVW GL URMWRMT
WVORTSGUFO RILMB RM GSV UZXG GSZG HLNV LU GSV NLHG ZWEZMXVW GSRMPVIH LM
XLNKFGVIRAVW GVCGH ZIV GSLHV WVZORMT DRGS ZMXRVMG TIVVP ZMW ILNZM NZGVIRZOH
3 GSV MVGDLIP DLIOW ZMW 4 GSV TVMVIZO DLIOW LU ORYIZIB HXRVMXV, DSRXS
RMXOFWVH KVLKOV RMGVIVHGVW RM KIVHVIEZGRLM ZMW XZGZOLTRMT.

UOVRHXSSZFVI XLMXOFWVW SRH IVNZIPH DRGS HKVXRZO GSZMPH GL GSV WZERW ZMW
OFXROV KZXPZIW ULFMWZGRLM ULI RGH HFKKLIG LU GSV NVVGRMT, GSV ZNVIRXZM
NVNLIB TILFK, GSV LUURXV ULI HXSLOZIOB KILTIZNH, GSV MZGRLMZO
WVNLMHGIZGRLM OZY, ZMW GSV LUURXV LU HKVXRZO VEVMGH.  SV VCKIVHHVW GSV
SLKV GSZG WZERW DLLWOVB KZXPZIW NRTSG YV ZYOV GL ZGGVMW, MLGRMT GSZG
KZXPZIWH DLIP ZMW GSV DLIP LU GSV ULFMWZGRLM SZW HKLMHLIVW Z MFNYVI LU
KILQVXGH RM GSV GVCG ZIVZ.

                                 

HVHHRLM R.  XLMGVMG RM Z MVD ULIN:   DSL DROO FHV RG ZMW DSZG DROO GSVB WL?


WZOB  ZXPMLDOVWTVNVMGH  Z MVD OZGRM ZFGSLIH WRHP   VUUVXGH LU GSV MVD
GVXSMLOLTB LM KIVERLFH NVGSLWH LU IVHVZIXS 


HVIERMT ZH NLWVIZGLI, QZNVH WZOB ZXPMLDOVWTVW GSV TVMVILHRGB LU ZOO GSV
KIVHVMGVIH ULI TRERMT LU GSVRI GRNV, XLFMHVO, ZMW KZGRVMXV RM KOZMMRMT
GSV DLIPHSLK, ZH DVOO ZH LU NVNYVIH LU GSV ZNVIRXZM NVNLIB KILQVXG ZMW
LGSVI ORYIZIB LU XLMTIVHH HGZUU, ZMW GSV WZERW ZMW OFXROV KZXPZIW
ULFMWZGRLM ZMW RGH VCVXFGREV WRIVXGLI, XLOYFIM H. DROYFI.

WZOB GSVM IVXLFMGVW SRH ERHRG RM NZIXS GL GSV XVMGVI ULI VOVXGILMRX GVCGH
RM GSV SFNZMRGRVH XVGS ZMW GSV WVKZIGNVMG LU XOZHHRXH ZG IFGTVIH
FMREVIHRGB, DSVIV ZM LOW UIRVMW, OLDVOO VWNFMWH, RMGILWFXVW SRN GL GSV
WVKZIGNVMGH RYBXFH HXSLOZIOB KVIHLMZO XLNKFGVI, ZMW, RM KZIGRXFOZI, GSV
MVD OZGRM XWILN, XLMGZRMRMT, ZNLMT LGSVI GSRMTH, ZONLHG ZOO XOZHHRXZO
OZGRM ORGVIZIB GVCGH GSILFTS Z.W. 200.  KZXPZIW SFNZMRGRVH RMHGRGFGV
KSR, OLH ZOGLH, XZORULIMRZ, IVOVZHVW GSRH WRHP OZGV RM 1991, DRGS Z
MLNRMZO GIRVMMRZO ORXVMHRMT UVV.

KOZBRMT DRGS GSV WRHP ULI ZM SLFI LI HL ZG IFGTVIH YILFTSG SLNV GL WZOB
ZG LMXV GSV IVELOFGRLMRARMT RNKZXG LU GSV MVD GVXSMLOLTB LM SRH KIVERLFH
NVGSLWH LU IVHVZIXS.  SZW GSRH WRHP YVVM ZEZROZYOV GDL LI GSIVV BVZIH
VZIORVI, WZOB XLMGVMWVW, DSVM SV DZH VMTZTVW RM KIVKZIRMT Z XLNNVMGZIB LM
YLLP 10 LU ERITROH ZVMVRW ULI XZNYIRWTV FMREVIHRGB KIVHH, SV DLFOW MLG
SZEV IVJFRIVW Z ULIGBVRTSGHJFZIVULLG GZYOV LM DSRXS GL HKIVZW GSV
MFNVILFH, NLHG UIVJFVMGOB XLMHFOGVW RGVNH, RMXOFWRMT HLNV GVM LI GDVOEV
XLMXLIWZMXVH GL PVB OZGRM ZFGSLIH, ZM ZONLHG VJFZO MFNYVI LU OVCRXZ GL
ZFGSLIH DSL OZXPVW XLMXLIWZMXVH, ZMW DSVIV VRGSVI OVCRXZ LI XLMXLIWZMXVH
DVIV OZXPRMT, MFNVILFH VWRGRLMH LU ZFGSLIH ZMGVWZGRMT ZMW KLHGWZGRMT ERITRO.

MLI, DSVM XSVXPRMT VZXS LU GSV ZEVIZTV HRC GL HVEVM DLIWH XLMGZRMVW RM
GSV ERITRORZM SVCZNVGVI ULI RGH FHZTV VOHVDSVIV RM ERITROH DLIPH LI
LGSVI OZGRM ZFGSLIH, DLFOW WZOB SZEV SZW GL NZRMGZRM GSV OZYLIRLFH
NVXSZMRXZO KILXVHH LU UORKKRMT GSILFTS GSVHV XLMXLIWZMXVH, OVCRXZ, ZMW
VWRGRLMH VZXS GRNV.  MLI DLFOW SV SZEV SZW GL UIVJFVMG ZH LUGVM GSV
NROGLM H. VRHVMSLDVI ORYIZIB ZG GSV QLSMH SLKPRMH FMREVIHRGB GL XLMHFOG
GSV GSVHZFIFH ORMTFZV OZGRMZV.  RMHGVZW LU WVELGRMT XLFMGOVHH SLFIH, LI
GSV YFOP LU SRH IVHVZIXS GRNV, GL TZGSVIRMT WZGZ XLMXVIMRMT ERITROH FHV
LU DLIWH, WZOBMLD UIVVW YB KSRH OZGRM ZFGSLIH WRHP UILN GSV
GBIZMMRXZO, BVG RM HLNV DZBH KZIZWLCRXZOOB SZKKB HXSLOZIOB WIFWTVIB
DLFOW SZEV YVVM ZYOV GL WVELGV GSZG HZNV YFOP LU GRNV GL ZMZOBARMT ZMW
RMGVIKIVGRMT ERITRORZM EVIYZO FHZTV.

XRGRMT GSVLWLIV YIFMMVI, TIVTLIB XIZMV, VOOR NBOLMZH, ZMW ZEIZ NRXSVOHLM,
WZOB ZITFVW GSZG GSRH IVEVIHZO RM SRH HGBOV LU DLIP, NZWV KLHHRYOV YB GSV
MVD GVXSMLOLTB, DLFOW KVISZKH SZEV IVHFOGVW RM YVGGVI, NLIV KILWFXGREV
IVHVZIXS.  RMWVVW, VEVM RM GSV XLFIHV LU SRH YILDHRMT GSV OZGRM ZFGSLIH
WRHP ZG IFGTVIH, RGH KLDVIUFO HVZIXS, IVGIRVEZO, ZMW SRTSORTSGRMT
XZKZYRORGRVH HFTTVHGVW GL SRN HVEVIZO MVD ZEVMFVH LU IVHVZIXS RMGL
ERITROH FHV LU HLFMW VUUVXGH.  GSRH ZMVXWLGZO ZXXLFMG, WZOB NZRMGZRMVW,
NZB HVIEV GL ROOFHGIZGV RM KZIG GSV HFWWVM ZMW IZWRXZO GIZMHULINZGRLM
YVRMT DILFTSG RM GSV DZBH HXSLOZIH DLIP.

                                 


NRXSVOHLM  VOVNVMGH IVOZGVW GL HXSLOZIHSRK ZMW GVXSMLOLTB  VOVXGILMRX
GVCGH DRGSRM GSV XLMGVCG LU YILZWVI GIVMWH DRGSRM RMULINZGRLM GVXSMLOLTB
ZMW HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM  VEZOFZGRLM LU GSV KILHKVXGH ULI GSV FHV LU
VOVXGILMRX GVCGH  IVOZGRLMHSRK LU VOVXGILMRX GVCGH GL KILXVHHVH LU
HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM RM SFNZMRGRVH IVHVZIXS  MVD VCXSZMTV ULINZGH
XIVZGVW YB HXSLOZIH  KILQVXGH RMRGRZGVW GL RMXIVZHV HXSLOZIOB ZXXVHH GL
XLMEVIGVW GVCG  GIVMW GLDZIW NZPRMT VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH ZEZROZYOV
GSILFTS IVHVZIXS ZMW VWFXZGRLM MVGDLIPH  XSZMTVH GZPRMT KOZXV RM
HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM ZNLMT SFNZMRGRVH HXSLOZIH  MVGDLIPNVWRZGVW
HXSLOZIHSRK GIZMHULINRMT GIZWRGRLMZO HXSLOZIOB KIZXGRXVH  PVB
RMULINZGRLM GVXSMLOLTB GIVMWH ZUUVXGRMT GSV XLMWFXG LU HXSLOZIOB
XLNNFMRXZGRLM LEVI GSV MVCG WVXZWV  GSV GIVMW GLDZIW VMWFHVI XLNKFGRMT
 GSV GIVMW GLDZIW TIVZGVI XLMMVXGRERGB  VUUVXGH LU GSVHV GIVMWH  PVB
GIZMHULINZGRLMH GZPRMT KOZXV  HFNNZIB LU KIRMXRKZO ZITFNVMGH 


ZEIZ NRXSVOHLM, ZIXSREZO IVHVZIXS ZMW VEZOFZGRLM HGZUU, MZGRLMZO ZIXSREVH
ZMW IVXLIWH ZWNRMRHGIZGRLM MZIZ, ZITFVW GSZG VHGZYORHSRMT DSL DROO FHV
VOVXGILMRX GVCGH ZMW DSZG GSVB DROO FHV GSVN ULI RMELOEVH Z XLMHRWVIZGRLM
LU YLGS RMULINZGRLM GVXSMLOLTB ZMW HXSLOZIHSRK GIVMWH.  GSRH
XLMHRWVIZGRLM RMXOFWVH HVEVIZO VOVNVMGH IVOZGVW GL HXSLOZIHSRK ZMW
GVXSMLOLTB:  1 GSV PVB GIVMWH RM RMULINZGRLM GVXSMLOLTB GSZG ZIV NLHG
IVOVEZMG GL HXSLOZIHSRK 2 GSV PVB GIVMWH RM GSV FHV LU XFIIVMGOB
ZEZROZYOV GVXSMLOLTB YB HXSLOZIH RM GSV MLMHXRVMGRURX XLNNFMRGB ZMW 3
GSV IVOZGRLMHSRK YVGDVVM GSVHV GDL EVIB WRHGRMXG YFG RMGVIIVOZGVW GIVMWH.
GSV RMEVHGNVMG RM FMWVIHGZMWRMT GSRH IVOZGRLMHSRK YVRMT NZWV YB
RMULINZGRLM KILERWVIH, GVXSMLOLTRHGH, ZMW KFYORX KLORXB WVEVOLKVIH, ZH
DVOO ZH YB HXSLOZIH GSVNHVOEVH, HVVNH GL YV KVIEZHREV ZMW TILDRMT,
NRXSVOHLM XLMGVMWVW.  HSV WIVD LM XLOOZYLIZGREV DLIP DRGS QVUU ILGSVMYVIT
LM GSV HXSLOZIOB FHV LU GVXSMLOLTB.

NRXSVOHLM HLFTSG GL KOZXV GSV KSVMLNVMLM LU VOVXGILMRX GVCGH DRGSRM GSV
XLMGVCG LU YILZWVI GIVMWH DRGSRM RMULINZGRLM GVXSMLOLTB ZMW HXSLOZIOB
XLNNFMRXZGRLM.  HSV ZITFVW GSZG VOVXGILMRX GVCGH ZIV LU NLHG FHV GL
IVHVZIXSVIH GL GSV VCGVMG GSZG GSV IVHVZIXSVIH DLIPRMT XLMGVCG R.V.,
GSVRI IVOVEZMG YRYORLTIZKSRX HLFIXVH, XLOOVTRZO UVVWYZXP, ZMZOBGRX GLLOH,
MLGVH, WIZUGH, VGX., ZOLMT DRGS GSVRI URVOWH KIRNZIB ZMW HVXLMWZIB
HLFIXVH, ZOHL RH ZXXVHHRYOV RM VOVXGILMRX ULIN ZMW XZM YV RMGVTIZGVW RM
DZBH GSZG ZIV FMRJFV GL GSV LMORMV VMERILMNVMG.

VEZOFZGRLM LU GSV KILHKVXGH ULI GSV FHV LU VOVXGILMRX GVCGH RMXOFWVH GDL
VOVNVMGH:  1 ZM VCZNRMZGRLM LU GSV DZBH RM DSRXS IVHVZIXSVIH XFIIVMGOB
ZIV FHRMT VOVXGILMRX GVCGH ZOLMT DRGS LGSVI VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH, ZMW 2
ZM ZMZOBHRH LU PVB RMULINZGRLM GVXSMLOLTB GIVMWH GSZG ZIV ZUUVXGRMT GSV
OLMTGVIN XLMWFXG LU HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM.  NRXSVOHLM ORNRGVW SVI
WRHXFHHRLM LU GSV FHV LU VOVXGILMRX GVCGH GL GSV KIZXGRXVH LU SFNZMRHGH
ZMW MLGVW GSZG GSV HXRVMGRURX XLNNFMRGB DZH LFGHRWV GSV KZMVOH LEVIERVD.

NRXSVOHLM VCZNRMVW GSV MZGFIV LU GSV XFIIVMG IVOZGRLMHSRK LU VOVXGILMRX
GVCGH RM KZIGRXFOZI, ZMW VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH RM TVMVIZO, GL DSZG HSV
NZRMGZRMVW DVIV, VHHVMGRZOOB, UREV KILXVHHVH LU HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM
RM SFNZMRGRVH IVHVZIXS.  IVHVZIXSVIH 1 RWVMGRUB HLFIXVH, 2 XLNNFMRXZGV
DRGS GSVRI XLOOVZTFVH, 3 RMGVIKIVG ZMW ZMZOBAV WZGZ, 4 WRHHVNRMZGV
GSVRI IVHVZIXS URMWRMTH, ZMW 5 KIVKZIV XFIIRXFOZ GL RMHGIFXG GSV MVCG
TVMVIZGRLM LU HXSLOZIH ZMW HGFWVMGH.  GSRH VCZNRMZGRLM DLFOW KILWFXV Z
XOVZIVI FMWVIHGZMWRMT LU GSV HBMVITB ZNLMT GSVHV UREV KILXVHHVH GSZG
UFVOH GSV GVMWVMXB LU GSV FHV LU VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH ULI LMV KILXVHH GL
HGRNFOZGV RGH FHV ULI LGSVI KILXVHHVH LU HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM.

ULI GSV URIHG KILXVHH LU HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM, GSV RWVMGRURXZGRLM LU
HLFIXVH, NRXSVOHLM IVNZIPVW GSV LKKLIGFMRGB HXSLOZIH MLD VMQLB GL
HFKKOVNVMG GIZWRGRLMZO DLIWLUNLFGS HVZIXSVH ULI HLFIXVH ZNLMT GSVRI
XLOOVZTFVH DRGS MVD ULINH LU VOVXGILMRX HVZIXSRMT.  HL, ULI VCZNKOV,
RMHGVZW LU SZERMT GL ERHRG GSV ORYIZIB, IVHVZIXSVIH ZIV ZYOV GL VCKOLIV
WVHXIRKGRLMH LU SLOWRMTH RM GSVRI LUURXVH.  UFIGSVINLIV, RU GSVRI LDM
RMHGRGFGRLMH SLOWRMTH KILEV RMHFUURXRVMG, HXSLOZIH XZM ZXXVHH NLIV GSZM
200 NZQLI ZNVIRXZM ORYIZIB XZGZOLTFVH LEVI RMGVIMVG, RMXOFWRMT GSV
FMREVIHRGRVH LU XZORULIMRZ, NRXSRTZM, KVMMHBOEZMRZ, ZMW DRHXLMHRM.
WRIVXG ZXXVHH GL GSV YRYORLTIZKSRX WZGZYZHVH LUUVIH RMGVOOVXGFZO
VNKLDVINVMG GL HXSLOZIH YB KIVHVMGRMT Z XLNKIVSVMHREV NVZMH LU YILDHRMT
GSILFTS ORYIZIRVH UILN GSVRI SLNVH ZMW LUURXVH ZG GSVRI XLMEVMRVMXV.

GSV HVXLMW KILXVHH LU XLNNFMRXZGRLM RMELOEVH XLNNFMRXZGRLM ZNLMT
HXSLOZIH.  YVBLMW GSV NLHG XLNNLM NVGSLWH LU XLNNFMRXZGRLM, HXSLOZIH ZIV
FHRMT VNZRO ZMW Z EZIRVGB LU MVD VOVXGILMRX XLNNFMRXZGRLMH ULINZGH
WVIREVW UILN RG ULI UFIGSVI ZXZWVNRX RMGVIXSZMTV.  VNZRO VCXSZMTVH ZIV
TILDRMT ZG ZM ZHGLMRHSRMT IZGV, IVKLIGVWOB 15 KVIXVMG Z NLMGS.  GSVB
XFIIVMGOB XLMHGRGFGV ZKKILCRNZGVOB SZOU GSV GIZUURX LM IVHVZIXS ZMW
VWFXZGRLM MVGDLIPH.  NLIVLEVI, GSV TOLYZO HKIVZW LU VNZRO SZH YVVM HL
IZKRW GSZG RG RH MLD KLHHRYOV ULI ZNVIRXZM HXSLOZIH GL FHV RG GL
XLNNFMRXZGV DRGS XLOOVZTFVH RM XOLHV GL 140 LGSVI XLFMGIRVH.

LGSVI MVD VCXSZMTV ULINZGH XIVZGVW YB HXSLOZIH ZMW LKVIZGRMT LM RMGVIMVG
RMXOFWV NLIV GSZM 700 XLMUVIVMXVH, DRGS ZYLFG 80 KVIXVMG LU GSVHV WVELGVW
GL GLKRXH RM GSV HLXRZO HXRVMXVH ZMW SFNZMRGRVH.  GSV IZGV LU TILDGS LU
GSVHV HXSLOZIOB VOVXGILMRX XLMUVIVMXVH ZOHL RH ZHGLMRHSRMT.  UILN O990 GL
O991, 200 MVD XLMUVIVMXVH DVIV RWVMGRURVW LM RMGVIMVG.  UILN LXGLYVI 1991
GL QFMV 1992, ZM ZWWRGRLMZO 150 XLMUVIVMXVH RM GSV HLXRZO HXRVMXVH ZMW
SFNZMRGRVH DVIV ZWWVW GL GSRH WRIVXGLIB LU ORHGRMTH.  HXSLOZIH SZEV
VHGZYORHSVW XLMUVIVMXVH RM ERIGFZOOB VEVIB URVOW, DRGSRM VEVIB WRUUVIVMG
WRHXRKORMV.  ULI VCZNKOV, GSVIV ZIV XFIIVMGOB XOLHV GL 600 ZXGREV HLXRZO
HXRVMXV ZMW SFNZMRGRVH  XLMUVIVMXVH LM GLKRXH HFXS ZH ZIG ZMW
ZIXSRGVXGFIV, VGSMLNFHRXLOLTB, ULOPOLIV, QZKZMVHV XFOGFIV, NVWRXZO
VWFXZGRLM, ZMW TRUGVW ZMW GZOVMGVW VWFXZGRLM.  GSV ZKKVZO GL HXSLOZIH LU
XLNNFMRXZGRMT GSILFTS GSVHV XLMUVIVMXVH RH GSZG, FMORPV ZMB LGSVI NVWRFN,
VOVXGILMRX XLMUVIVMXVH GLWZB KILERWV Z ULIFN ULI TOLYZO XLNNFMRXZGRLM
DRGS KVVIH ZG GSV UILMG VMW LU GSV IVHVZIXS KILXVHH.

RMGVIKIVGZGRLM ZMW ZMZOBHRH LU HLFIXVH XLMHGRGFGVH GSV GSRIW KILXVHH LU
HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM GSZG NRXSVOHLM WRHXFHHVW RM GVINH LU GVCGH ZMW
GVCGFZO IVHLFIXVH.  GSV NVGSLWH FHVW GL ZMZOBAV HLFIXVH UZOO HLNVDSVIV LM
Z XLMGRMFFN UILN JFZMGRGZGREV ZMZOBHRH GL JFZORGZGREV ZMZOBHRH.
GBKRXZOOB, VERWVMXV RH XFOOVW ZMW VEZOFZGVW FHRMT NVGSLWH WIZDM UILN YLGS
VMWH LU GSRH XLMGRMFFN.  ZG LMV VMW, JFZMGRGZGREV ZMZOBHRH RMELOEVH GSV
FHV LU NZGSVNZGRXZO KILXVHHVH HFXS ZH Z XLFMG LU UIVJFVMXRVH ZMW
WRHGIRYFGRLMH LU LXXFIIVMXVH LI, LM Z SRTSVI OVEVO, IVTIVHHRLM ZMZOBHRH.
ZG GSV LGSVI VMW LU GSV XLMGRMFFN, JFZORGZGREV ZMZOBHRH GBKRXZOOB
RMELOEVH MLMNZGSVNZGRXZO KILXVHHVH LIRVMGVW GLDZIW OZMTFZTV
RMGVIKIVGZGRLM LI GSV YFROWRMT LU GSVLIB.  ZHKVXGH LU GSRH DLIP RMELOEV
GSV KILXVHHRMTVRGSVI NZMFZO LI XLNKFGZGRLMZOLU OZITV ZMW HLNVGRNVH
NZHHREV ZNLFMGH LU GVCGFZO HLFIXVH, ZOGSLFTS GSV FHV LU MLMGVCGFZO
HLFIXVH ZH VERWVMXV, HFXS ZH KSLGLTIZKSH, HLFMW IVXLIWRMTH, URON ULLGZTV,
ZMW ZIGRUZXGH, RH HRTMRURXZMG ZH DVOO.

HXSLOZIH SZEV WRHXLEVIVW GSZG NZMB LU GSV NVGSLWH LU RMGVIKIVGZGRLM ZMW
ZMZOBHRH GSZG ZIV IVOZGVW GL YLGS JFZMGRGZGREV ZMW JFZORGZGREV NVGSLWH
ZIV KILXVHHVH GSZG XZM YV KVIULINVW YB XLNKFGVIH.  ULI VCZNKOV, XLNKFGVIH
XZM XLFMG.  GSVB XZM XLFMG YIFHS HGILPVH FHVW RM Z IVNYIZMWG KZRMGRMT LI
KVIULIN IVTIVHHRLM ZMZOBHRH ULI FMWVIHGZMWRMT XZFHV ZMW VUUVXG.  YB NVZMH
LU ZWEZMXVW GVXSMLOLTRVH, XLNKFGVIH XZM IVXLTMRAV KZGGVIMH, ZMZOBAV GVCG,
ZMW NLWVO XLMXVKGH.  UFIGSVINLIV, XLNKFGVIH XZM XLNKOVGV GSVHV KILXVHHVH
UZHGVI DRGS NLIV HLFIXVH ZMW DRGS TIVZGVI KIVXRHRLM GSZM HXSLOZIH DSL
NFHG IVOB LM NZMFZO RMGVIKIVGZGRLM LU WZGZ.  YFG RU HXSLOZIH ZIV GL FHV
XLNKFGVIH ULI GSVHV KILXVHHVH, HLFIXV NZGVIRZOH NFHG YV RM Z ULIN
ZNVMZYOV GL XLNKFGVIZHHRHGVW ZMZOBHRH.  ULI GSRH IVZHLM NZMB HXSLOZIH,
LMXV GSVB SZEV RWVMGRURVW GSV HLFIXVH GSZG ZIV PVB GL GSVRI IVHVZIXS, ZIV
XLMEVIGRMT GSVN GL NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV ULIN.  GSFH, Z IVKIVHVMGZGREV VCZNKOV
LU GSV MFNVILFH GVCGFZO XLMEVIHRLM KILQVXGH LITZMRAVW YB HXSLOZIH ZILFMW
GSV DLIOW RM IVXVMG BVZIH GL HFKKLIG XLNKFGZGRLMZO GVCG ZMZOBHRH RH GSV
GOT, GSV GSVHZFIFH ORMTFZV TIZVXZV.  GSRH KILQVXG RH WVELGVW GL
XLMEVIGRMT GSV VCGZMG ZMXRVMG GVCGH LU XOZHHRXZO TIVVXV.  VWRGLIH MLGV:
ZXXLIWRMT GL GSV GOT MVDHOVGGVI LU NZB O992, GOT DZH RM FHV RM GSRIGBGDL
WRUUVIVMG XLFMGIRVH.  GSRH URTFIV FKWZGVH NRXSVOHLMH KIVERLFH XLFMG YB LMV.

GSV HXSLOZIH KVIULINRMT GSVHV XLMEVIHRLMH SZEV YVVM ZHPVW GL IVXLTMRAV
GSZG GSV VOVXGILMRX HLFIXVH GSVB ZIV XLMEVIGRMT ULI LMV FHV KLHHVHH EZOFV
ULI LGSVI IVHVZIXS KFIKLHVH ZH DVOO.  ZH Z IVHFOG, WFIRMT GSV KZHG UVD
BVZIH, SFNZMRGRVH HXSLOZIH SZEV RMRGRZGVW Z MFNYVI LU KILQVXGH GL
RMXIVZHV HXSLOZIOB ZXXVHH GL XLMEVIGVW GVCG.  HL, ULI VCZNKOV, GSV GVCG
VMXLWRMT RMRGRZGREV GVR, ZYLFG DSRXS NLIV RH HZRW OZGVI RM GSV KILTIZN,
DZH VHGZYORHSVW ZH ZM VUULIG YB HXSLOZIH GL WVGVINRMV HGZMWZIW VOVNVMGH
ZMW NVGSLWH ULI VMXLWRMT NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV GVCG ULI VOVXGILMRX VCXSZMTV.
RM Z HVXLMW VUULIG GL UZXRORGZGV GSV HSZIRMT LU XLMEVIGVW GVCG, HXSLOZIH
SZEV XIVZGVW Z MVD RMHGRGFGRLM, GSV XVMGVI ULI VOVXGILMRX GVCGH RM GSV
SFNZMRGRVH XVGS.  GSV XVMGVI VHGRNZGVH GSZG GSVIV ZIV 8,000 HVIRVH LU
HLFIXV GVCGH RM GSV SFNZMRGRVH GSZG SZEV YVVM XLMEVIGVW GL
NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV ULIN DLIOWDRWV.  XVGS RH FMWVIGZPRMT ZM RMGVIMZGRLMZO
HVZIXS ULI XLMEVIGVW GVCG RM GSV SFNZMRGRVH, XLNKRORMT RG RMGL ZM
VOVXGILMRX ORYIZIB, ZMW KIVKZIRMT YRYORLTIZKSRX WVHXIRKGRLMH LU GSV
HLFIXVH ULI GSV IVHVZIXS ORYIZIRVH RMULINZGRLM MVGDLIPH IORM
NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV WZGZ UROV.  GSV ORYIZIB KILUVHHRLM SZH YVTFM GL RMRGRZGV
OZITV XLMEVIHRLM KILQVXGH ZH DVOO, HFXS ZH ZNVIRXZM NVNLIB.

DSROV HXSLOZIH SZEV YVVM NZPRMT XLMEVIGVW GVCG ZEZROZYOV GL LMV ZMLGSVI,
GBKRXZOOB LM WRHP LI LM XWILN, GSV XOVZI GIVMW RH GLDZIW NZPRMT GSVHV
IVHLFIXVH ZEZROZYOV GSILFTS IVHVZIXS ZMW VWFXZGRLM MVGDLIPH.  GSFH, GSV
ZNVIRXZM ZMW UIVMXS IVHVZIXS LM GSV GIVZHFIB LU GSV UIVMXS OZMTFZTV
ZIGUO ZMW GSV WZMGV KILQVXG ZIV ZOIVZWB ZEZROZYOV LM RMGVIMVG.
NRXSVOHLM HFNNZIRAVW GSRH HVXGRLM LM RMGVIKIVGZGRLM ZMW ZMZOBHRH YB
MLGRMT GSZG:  1 RMXIVZHRMT MFNYVIH LU SFNZMRGRVH HXSLOZIH RM GSV ORYIZIB
XLNNFMRGB ZIV IVXLTMRARMT GSV RNKLIGZMXV GL GSV ZWEZMXVNVMG LU
HXSLOZIHSRK LU IVGILHKVXGREV XLMEVIHRLM LU HLFIXV NZGVIRZOH RM GSV ZIGH
ZMW SFNZMRGRVH ZMW 2 GSVIV RH Z TILDRMT IVZORAZGRLM GSZG NZPRMT GSV
HLFIXVH ZEZROZYOV LM IVHVZIXS ZMW VWFXZGRLM MVGDLIPH NZCRNRAVH GSVRI
FHVUFOMVHH ULI GSV ZMZOBHRH KVIULINVW YB SFNZMRGRVH HXSLOZIH.

GSV ULFIGS KILXVHH LU HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM RH WRHHVNRMZGRLM LU
IVHVZIXS URMWRMTH, GSZG RH, KFYORXZGRLM.  HXSLOZIH ZIV FHRMT VCRHGRMT
IVHVZIXS ZMW VWFXZGRLM MVGDLIPH GL VMTRMVVI Z MVD GBKV LU KFYORXZGRLM:
HXSLOZIOBXLMGILOOVW QLFIMZOH GSZG ZIV VOVXGILMRXZOOB KILWFXVW ZMW
WRHHVNRMZGVW.  ZOGSLFTS HFXS QLFIMZOH ZIV HGROO VNVITRMT ZH Z
XLNNFMRXZGRLM ULINZG, GSVRI MFNYVI SZH TILDM, UILN ZKKILCRNZGVOB GDVOEV
GL GSRIGBHRC WFIRMT GSV KZHG BVZI QFOB 1991 GL QFMV 1992.  NLHG LU
GSVHV VOVXGILMRX HXSLOZIOB QLFIMZOH ZIV WVELGVW GL GLKRXH RM GSV
SFNZMRGRVH.  ZH DRGS MVGDLIP XLMUVIVMXVH, HXSLOZIOB VMGSFHRZHN ULI GSVHV
VOVXGILMRX QLFIMZOH HGVNH UILN GSV NVWRFNH FMRJFV ZYRORGB GL ZWEZMXV
HXSLOZIHSRK RM Z DZB GSZG ML LGSVI NVWRFN XZM WL YB HFKKLIGRMT TOLYZO
UVVWYZXP ZMW RMGVIXSZMTV, KIZXGRXZOOB RM IVZO GRNV, VZIOB RM GSV IVHVZIXS
KILXVHH.  YVBLMW HXSLOZIOB QLFIMZOH, NRXSVOHLM IVNZIPVW GSV WVOREVIB LU
XLNNVIXRZO UFOOGVCG KILWFXGH, HFXS ZH ZIGRXOVH RM KILUVHHRLMZO QLFIMZOH,
MVDHOVGGVIH, NZTZARMVH, DRIV HVIERXVH, ZMW IVUVIVMXV HLFIXVH.  GSVHV ZIV
YVRMT WVOREVIVW ERZ LMORMV OLXZO ORYIZIB XZGZOLTFVH, VHKVXRZOOB GSILFTS
XWILNH.  UFIGSVINLIV, ZXXLIWRMT GL NRXSVOHLM, GSVIV RH TVMVIZO LKGRNRHN
GSZG GSV XLKBIRTSG ZMW UVVH RHHFVH RNKVWRMT GSV WVOREVIB LU UFOO GVCG LM
VCRHGRMT IVHVZIXS ZMW VWFXZGRLM MVGDLIPH HLLM DROO YV IVHLOEVW.

GSV URMZO KILXVHH LU HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM RH XFIIRXFOFN WVEVOLKNVMG
ZMW RMHGIFXGRLM, ZMW GSRH RMELOEVH GSV FHV LU XLNKFGVI RMULINZGRLM
GVXSMLOLTRVH RM GDL ZIVZH.  GSV URIHG RH GSV WVEVOLKNVMG LU
XLNKFGVILIRVMGVW RMHGIFXGRLMZO GLLOH, DSRXS RMXOFWVH HRNFOZGRLMH,
NFOGRNVWRZ ZKKORXZGRLMH, ZMW XLNKFGVI GLLOH GSZG ZIV FHVW GL ZHHRHG RM
GSV ZMZOBHRH LU HLFIXVH RM GSV XOZHHILLN, VGX.  GSV KVIHVFH KILQVXG, Z
WZGZYZHV GSZG KILERWVH Z NFOGRNVWRZ XFIIRXFOFN LM XOZHHRXZO TIVVP
XRERORAZGRLM, RH Z TLLW VCZNKOV LU GSV DZB RM DSRXS VMGRIV XFIIRXFOZ ZIV
YVRMT IVXZHG FHRMT RMULINZGRLM GVXSMLOLTRVH.  RG RH ZMGRXRKZGVW GSZG GSV
XFIIVMG WRUURXFOGB RM VCXSZMTRMT VOVXGILMRXZOOB XLNKFGVIYZHVW
RMHGIFXGRLMZO HLUGDZIV, DSRXS RM GFIM NZPVH RG WRUURXFOG ULI LMV HXSLOZI
GL YFROW FKLM GSV DLIP LU LGSVIH, DROO YV IVHLOEVW YVULIV GLL OLMT.
HGZMWZOLMV XFIIRXFOZI ZKKORXZGRLMH GSZG RMELOEV VOVXGILMRX GVCG DROO YV
HSZIZYOV GSILFTS MVGDLIPH, IVRMULIXRMT GSVRI HRTMRURXZMXV ZH RMGVOOVXGFZO
KILWFXGH ZH DVOO ZH RMHGIFXGRLMZO GLLOH.

GSV HVXLMW ZHKVXG LU VOVXGILMRX OVZIMRMT RMELOEVH GSV FHV LU IVHVZIXS ZMW
VWFXZGRLM MVGDLIPH ULI WRHGZMXV VWFXZGRLM KILTIZNH.  HFXS KILTIZNH
RMGVIZXGREVOB ORMP GVZXSVIH DRGS HGFWVMGH RM TVLTIZKSRXZOOB HXZGGVIVW
OLXZGRLMH ZMW IVOB LM GSV ZEZROZYRORGB LU VOVXGILMRX RMHGIFXGRLMZO
IVHLFIXVH.  WRHGZMXV VWFXZGRLM KILTIZNH ZIV TZRMRMT DRWV ZKKVZO ZNLMT
HGZGV WVKZIGNVMGH LU VWFXZGRLM YVXZFHV LU GSVRI WVNLMHGIZGVW XZKZXRGB GL
YIRMT ZWEZMXVW HKVXRZORAVW XLFIHV DLIP ZMW ZM ZIIZB LU VCKVIGH GL NZMB
XOZHHILLNH.  Z IVXVMG IVKLIG ULFMW GSZG ZG OVZHG 32 HGZGVH LKVIZGVW ZG
OVZHG LMV HGZGVDRWV MVGDLIP ULI VWFXZGRLM RM 1991, DRGS MVGDLIPH FMWVI
WVEVOLKNVMG RM NZMB LU GSV IVNZRMRMT HGZGVH.

NRXSVOHLM HFNNZIRAVW GSRH HVXGRLM YB MLGRMT GDL HGIRPRMT XSZMTVH GZPRMT
KOZXV RM HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM ZNLMT SFNZMRGRVH HXSLOZIH.  URIHG RH GSV
VCGVMG GL DSRXS VOVXGILMRX GVCG RM KZIGRXFOZI, ZMW VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH
RM TVMVIZO, ZIV YVRMT RMUFHVW RMGL VZXS LU GSV UREV KILXVHHVH WVHXIRYVW
ZYLEV.  ZH NVMGRLMVW VZIORVI, GSVIV RH Z XVIGZRM HBMVITB ZG DLIP SVIV.
GSV FHV LU VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH ULI LMV KILXVHH GVMWH GL HGRNFOZGV RGH
FHV ULI LGSVI KILXVHHVH, YVXZFHV GSV XSRVU XLFIHV LU NLEVNVMG RH GLDZIW Z
XLNKIVSVMHREV LMORMV DLIPRMT XLMGVCG ULI SFNZMRGRVH HXSLOZIH GSZG
RMXOFWVH LMORMV ZEZROZYRORGB LU PVB YRYORLTIZKSRVH, HXSLOZIOB UVVWYZXP,
HLFIXVH, ZMZOBGRXZO GLLOH, ZMW KFYORXZGRLMH.  NRXSVOHLM MLGVW UFIGSVI
GSZG GSV NLEVNVMG GLDZIW Z XLNKIVSVMHREV LMORMV DLIPRMT XLMGVCG ULI
SFNZMRGRVH HXSLOZIH RH MLG MVD.  RM UZXG, RG SZH YVVM FMWVIDZB ULI NLIV
GSZM ULIGB BVZIH RM GSV SFNZMRGRVH, HRMXV UZGSVI ILYVIGL YFHZ YVTZM
WVEVOLKRMT ZM VOVXGILMRX XLMXLIWZMXV LU GSV DLIPH LU HZRMG GSLNZH ZJFRMZH
RM 1949.  DSZG DV ZIV DRGMVHHRMT GLWZB, NRXSVOHLM XLMGVMWVW, RH MLG GSV
YVTRMMRMT LU GSRH LMORMV GIZMHRGRLM YFG, ULI ZG OVZHG HLNV SFNZMRGRVH
HXSLOZIH, GSV GFIMRMT KLRMG RM GSV GIZMHRGRLM UILN Z KIRMG GL ZM
VOVXGILMRX DLIPRMT XLMGVCG.  XLRMXRWRMT DRGS GSV LMORMV GIZMHRGRLM, GSV
HVXLMW HGIRPRMT XSZMTV RH GSV VCGVMG GL DSRXS IVHVZIXS ZMW VWFXZGRLM
MVGDLIPH ZIV YVXLNRMT GSV MVD NVWRFN LU HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM.  GSV
VCRHGRMT RMGVIMVG ZMW GSV KVMWRMT MZGRLMZO VWFXZGRLM ZMW IVHVZIXS MVGDLIP
MIVM IVKIVHVMG GSV MVD NVVGRMT TILFMW DSVIV HXSLOZIH ZIV TLRMT ULI
YRYORLTIZKSRX RMULINZGRLM, HXSLOZIOB WRZOLTFV ZMW UVVWYZXP, GSV NLHG
XFIIVMG KFYORXZGRLMH RM GSVRI URVOW, ZMW SRTSOVEVO VWFXZGRLMZO
LUUVIRMTH.  GIZWRGRLMZO HXSLOZIOB KIZXGRXVH ZIV FMWVITLRMT GIVNVMWLFH
GIZMHULINZGRLMH ZH Z IVHFOG LU GSV VNVITVMXV ZMW TILDRMT KILNRMVMXV LU
DSZG RH XZOOVW MVGDLIPNVWRZGVW HXSLOZIHSRK.

NRXSVOHLM MVCG GFIMVW GL GSV HVXLMW VOVNVMG LU GSV UIZNVDLIP HSV KILKLHVW
ZG GSV LFGHVG LU SVI GZOP ULI VEZOFZGRMT GSV KILHKVXGH ULI VOVXGILMRX
GVCG, MZNVOB GSV PVB RMULINZGRLM GVXSMLOLTB GIVMWH ZUUVXGRMT GSV XLMWFXG
LU HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM LEVI GSV MVCG WVXZWV:  1 VMWFHVI XLNKFGRMT
ZMW 2 XLMMVXGRERGB.

VMWFHVI XLNKFGRMT NVZMH GSZG GSV KVIHLM GLFXSRMT GSV PVBYLZIW, LI
KVIULINRMT XLNKFGZGRLMH, RH GSV HZNV ZH GSV KVIHLM DSL RMRGRZGVH LI
XLMHFNVH GSV XLNKFGZGRLM.  GSV VNVITVMXV LU KVIHLMZO XLNKFGVIH, ZOLMT
DRGS Z SLHG LU LGSVI ULIXVH, HFXS ZH FYRJFRGLFH XLNKFGRMT, ZWEZMXVH RM
RMGVIUZXV WVHRTM, ZMW GSV LMORMV GIZMHRGRLM, RH KILNKGRMT GSV XLMHFNVIH
LU XLNKFGZGRLM GL WL GSVRI LDM XLNKFGRMT, ZMW RH GSFH IVMWVIRMT LYHLOVGV
GSV GIZWRGRLMZO WRHGRMXGRLM YVGDVVM VMW FHVIH ZMW FOGRNZGV FHVIH.

GSV GIVMW GLDZIW VMWFHVI XLNKFGRMT RH HRTMRURXZMG GL XLMHRWVIZGRLM LU
GSV KILHKVXGH ULI VOVXGILMRX GVCGH YVXZFHV RG NVZMH GSZG IVHVZIXSVIH ZIV
YVXLNRMT NLIV ZWVKG ZG WLRMT GSVRI LDM XLNKFGZGRLMH ZMW, GSFH, NLIV
XLNKVGVMG RM GSV FHV LU VOVXGILMRX NVWRZ.  YB ZELRWRMT KILTIZNNVI
RMGVINVWRZIRVH, XLNKFGZGRLM RH YVXLNRMT XVMGIZO GL GSV IVHVZIXSVIH
GSLFTSG KILXVHH.  GSRH WRIVXG RMELOEVNVMG RM XLNKFGRMT RH XSZMTRMT GSV
IVHVZIXSVIH KVIHKVXGREV LM GSV MZGFIV LU IVHVZIXS RGHVOU, GSZG RH, GSV
PRMWH LU JFVHGRLMH GSZG XZM YV KLHVW, GSV ZMZOBGRXZO NVGSLWLOLTRVH GSZG
XZM YV FHVW, GSV GBKVH ZMW ZNLFMG LU HLFIXVH GSZG ZIV ZKKILKIRZGV ULI
ZMZOBHVH, ZMW GSV ULIN RM DSRXS URMWRMTH ZIV KIVHVMGVW.  GSV GIVMW GLDZIW
VMWFHVI XLNKFGRMT NVZMH GSZG, RMXIVZHRMTOB, VOVXGILMRX NVWRZ ZMW
XLNKFGZGRLM ZIV YVRMT RMUFHVW RMGL ZOO KILXVHHVH LU SFNZMRGRVH
HXSLOZIHSRK, RMHKRIRMT IVNZIPZYOV GIZMHULINZGRLMH RM HXSLOZIOB
XLNNFMRXZGRLM.

GSV GIVMW GLDZIW TIVZGVI XLMMVXGRERGB HFTTVHGH GSZG IVHVZIXSVIH ZIV FHRMT
XLNKFGZGRLM RMXIVZHRMTOB RM MVGDLIP VMERILMNVMGH.  XLMMVXGRERGB RH
RNKLIGZMG GL HXSLOZIHSRK YVXZFHV RG VIZHVH GSV WRHGZMXV GSZG HVKZIZGVH
HGFWVMGH UILN GVZXSVIH ZMW HXSLOZIH UILN GSVRI XLOOVZTFVH, DSROV ZOOLDRMT
FHVIH GL ZXXVHH IVNLGV WZGZYZHVH, HSZIV RMULINZGRLM RM NZMB WRUUVIVMG
NVWRZ, XLMMVXG GL GSVRI DLIPRMT XLMGVCG DSVIVEVI GSVB ZIV, ZMW
XLOOZYLIZGV RM ZOO KSZHVH LU IVHVZIXS.

GSV XLNYRMZGRLM LU GSV GIVMW GLDZIW VMWFHVI XLNKFGRMT ZMW GSV GIVMW
GLDZIW XLMMVXGRERGB HFTTVHGH GSZG GSV HXSLOZIOB FHV LU VOVXGILMRX
IVHLFIXVH, ZOIVZWB VERWVMG ZNLMT HLNV IVHVZIXSVIH, DROO HLLM YVXLNV ZM
VHGZYORHSVW UVZGFIV LU HXSLOZIHSRK.  GSV VUUVXGH LU GSVHV GIVMWH, ZOLMT
DRGS LMTLRMT XSZMTVH RM HXSLOZIOB KIZXGRXVH, KLRMG GL Z UFGFIV RM DSRXS
SFNZMRGRVH IVHVZIXSVIH DROO FHV XLNKFGZGRLM ZMW VOVXGILMRX XLNNFMRXZGRLM
GL SVOK GSVN ULINFOZGV RWVZH, ZXXVHH HLFIXVH, KVIULIN IVHVZIXS,
XLOOZYLIZGV DRGS XLOOVZTFVH, HVVP KVVI IVERVD, KFYORHS ZMW WRHHVNRMZGV
IVHFOGH, ZMW VMTZTV RM NZMB LGSVI KILUVHHRLMZO ZMW VWFXZGRLMZO ZXGRERGRVH.

RM HFNNZIB, NRXSVOHLM VNKSZHRAVW ULFI KLRMGH:  1 Z KLIGRLM LU SFNZMRGRVH
HXSLOZIH ZOIVZWB XLMHRWVI VOVXGILMRX GVCGH GSV KIVUVIIVW ULINZG ULI
ZMZOBHRH ZMW WRHHVNRMZGRLM.  2 HXSLOZIH ZIV FHRMT GSVHV VOVXGILMRX
GVCGH, RM XLMQFMXGRLM DRGS LGSVI VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH, RM ZOO GSV
KILXVHHVH LU HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM.  3 GSV SFNZMRGRVH HXSLOZIH
DLIPRMT XLMGVCG RH RM GSV KILXVHH LU XSZMTRMT UILN KIRMG GVXSMLOLTB GL
VOVXGILMRX GVXSMLOLTB, RM NZMB DZBH NRIILIRMT GIZMHULINZGRLMH GSZG SZEV
LXXFIIVW LI ZIV LXXFIIRMT DRGSRM GSV HXRVMGRURX XLNNFMRGB.  4 GSVHV
XSZMTVH ZIV LXXFIIRMT RM XLMQFMXGRLM DRGS GSV WVEVOLKNVMG LU Z MVD
XLNNFMRXZGRLM NVWRFN:  IVHVZIXS ZMW VWFXZGRLM MVGDLIPH GSZG ZIV
XSZIZXGVIRAVW YB GSVRI XZKZXRGB GL ZWEZMXV HXSLOZIHSRK RM Z DSLOOB FMRJFV
DZB.

NRXSVOHLM ZOHL IVRGVIZGVW SVI GSIVV KIRMXRKZO ZITFNVMGH:  O VOVXGILMRX
GVCGH ZIV YVHG FMWVIHGLLW RM GVINH LU GSV IVOZGRLMHSRK GL LGSVI
VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH ZMW GSV TILDRMT KILNRMVMXV LU MVGDLIPNVWRZGVW
HXSLOZIHSRK.  2 GSV KILHKVXGH ULI VOVXGILMRX GVCGH ORV RM GSVRI XZKZXRGB
GL YV RMGVTIZGVW RMGL GSV LMORMV MVGDLIP LU VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH GSZG
XLNKIRHV GSV MVD DLIPRMT XLMGVCG ULI HXSLOZIH.  3 IVGILHKVXGREV XLMEVIHRLM
LU KLIGRLMH LU GSV HXSLOZIOB IVXLIW HSLFOW YV Z PVB HGIZGVTB ZH RMULINZGRLM
KILERWVIH IVHKLMW GL XSZMTVH RM HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM KIZXGRXVH.

                                 


EVXXRZ  ZNH VEZOFZGRLM KILQVXG ZMW KFYORX FHVIH LU VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH
 ZN ZMW RGH WVHRTM  HRGV HVOVXGRLM ZMW VEZOFZGRMT GSV NZXRMGLHS
RNKOVNVMGZGRLM LU ZN  XSZIZXGVIRHGRXH LU GSV HRC KFYORX ORYIZIRVH
HVOVXGVW  XSZIZXGVIRHGRXH LU ZNH FHVIH RM GSVHV ORYIZIRVH  KIRMXRKZO
DZBH ZN RH YVRMT FHVW 


HFHZM EVXXRZ, GVZN OVZWVI, ZMW QLZMMV UIVVNZM, ZHHLXRZGV XLLIWRMZGLI,
ZNVIRXZM NVNLIB, ORYIZIB LU XLMTIVHH, TZEV Z QLRMG KIVHVMGZGRLM.  URIHG,
YB DZB LU RMGILWFXGRLM, EVXXRZ VCKOZRMVW SVI ZMW UIVVNZMH ILOVH RM
ZNVIRXZM NVNLIB ZN.  HVIERMT KIRMXRKZOOB ZH ZM LYHVIEVI, EVXXRZ SZH
ZHHRHGVW DRGS GSV VEZOFZGRLM KILQVXG LU ZN, KOZXRMT ZN XLOOVXGRLMH RM Z
EZIRVGB LU WRUUVIVMG HRGVH ZILFMW GSV XLFMGIB ZMW SVOKRMT GL LITZMRAV ZMW
RNKOVNVMG GSZG KILQVXG.  UIVVNZM SZH YVVM ZM ZHHLXRZGV XLLIWRMZGLI LU ZN
ZMW SZH YVVM RMELOEVW KIRMXRKZOOB DRGS GSV RMGVIKIVGZGREV NZGVIRZOH,
KIVKZIRMT HLNV LU GSV VOVXGILMRX VCSRYRGH ZMW KIRMGVW SRHGLIRXZO
RMULINZGRLM GSZG ZXXLNKZMRVH ZN ZMW GSZG RH IVJFVHGVW YB FHVIH.  EVXXRZ
ZMW UIVVNZM HSZIVW ZMVXWLGZO LYHVIEZGRLMH XLMXVIMRMT ZN DRGS KFYORX FHVIH
LU VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH.  MLGDRGSHGZMWRMT Z UZRIOB HGIFXGFIVW VEZOFZGRLM
RM KILTIVHH, YLGS EVXXRZ ZMW UIVVNZM XSLHV MLG GL IVKLIG LM HKVXRURXH RM
GVINH LU MFNYVIH, VGX., YVXZFHV GSVB UVOG RG DZH GLL VZIOB RM GSV
VEZOFZGRLM KILQVXG GL WL HL.

ZN RH ZM VOVXGILMRX ZIXSREV LU KIRNZIB HLFIXV NZGVIRZOH UILN GSV ORYIZIB
LU XLMTIVHH, HVOVXGVW XLOOVXGRLMH IVKIVHVMGRMT Z EZIRVGB LU ULINZGH
KSLGLTIZKSH, TIZKSRX ZIGH, IVXLIWVW HLFMW, NLGRLM KRXGFIVH, YILZWHRWVH,
ZMW HLLM, KZNKSOVGH ZMW YLLPH.  RM GVINH LU GSV WVHRTM LU GSRH HBHGVN,
GSV RMGVIKIVGZGREV VCSRYRGH SZEV YVVM PVKG HVKZIZGV UILN GSV KIRNZIB
IVHLFIXVH, DRGS TLLW IVZHLM.  ZXXLNKZMBRMT GSRH XLOOVXGRLM ZIV KIRMGVW
WLXFNVMGZGRLM ZMW FHVI TFRWVH, ZH DVOO ZH TFRWVH GSZG UIVVNZM KIVKZIVW ULI
GVZXSVIH HL GSZG GSVB NZB YVTRM FHRMT GSV XLMGVMG LU GSV HBHGVN ZG LMXV.

EVXXRZ WVHXIRYVW GSV VEZOFZGRLM KILQVXG YVULIV GZOPRMT ZYLFG GSV KFYORX
FHVIH LU ZN, ORNRGRMT SVI IVNZIPH GL KFYORX ORYIZIRVH, YVXZFHV UIVVNZM
DLFOW GZOP NLIV HKVXRURXZOOB ZYLFG HXSLLOH UILN PRMWVITZIGVM GL GDVOUGS
TIZWV P12.   SZERMT HGZIGVW RM HKIRMT 1991, GSV VEZOFZGRLM XFIIVMGOB
RMELOEVH GVHGRMT LU GSV NZXRMGLHS RNKOVNVMGZGRLM LU ZN.  HRMXV GSV
KIRNZIB TLZO LU GSRH VEZOFZGRLM RH GL WVGVINRMV GSV NLHG ZKKILKIRZGV
ZFWRVMXV LI ZFWRVMXVH ULI ZN, EVIB WRUUVIVMG HRGVH DVIV HVOVXGVW.  GSRH
NZPVH VEZOFZGRLM WRUURXFOG YVXZFHV LU GSV EZIBRMT WVTIVVH LU GVXSMLOLTB
ORGVIZXB ZNLMT GSV HRGVH.  ZN RH HRGFZGVW RM ULIGBULFI OLXZGRLMH, LU
DSRXS HRC ZIV KFYORX ORYIZIRVH ZMW HRCGVVM ZIV HXSLLOH.  IVKIVHVMGVW
ZNLMT GSV HXSLLOH ZIV VOVNVMGZIB, QFMRLI SRTS, ZMW SRTS HXSLLOH.
WRHGIRXG LUURXVH ZOHL ZIV RMELOEVW RM GSV VEZOFZGRLM, DSRXS DROO
XLMXOFWV RM HFNNVI 1993.

EVXXRZ ULXFHVW GSV IVNZRMWVI LU SVI GZOP LM GSV HRC KFYORX ORYIZIRVH, LMV
LU DSRXS WLFYOVH ZH Z HGZGV ORYIZIB.  GSVB IVKIVHVMG Z IZMTV LU
TVLTIZKSRX ZIVZH ZMW Z IZMTV LU WVNLTIZKSRX XSZIZXGVIRHGRXH.  ULI
VCZNKOV, GSIVV ZIV OLXZGVW RM FIYZM HVGGRMTH, GDL RM IFIZO HVGGRMTH, ZMW
LMV RM Z HFYFIYZM HVGGRMT.  Z IZMTV LU GVXSMRXZO VCKVIGRHV RH GL YV ULFMW
ZNLMT GSVHV UZXRORGRVH ZH DVOO.  ULI VCZNKOV, LMV RH ZM "ZKKOV ORYIZIB LU
GSV UFGFIV," DSROV GDL LGSVIH ZIV IFIZO LMVILLN ORYIZIRVHRM LMV, ZN
HRGH ZG GSV UILMG WVHP MVCG GL Z GIZXGLI NZMFZO.

ZOO KFYORX ORYIZIRVH SZEV YVVM VCGIVNVOB VMGSFHRZHGRX, HFKKLIGREV, ZMW
ZKKIVXRZGREV LU GSV DLIP GSZG ZN SZH YVVM WLRMT.  EVXXRZ XSZIZXGVIRAVW
EZIRLFH FHVIH:  NLHG FHVIH RM KFYORX ORYIZIRVH WVHXIRYV GSVNHVOEVH ZH
TVMVIZO IVZWVIH LU GSV HGFWVMGH DSL FHV ZN RM GSV KFYORX ORYIZIRVH,
GSLHV RM ULFIGS TIZWV ZMW ZYLEV HVVN NLHG RMGVIVHGVW.  KFYORX ORYIZIRVH
RM IFIZO HRGVH GVMW GL ZGGIZXG IVGRIVW KVLKOV, DSL SZEV YVVM SRTSOB
IVXVKGREV GL ZN.  FHVIH GVMW GL UZOO RMGL GDL ZWWRGRLMZO XZGVTLIRVH:
KVLKOV RMGVIVHGVW RM GSV XLMGVMG ZMW SRHGLIRXZO XLMMLGZGRLMH LU GSVHV
KIRNZIB IVHLFIXVH, ZMW GSLHV UZHXRMZGVW YB GSV GVXSMLOLTB.  GSV ULINZG
IVXVRERMT GSV NLHG XLNNVMGH SZH YVVM NLGRLM KRXGFIVH.  GSV ZWFOG FHVIH RM
KFYORX ORYIZIRVH ZIV NLIV XLNULIGZYOV DRGS RYN XLNKFGVIH, DSVIVZH BLFMT
KVLKOV HVVN XLNULIGZYOV DRGS VRGSVI RYN LI NZXRMGLHS, ZOGSLFTS NLHG LU
GSVN HVVN GL XLNV UILN Z NZXRMGLHS YZXPTILFMW.  GSRH HZNV GVMWVMXB RH
ULFMW RM GSV HXSLLOH.

DSZG PRMWH LU GSRMTH WL FHVIH WL DRGS ZN?  RM Z KFYORX ORYIZIB GSVIV ZIV
GDL NZRM TLZOH LI DZBH GSZG ZN RH YVRMT FHVW:  ZH ZM RMWRERWFZO OVZIMRMT
GLLO, ZMW ZH Z OVRHFIV ZXGRERGB.  ZWFOG OVZIMRMT DZH LMV ZIVZ GSZG EVXXRZ
DLFOW SRTSORTSG ZH Z KLHHRYOV ZKKORXZGRLM ULI Z GLLO HFXS ZH ZN.  HSV
WVHXIRYVW Z KZGILM LU Z IFIZO KFYORX ORYIZIB DSL XLNVH RM VEVIB WZB LM
SRH OFMXS SLFI ZMW ORGVIZOOB IVZWH ZN, NVGSLWRXZOOB TLRMT GSILFTS GSV
XLOOVXGRLM RNZTV YB RNZTV.  ZG GSV VMW LU SRH SLFI SV NZPVH ZM VOVXGILMRX
YLLPNZIP, KFGH RG RM SRH KLXPVG, ZMW IVGFIMH GL DLIP.  GSV MVCG WZB SV
XLNVH RM ZMW IVHFNVH DSVIV SV OVUG LUU.  RMGVIVHGRMTOB, GSRH NZM SZW
MVEVI YVVM RM GSV ORYIZIB YVULIV SV FHVW ZN.  RM ZMLGSVI HNZOO, IFIZO
ORYIZIB, GSV XLLIWRMZGLI IVKLIGH GSZG ZN RH Z KLKFOZI ZXGRERGB ULI HLNV
LU GSV LOWVI, IVGRIVW KVLKOV RM GSV XLNNFMRGB, DSL LIWRMZIROB DLFOW MLG
FHV "GSLHV GSRMTH,"XLNKFGVIH.  ZMLGSVI VCZNKOV LU ZWFOG OVZIMRMT RM
KFYORX ORYIZIRVH RH YLLP TILFKH, LMV LU DSRXS, RM KZIGRXFOZI, RH FHRMT ZN
ZH KZIG LU RGH IVZWRMT LM RMWFHGIRZORAZGRLM, RMGVTIZGRLM, ZMW FIYZMRAZGRLM
RM GSV VZIOB 1900H.

LMV ORYIZIB IVKLIGH GSZG Z UZNROB RH FHRMT ZN GL SVOK VWFXZGV GSVRI
XSROWIVM.  RM ZMLGSVI RMHGZMXV, RMWRERWFZOH UILN Z OLXZO NFHVFN XZNV RM
GL FHV ZN GL KIVKZIV ZM VCSRYRG LM GLBH LU GSV KZHG.  GSVHV GDL VCZNKOVH
VNKSZHRAV GSV NRHHRLM LU GSV KFYORX ORYIZIB ZH Z XFOGFIZO RMHGRGFGRLM,
IVZXSRMT LFG GL KVLKOV DSL WL MLG SZEV GSV HZNV IVHLFIXVH ZEZROZYOV GL
GSLHV DSL OREV RM Z NVGILKLORGZM ZIVZ LI SZEV ZXXVHH GL Z NZQLI ORYIZIB.
LMV IFIZO ORYIZIB IVKLIGH GSZG QFMRLI SRTS HXSLLO HGFWVMGH RM OZITV
MFNYVIH XZNV RM LMV ZUGVIMLLM GL FHV ZN ULI VMGVIGZRMNVMG.  Z MFNYVI LU
KFYORX ORYIZIRVH IVKLIGVW TIVZG RMGVIVHG ZNLMT KLHGXZIW XLOOVXGLIH RM GSV
WVGILRG XLOOVXGRLM, DSRXS DZH VHHVMGRZOOB Z XLOOVXGRLM LU RNZTVH FHVW LM
KLHGXZIWH ZILFMW GSV GFIM LU GSV XVMGFIB.  GIZRM YFUUH ZIV HRNROZIOB
RMGVIVHGVW YVXZFHV GSZG DZH Z GRNV LU TIVZG RMGVIVHG RM IZROILZWRMT.
KVLKOV, RG DZH ULFMW, IVOZGV GL GSRMTH GSZG GSVB PMLD LU URIHGSZMW.  ULI
VCZNKOV, RM YLGS IFIZO KFYORX ORYIZIRVH DSVIV ZN DZH NZWV ZEZROZYOV,
LYHVIEVIH IVKLIGVW GSZG GSV LOWVI KVLKOV DRGS KVIHLMZO IVNVNYIZMXVH LU
GSV GFIM LU GSV XVMGFIB DVIV TIZERGZGRMT GL GSV WVGILRG XLOOVXGRLM.
GSVHV VCZNKOVH HVIEVW GL FMWVIHXLIV NRXSVOHLMH LYHVIEZGRLM IV GSV
RMGVTIZGRLM LU VOVXGILMRX GLLOH ZMW RWVZHGSZG KVLKOV OVZIM YVHG DSVM
GSV NZGVIRZO IVOZGVH GL HLNVGSRMT GSVB PMLD.

EVXXRZ NZWV GSV URMZO KLRMG GSZG RM NZMB XZHVH ZN HVIEVH ZH Z
KFYORXIVOZGRLMH GLLO ULI GSV KFYORX ORYIZIRVH GSZG ZIV GVHGRMT RG.  RM
LMV XZHV, ZN RH YVRMT FHVW ZH Z EVSRXOV GL HVXFIV ZWWRGRLMZO UFMWRMT ULI
GSV ORYIZIB.  RM ZMLGSVI XZHV, ZN SZH HVIEVW ZH ZM RMHKRIZGRLM GL GSV
HGZUU LU Z NZQLI OLXZO KFYORX ORYIZIB RM GSV HLFGS GL GSRMP ZYLFG DZBH GL
NZPV RGH LDM XLOOVXGRLM LU KSLGLTIZKSH NLIV ZXXVHHRYOV GL GSV KFYORX.

                                  


UIVVNZM  ZN ZMW ZIXSREZO VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH RM Z HXSLLO VMERILMNVMG 
JFVHGRLMH XLMXVIMRMT XLMGVCG  JFVHGRLMH XLMXVIMRMT GSV VOVXGILMRX ULINZG
RGHVOU  XLNKFGVI ZMCRVGB  ZXXVHH ZMW ZEZROZYRORGB LU GSV HBHGVN 
SZIWDZIV  HGIVMTGSH TZRMVW GSILFTS GSV FHV LU ZIXSREZO IVHLFIXVH RM
HXSLLOH 


IVRGVIZGRMT ZM LYHVIEZGRLM NZWV YB EVXXRZ, GSZG ZN RH ZM ZIXSREZO
IVHLFIXV NZWV FK LU KIRNZIB NZGVIRZOH DRGS EVIB ORGGOV RMGVIKIVGZGRLM,
UIVVNZM HGZGVW GSZG GSV KILQVXG SZH ZGGVNKGVW GL YIRWTV GSV TZK YVGDVVM
GSVHV YZIV KIRNZIB NZGVIRZOH ZMW Z HXSLLO VMERILMNVMG, ZMW RM GSZG XZFHV
SZH XIVZGVW TFRWVW RMGILWFXGRLMH GL ZN XLOOVXGRLMH.  OLFW WVNZMW UILN GSV
VWFXZGRLMZO XLNNFMRGB,  XSRVUOB UILN GVZXSVIH DLIPRMT DRGS GSV FKKVI
TIZWVH LU VOVNVMGZIB HXSLLO GSILFTS SRTS HXSLLO, TIVVGVW GSV ZMMLFMXVNVMG
GSZG ZN DLFOW YV GVHGVW ZILFMW GSV XLFMGIB.

UIVVNZM IVKLIGVW MLG LMOB LM DSZG DZH OVZIMVW ZYLFG ZN RM Z HXSLLO
VMERILMNVMG, YFG ZOHL LM HVEVIZO FMREVIHZO JFVHGRLMH GSZG DVIV IZRHVW
XLMXVIMRMT ZIXSREZO VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH RM HXSLLOH.  HSV WRHXFHHVW
HVEVIZO HGIVMTGSH LU GSRH GBKV LU NZGVIRZO RM Z HXSLLO VMERILMNVMG ZH
LKKLHVW GL Z SRTSOB HGIFXGFIVW IVHLFIXV GSZG LUUVIH Z ORNRGVW MFNYVI LU
KZGSH GL ULOOLD.

UIVVNZM URIHG IZRHVW HVEVIZO JFVHGRLMH ZYLFG FHRMT ZN RM Z HXSLLO
VMERILMNVMG.  GSVIV RH LUGVM HLNV WRUURXFOGB RM WVEVOLKRMT Z HVMHV LU
DSZG GSV HBHGVN XLMGZRMH.  NZMB HGFWVMGH HRG WLDM ZG Z XLNKFGVI IVHLFIXV
ZMW ZHHFNV GSZG, YVXZFHV ZN XLNVH UILN GSV ORYIZIB LU XLMTIVHH, ZOO LU
ZNVIRXZM SRHGLIB RH MLD ZG GSVRI URMTVIGRKH.  ZH Z IVHFOG LU GSZG HLIG LU
NRHGZPVM QFWTNVMG, HLNV HGFWVMGH ZIV PMLDM GL XLMXOFWV GSZG ZN XLMGZRMH
MLGSRMT LU FHV GL GSVN DSVM GSVB OLLP ULI LMV LI GDL GSRMTH ZMW WL MLG
URMW GSVN.  RG RH WRUURXFOG GL WRHXLEVI GSZG NRWWOV TILFMW DSVIV LMV SZH
Z HVMHV LU DSZG GSV HBHGVN XLMGZRMH.  HLNV HGFWVMGH TILKV GLDZIW GSV RWVZ
LU ZM ZIXSREV, Z MVD RWVZ GL GSVN, HRMXV GSVB SZEV MLG KIVERLFHOB
VCKVIRVMXVW DSZG RG NVZMH GL SZEV ZXXVHH GL Z EZHG YLWB LU HLNVDSZG
IZMWLN RMULINZGRLM.

LGSVI JFVHGRLMH IZRHVW YB UIVVNZM XLMXVIMVW GSV VOVXGILMRX ULINZG RGHVOU.
ULI RMHGZMXV, RM Z HXSLLO VMERILMNVMG RG RH LUGVM WRUURXFOG YLGS ULI
GVZXSVIH ZMW HGFWVMGH GL TZRM Z HVMHV LU DSZG RG RH GSVB ZIV ERVDRMT.
GSVB FMWVIHGZMW GSZG RG RH Z ERHFZO RNZTV, YFG GSVB WL MLG MVXVHHZIROB
PMLD GSZG RG RH Z KLHGXZIW UILN GSV GFIM LU GSV XVMGFIB, Z KZMLIZNRX
KSLGLTIZKS, LI VEVM NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV GVCG LU ZM VRTSGVVMGSXVMGFIB
YILZWHRWV, Z GDVMGRVGSXVMGFIB KIRMGVW YLLP, LI Z MRMVGVVMGSXVMGFIB
WRZIB.  GSZG WRHGRMXGRLM RH LUGVM WRUURXFOG ULI KVLKOV RM Z HXSLLO
VMERILMNVMG GL TIZHK.  YVXZFHV LU GSZG, RG LXXZHRLMZOOB YVXLNVH WRUURXFOG
GL WIZD XLMXOFHRLMH UILN DSZG LMV RH ERVDRMT.

UIVVNZM ZOHL MLGVW GSV LYERLFH UVZI LU GSV XLNKFGVI, DSRXS XLMHGRGFGVH Z
WRUURXFOGB RM FHRMT ZM VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXV.  GSLFTS HGFWVMGH RM TVMVIZO
WRW MLG HFUUVI UILN GSRH ZMCRVGB, HVEVIZO LOWVI HGFWVMGH UVZIVW GSZG GSVB
DVIV XLNKFGVIROORGVIZGV, ZM ZHHFNKGRLM GSZG YVXZNV HVOUUFOUROORMT DSVM
GSVB HVZIXSVW ULI HLNVGSRMT YFG UZROVW GL URMW RG.  UIVVNZM HZRW HSV
YVORVEVW GSZG HLNV GVZXSVIH ZOHL UVZI XLNKFGVI IVHLFIXVH, YVXZFHV GSVB
YVORVEV GSVB OZXP XLNKOVGV XLMGILO.  UIVVNZM IVOZGVW GSV VCZNKOV LU
GVZXSVIH HSLLRMT ZDZB HGFWVMGH YVXZFHV RG DZH MLG GSVRI GRNV GL FHV GSV
HBHGVN.  GSRH DZH Z XZHV RM DSRXS GSV HRGFZGRLM SZW GL YV VCGIVNVOB
HGIFXGFIVW HL GSZG GSV GVZXSVIH DLFOW MLG UVVO GSZG GSVB SZW OLHG GSVRI
TIZHK LM DSZG GSV HBHGVN XLMGZRMVW.

Z URMZO JFVHGRLM IZRHVW YB UIVVNZM XLMXVIMVW ZXXVHH ZMW ZEZROZYRORGB LU
GSV HBHGVN.  HSV MLGVW GSV LXXZHRLMZO VCRHGVMXV LU Z TZK RM XLNNFMRXZGRLM
YVGDVVM HXSLLO ORYIZIRZMH ZMW GVZXSVIH.  LUGVM ZN HRGH RM Z HXSLLO
ORYIZIB ZMW GSV ORYIZIRZM RH GSV KVIHLM IVHKLMHRYOV ULI NLMRGLIRMT GSV
HBHGVN.  GVZXSVIH WL MLG ZODZBH GZPV RMGL GSVRI DLIOW MVD ORYIZIB
IVHLFIXVH ZYLFG DSRXS GSV ORYIZIRZM RH VCXRGVW.  RMWVVW, ZG GSV HRGVH
DSVIV ZN SZW YVVM FHVW NLHG VUUVXGREVOB DRGSRM Z ORYIZIB, GSV ORYIZIRZM
DZH IVJFRIVW GL TL GL HKVXRURX GVZXSVIH ZMW RMHGIFXG GSVN RM RGH FHV.  ZH
Z IVHFOG, HVEVIZO ZN HRGVH DROO SZEV RMHVIERXV HVHHRLMH LEVI Z HFNNVI,
RM GSV SLKV GSZG KVISZKH, DRGS Z NLIV RMWRERWFZORAVW ORMP, GVZXSVIH DROO
YV NLIV ORPVOB GL FHV GSV IVHLFIXV.

Z IVOZGVW RHHFV RM GSV HXSLLO XLMGVCG XLMXVIMVW GSV MFNYVI LU
DLIPHGZGRLMH ZEZROZYOV ZG ZMB LMV OLXZGRLM.  XVMGIZORAZGRLM LU VJFRKNVMG
ZG GSV WRHGIRXG OVEVO, DRGS GVZXSVIH RMERGVW GL WLDMOLZW GSRMTH ZMW DZOP
ZDZB DRGS GSVN, KILEVW FMHFXXVHHUFO YVXZFHV GSV SLFIH GSVHV LUURXVH DVIV
LKVM DVIV ZOHL HXSLLO SLFIH.

ZMLGSVI RHHFV DZH SZIWDZIV.  ZH EVXXRZ LYHVIEVW, Z IZMTV LU HRGVH VCRHGH,
HLNV GVXSMLOLTRXZOOB ZWEZMXVW ZMW LGSVIH VHHVMGRZOOB ZXJFRIRMT GSVRI
URIHG XLNKFGVI ULI GSV KIRNZIB KFIKLHV LU FHRMT RG RM XLMQFMXGRLM DRGS
ZNH GVHGRMT.  FHVIH ZG GVXSMLOLTRXZOOB HLKSRHGRXZGVW HRGVH DZMG VEVM
NLIV HLKSRHGRXZGVW SZIWDZIV, HL GSZG GSVB XZM KVIULIN VEVM NLIV
HLKSRHGRXZGVW GZHPH DRGS GSV NZGVIRZOH RM ZN.  YFG LMXV GSVB ZXJFRIV Z
MVDVI KRVXV LU SZIWDZIV, GSVB NFHG OVZIM SLD GL FHV GSZG ZOHL ZG ZM
FMHLKSRHGRXZGVW HRGV RG GZPVH ZM VCGIVNVOB OLMT GRNV HRNKOB GL YVXLNV
ZXXFHGLNVW GL GSV XLNKFGVI, MLG GL NVMGRLM GSV KILTIZN LUUVIVW DRGS GSV
XLNKFGVI.  ZOO LU GSVHV HNZOO RHHFVH IZRHV LMV OZITV JFVHGRLM, MZNVOB,
ZIV HBHGVNH ORPV ZN GIFOB IVDZIWRMT RM Z HXSLLO VMERILMNVMG, LI WL GSVB
HRNKOB ZXG ZH RMMLEZGREV GLBH GSZG WL ORGGOV NLIV GSZM HKZIP RMGVIVHG?

UIVVNZM XLMGVMWVW GSZG GSV VEZOFZGRLM KILQVXG SZH IVEVZOVW HVEVIZO HGIVMTGSH
GSZG DVIV TZRMVW GSILFTS GSV FHV LU ZIXSREZO IVHLFIXVH RM HXSLLOH, RMXOFWRMT:

      KHBXSRX IVDZIWH UILN FHRMT ZN ZH Z EZHG, IRXS WZGZYZHV, DRGS
     GVZXSVIH ZHHRTMRMT EZIRLFH KILQVXGH GL HGFWVMGHLIZO KIVHVMGZGRLMH,
     DIRGGVM IVKLIGH, Z WLXFNVMGZIB, Z GFIMLUGSVXVMGFIB MVDHKZKVI
     KILQVXGH GSZG HGZIG DRGS GSV NZGVIRZOH RM ZN YFG ZIV XLNKOVGVW FHRMT
     LGSVI IVHLFIXVH ZN GSFH RH FHVW ZH Z IVHVZIXS GLLO RM XLMQFMXGRLM
     DRGS LGSVI VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH, ZH DVOO ZH DRGS YLLPH ZMW RGVNH RM
     GSV ORYIZIB DSVIV GSV HBHGVN RH HVG FK.

      HGFWVMGH ZIV ZXJFRIRMT XLNKFGVI ORGVIZXB RM Z SFNZMRGRVH XLMGVCG.

      GSRH HLIG LU HBHGVN RH LEVIXLNRMT GSV RHLOZGRLM YVGDVVM WRHXRKORMVH
     GSZG LUGVM VCRHGH RM HXSLLOH.  ULI VCZNKOV, NZMB VMTORHS GVZXSVIH ZIV
     IVJFRIRMT GSVRI HGFWVMGH GL DIRGV KZKVIH LM SRHGLIRXZO GLKRXH
     IVKIVHVMGVW RM ZN.  MFNVILFH GVZXSVIH SZEV IVKLIGVW GSZG GSVRI
     HGFWVMGH ZIV OVZIMRMT XIRGRXZO GSRMPRMT HPROOH FHRMT GSV HBHGVN.

      LM Z YILZWVI OVEVO, ZN RH RMGILWFXRMT KIRNZIB NZGVIRZOH, MLG LMOB
     GL HGFWVMGH YFG ZOHL GL GVZXSVIH, RM ZM VMERILMNVMG DSVIV LUGVM
     HRNKOB MLMV VCRHGZM VCXRGRMT GSRMT ULI GSV HGFWVMGH YVXZFHV RG
     SVOKH GSVN OVZIM GL XLMWFXG IVHVZIXS, GL RMGVIKIVG, ZMW GL WIZD
     GSVRI LDM XLMXOFHRLMH.  RM OVZIMRMT GL XLMWFXG IVHVZIXS ZMW DSZG RG
     NVZMH, HGFWVMGH ZIV NLGREZGVW GL HVVP PMLDOVWTV.  GSZG IVOZGVH GL
     ZMLGSVI KLHRGREV LFGXLNVZ SRTS OVEVO LU KVIHLMZO RMELOEVNVMG LU
     HGFWVMGH DRGS GSV NZGVIRZOH RM GSRH HBHGVN ZMW TIVZGVI NLGREZGRLM GL
     XLMWFXG GSVRI LDM IVHVZIXS ZMW WIZD GSVRI LDM XLMXOFHRLMH.

      KVISZKH GSV NLHG RILMRX HGIVMTGS LU GSVHV PRMWH LU ZIXSREZO
     VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH RH GSZG NZMB LU GSV GVZXSVIH ZN RMGVIERVDVW
     DVIV WVHKVIZGV, RG RH ML VCZTTVIZGRLM GL HZB, MLG LMOB ULI KIRNZIB
     NZGVIRZOH YFG ULI FMHGIFXGFIVW KIRNZIB NZGVIRZOH.  GSVHV DLFOW, GSVB
     GSLFTSG, ULHGVI KVIHLMZOOB NLGREZGVW IVHVZIXS, VCKOLIZGRLM, ZMW
     VCXRGVNVMG RM GSVRI HGFWVMGH.  RMWVVW, GSVHV NZGVIRZOH SZEV WLMV
     QFHG GSZG.  RILMRXZOOB, SLDVEVI, GSRH OZXP LU HGIFXGFIV KILWFXVH
     HLNV LU GSV XLMUFHRLM GL DSRXS GSV MVDMVHH LU GSVHV PRMWH LU
     IVHLFIXVH NZB ZOHL XLMGIRYFGV.  GSV PVB GL VUUVXGREV FHV LU ZIXSREZO
     KILWFXGH RM Z HXSLLO VMERILMNVMG RH Z XOVZI, VUUVXGREV RMGILWFXGRLM
     GL GSV HBHGVN ZMW GL DSZG RG XLMGZRMH.

                                 


WRHXFHHRLM  MLGSRMT PMLDM, JFZMGRGZGREVOB, ZYLFG GSV MFNYVI LU
SFNZMRGRVH HXSLOZIH DSL NFHG HVV GSV LIRTRMZO EVIHFH GSLHV DSL DLFOW
HVGGOV ULI ZM VWRGVW GIZMHXIRKG, LI ZYLFG GSV DZBH RM DSRXS SFNZMRGRVH
HXSLOZIH ZIV FHRMT RMULINZGRLM GVXSMLOLTB  URIN XLMXOFHRLMH XLMXVIMRMT
GSV NZMMVI ZMW VCGVMG LU GSV FHV LU HFKKLIGRMT NZGVIRZOH RM KIRMG
KILERWVW YB ZN GL ZDZRG XLNKOVGRLM LU VEZOFZGREV HGFWB  Z ORHGVMVIH
IVUOVXGRLMH LM ZWWRGRLMZO ZKKORXZGRLMH LU VOVXGILMRX GVCGH  ILOV LU
VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH RM GVZXSRMT VOVNVMGZIB IVHVZIXS HPROOH GL HGFWVMGH 


WFIRMT GSV WRHXFHHRLM GSZG ULOOLDVW GSV KIVHVMGZGRLMH YB NRXSVOHLM,
EVXXRZ, ZMW UIVVNZM, ZWWRGRLMZO KLRMGH VNVITVW.

OVHP ZHPVW RU NRXSVOHLM XLFOW TREV ZMB JFZMGRGZGREV VHGRNZGV LU GSV
MFNYVI LU SFNZMRGRVH HXSLOZIH DSL NFHG HVV LI DZMG GL HVV GSV LIRTRMZO,
LI GSV YVHG KLHHRYOV EVIHRLM LU GSV NZGVIRZO, EVIHFH GSLHV DSL GBKRXZOOB
DLFOW HVGGOV ULI ZM VWRGVW GIZMHXIRKG.  DSROV FMZYOV GL KILERWV Z URTFIV,
HSV LUUVIVW SVI RNKIVHHRLMH ZH ZM ZIXSRERHG DSL SZH WLMV HLNV IVUVIVMXV
DLIP ZMW SZH WRHXFHHVW GSRH RHHFV DRGS LGSVI ZIXSRERHGH DSL KVIULIN
IVUVIVMXV, GSZG GSLHV DSL FHV ZIXSREVH ZMW GSLHV DSL FHV KIRNZIB HLFIXVH
ULI DSZG DLFOW YV XLMHRWVIVW EVIB SRTSOVEVO HXSLOZIOB IVHVZIXS, ZH
LKKLHVW GL, HZB, FMWVITIZWFZGV KZKVIH, DVIV UVD RM MFNYVI, VHKVXRZOOB
TREVM GSV KFYORX RMGVIVHG RM FHRMT KIRNZIB HLFIXVH GL XLMWFXG
TVMVZOLTRXZO LI ZELXZGRLMZO IVHVZIXS ZMW GSV PRMW LU KILUVHHRLMZO
IVHVZIXS WLMV YB KVLKOV RM KIREZGV RMWFHGIB LI GSV UVWVIZO TLEVIMNVMG.
NLIV RNKLIGZMG RM NRXSVOHLMH ERVD DZH GSZG, JFZMGRGZGREVOB, MLGSRMT RH
PMLDM ZYLFG GSV DZBH RM DSRXS, ULI VCZNKOV, SFNZMRGRVH HXSLOZIH ZIV FHRMT
RMULINZGRLM GVXSMLOLTB.  ML HGFWRVH VCRHG GL LUUVI TFRWZMXV RM XIVZGRMT
HGIZGVTRVH.  GSV NLHG IVXVMG HGFWB DZH XLMWFXGVW RM 1985 YB GSV ZNVIRXZM
XLFMXRO LU OVZIMVW HLXRVGRVH ZXOH, ZMW DSZG RG HSLDVW DZH GSZG 50
KVIXVMG LU SFNZMRGRVH HXSLOZIH ZG GSZG GRNV DVIV FHRMT XLNKFGVIH.  GSZG
XLMHGRGFGVH GSV VCGVMG LU LFI PMLDOVWTV.

XLMXVIMRMT ZNH HGIZGVTB ULI LIRVMGRMT KVLKOV GLDZIW GSV HXLKV LU
VOVXGILMRX IVHLFIXVH, UIVVNZM XLFOW LUUVI ML SZIW XLMXOFHRLMH ZG GSRH
KLRMG, YVXZFHV HSV ZMW SVI XLOOVZTFVH DVIV HGROO DZRGRMT GL HVV,
KZIGRXFOZIOB RM GSV HXSLLOH, DSZG SZH YVVM NZWV LU GSVRI VUULIGH.  DRGSRM
GSV HBHGVN, SLDVEVI, ZN SZH KILERWVW DSZG ZIV XZOOVW VOVXGILMRX VCSRYRGH
HFXS ZH RMGILWFXGRLMH GL GRNV KVIRLWH ZMW NZGVIRZOHZMW GSVHV ZIV
RMGVMWVW GL LUUVI Z HGFWVMG FHVI Z HVMHV LU DSZG Z YILZWHRWV RH  ZMW DSZG
RG NRTSG GVOO SVI LI SRN.  YFG UIVVNZM XLMXVWVW GSZG GSV KILQVXG HGZUU
DLFOW SZEV GL GZOP DRGS HGFWVMGH MVCG BVZI, ZUGVI GVZXSVIH SZEV SZW Z
HFNNVI GL FHV GSV NZGVIRZOH, ZMW ZGGVNKG GL WRHXLEVI DSZG GSV HGFWVMGH
DVIV OVZIMRMT UILN GSV NZGVIRZOH.  RM ZWWRGRLM, UIVVNZM WVHXIRYVW
HFKKLIGRMT NZGVIRZOH RM KIRMG KILERWVW YB ZN ZG GSV IVJFVHG LU OLXZO
GVZXSVIH WFIRMT Z NVVGRMT SVOW ZG OX.  GSVHV RMXOFWVW GRNV ORMVH,
YRYORLTIZKSRVH, ZMW LGSVI NZGVIRZOH GSZG XLFOW YV IVKILWFXVW LM Z
KSLGLXLKRVI RM Z XOZHHILLN.  GVZXSVIH XLFOW DZOP ZDZB DRGS ZMW FHV GSVHV,
ZMW RM GSRH DZB TZRM Z YVGGVI FMWVIHGZMWRMT LU GSV XLMGVMGH.  YFG ZTZRM,
IVZXSRMT URIN XLMXOFHRLMH XLMXVIMRMT GSV NZMMVI ZMW VCGVMG LU GSVRI FHV
DLFOW SZEV GL DZRG FMGRO MVCG BVZI.

ZH GL GSV XSZMTVH HSV HZD LXXFIIRMT ZG GSV MZGRLMZO ZIXSREVH ZMW IVXLIWH
ZWNRMRHGIZGRLM MZIZ ZH Z IVHFOG LU GSV RMXIVZHRMT VNKSZHRH LM
GVXSMLOLTB RM HXSLOZIOB IVHVZIXS, NRXSVOHLM HGZGVW GSZG MZIZ ZG GSRH
KLRMG DZH ZYHLIYRMT GSV IVKLIG YB SVI ZMW QVUU ILGSVMYVIT ZWWIVHHRMT
HGIZGVTRVH ULI GSV ZIXSREZO KILUVHHRLM RM TVMVIZO, ZOGSLFTS MLG ULI GSV
MZGRLMZO ZIXSREVH HKVXRURXZOOB.  MZIZ RH QFHG YVTRMMRMT GL VHGZYORHS RGH
ILOV ZMW DSZG RG XZM WL.  RM GVINH LU XSZMTVH ZMW RMRGRZGREVH GSZG MZIZ
XZM GZPV, ML XOVZI IVHKLMHV XLFOW YV TREVM ZG GSRH GRNV.

TIVVMURVOW IVNZIPVW GDL GIVMWH NVMGRLMVW RM GSV HVHHRLM.  IVUOVXGRMT LM
WZOBH LKVMRMT XLNNVMGH LM SLD SV XLFOW SZEV FHVW Z OZGRM XLOOVXGRLM LU
GVCG RM ZM VOVXGILMRX ULIN, SV HZRW GSZG ZG URIHG SV GSLFTSG NLHG HXSLOZIH
DLFOW YV FMDROORMT GL WL GSZG.  YFG ZH SV GSLFTSG LU GSZG RM GVINH LU GSV
LIRTRMZO NVZMRMT LU IVHVZIXSGSZG RH, SZERMT ZOIVZWB NZHGVIVW GSVHV GVCGH,
IVHVZIXSRMT GSVN ULI XIRGRXZO ZMW XLNKZIZGREV KFIKLHVHULI GSV URIHG GRNV,
GSV VOVXGILMRX ULINZG NZWV Z OLG LU HVMHV.  TIVVMURVOW XLFOW VMERHRLM
TILDRMT MFNYVIH LU HXSLOZIH OVZIMRMT GSV MVD GVXSMLOLTRVH ULI GSZG EVIB
ZHKVXG LU GSVRI HXSLOZIHSRK ZMW ULI XLMEVMRVMXVH HZPV.

ORHGVMRMT GL EVXXRZ ZMW UIVVNZM, TIVVMURVOW GSLFTSG LU ZM ZWWRGRLMZO
ZKKORXZGRLM LU VOVXGILMRX GVCGH.  SV IVZORAVW GSZG ZN XLFOW YV FHVW ZH Z
TFRWV GL OVZW HLNVLMV GL LIRTRMZO HLFIXVH.  HGFWVMGH XZMMLG YV VCKVXGVW
GL SZEV NZHGVIVW GSVHV HLFIXVH, GSRMTH GSVB SZEV MVEVI PMLDM ZYLFG
YVULIV.  GSFH, ZN RH OVZWRMT GSVN, RM GSVLIB, GL Z EZHG YLWB LU
RMULINZGRLM ZMW TRERMT GSVN Z HFKVIURXRZO LEVIERVD LU RG, VMZYORMT GSVN
GL HVOVXG KZIGH LU RG.  TIVVMURVOW ZHPVW RU ZMB VERWVMXV VCRHGH GSZG GSRH
IVHLFIXV DROO RMWVVW GVZXS GSV MVD FHVI, GSV P12 HGFWVMGH, SLD GL WL
IVHVZIXS.  HXSLOZIH ZOIVZWB PMLD SLD GL WL IVHVZIXS ZMW ZIV ZKKOBRMT
GSVHV MVD GLLOH.  YFG SV DLMWVIVW DSB HGFWVMGH DLFOW TL YVBLMW KRXPRMT
LFG GSRMTH GSZG DVIV NLHG VCXRGRMT GL GSVN.

UIVVNZM XLMXVWVW GSV XLIIVXGMVHH LU TIVVMURVOWH LYHVIEZGRLM ZH ZKKORVW
GL Z HXSLLO VMERILMNVMG.  GSV IRHP RH GSZG Z HGFWVMG DLFOW HRG WLDM ZG Z
HBHGVN, KOZB DRGS RG, URMW HLNV GSRMTH LU RMGVIVHG, ZMW GSVM DZOP ZDZB.
YFG RM GSV IVOZGREVOB XLMGILOOVW HRGFZGRLM LU Z HXSLLO ORYIZIB, NFXS DROO
WVKVMW LM GSV RMHGIFXGRLMH Z GVZXSVI LI Z ORYIZIRZM TREVH Z HGFWVMG.  HSV
ERVDVW GSV HRGFZGRLM MLG ZH LMV LU URMVGFMRMT IVHVZIXS HPROOH YFG LU
RMELOERMT HGFWVMGH ZG Z KVIHLMZO OVEVO RM FMWVIHGZMWRMT ZMW IVHVZIXSRMT
GSRMTH.  TREVM GSV TFRWZMXV LMV XZM IVXVREV ZG HXSLLO, RG GSVM YVXLNVH
KLHHRYOV GL GVZXS VOVNVMGZIB IVHVZIXS HPROOH GL HGFWVMGH, DSRXS RM UZXG
LMV KZIGRXFOZI ORYIZIRZM HZRW HSV DZH GVZXSRMT SVI URUGS TIZWVIH.
UIVVNZM XLMXOFWVW GSZG RMGILWFXRMT GSV RWVZ LU ULOOLDRMT LMVH LDM KZGS
LU RMJFRIB, DSRXS RH VHHVMGRZOOB DSZG IVHVZIXS VMGZROH, RMELOEVH NLIV
GSZM GVZXSRMT HKVXRURX HPROOH.  GL GSVHV XLNNVMGH EVXXRZ ZWWVW GSV
LYHVIEZGRLM GSZG GSV RMWRERWFZO GVZXSVI ZMW GSV FHV LU Z XIVZGREV
IVHLFIXV, IZGSVI GSZM ZN RGHVOU, HVVNVW GL NZPV GSV PVB WRUUVIVMXV.
HLNV HXSLLOH ZMW HLNV GVZXSVIH ZIV NZPRMT VCXVOOVMG FHV LU GSV MZGFIV
LU XIRGRXZO GSRMPRMT ZMW GVZXSRMT HPROOH, HSV HZRW.

XLMXFIIRMT DRGS GSVHV IVNZIPH, WZOB XOLHVW GSV HVHHRLM DRGS GSV GSLFTSG GSZG
GSV NLIV GSZG KILWFXVIH KILWFXVW ULI GVZXSVIH ZMW ULI HXSLOZIH GL FHV DRGS
GSVRI HGFWVMGH, GSV NLIV HFXXVHHUFO GSVRI VOVXGILMRX KILWFXGH DLFOW KILEV.

                                 

HVHHRLM RR.  HSLD ZMW GVOO

QZXJFVORMV SVHH, WRIVXGLI, MZGRLMZO WVNLMHGIZGRLM OZYLIZGLIB, HVIEVW ZH
NLWVIZGLI LU GSV "HSLDZMWGVOO" HVHHRLM.  HSV MLGVW GSZG Z
JFVHGRLMZMWZMHDVI KVIRLW DLFOW ULOOLD VZXS KIVHVMGZGRLM.


NBOLMZH  LEVIERVD ZMW XLMGVMG LU KVIHVFH  KVIHVFH KIRNZIB NZGVIRZOH
VCRHG RM Z HBHGVNRMWVKVMWVMG, ZIXSREZO ULIN  Z XLMXVHHRLM  GVCGFZO
ZHKVXGH LU KVIHVFH  GLLOH GL FHV DRGS GSV TIVVP GVCG  KIVKZIVW RMWRXVH
ZMW UFOOGVCG HVZIXSVH RM KVIHVFH  VMTORHSTIVVP DLIW HVZIXS OVZWH GL
XOLHV HGFWB LU DLIWH ZMW XLMXVKGH  MZERTZGRMT KVIHVFH YB GIZXRMT WLDM
RMWRXVH  FHRMT GSV RXLMLTIZKSB GL KVIULIN IVHVZIXS 


VOOR NBOLMZH, NZMZTRMT VWRGLI, KVIHVFH KILQVXG, SZIEZIW FMREVIHRGB, URIHG
TZEV ZM LEVIERVD LU KVIHVFH, Z OZITV, XLOOZYLIZGREV VUULIG YZHVW ZG
SZIEZIW FMREVIHRGB YFG DRGS XLMGIRYFGLIH ZMW XLOOZYLIZGLIH OLXZGVW ZG
MFNVILFH FMREVIHRGRVH ZMW XLOOVTVH RM GSV FMRGVW HGZGVH V.T., YLDWLRM,
NZIBOZMW, KLNLMZ, XSRXZTL, ERITRMRZ.  UFMWVW KIRNZIROB YB GSV
ZMMVMYVITXKY KILQVXG, DRGS ZWWRGRLMZO UFMWRMT UILN ZKKOV, SZIEZIW, ZMW
GSV KZXPZIW SFNZMRGRVH RMHGRGFGV, ZNLMT LGSVIH, KVIHVFH RH Z NFOGRNVWRZ,
SBKVIGVCGFZO WZGZYZHV ULI GVZXSRMT ZMW IVHVZIXS LM XOZHHRXZO TIVVP
XRERORAZGRLM, DSRXS DZH IVOVZHVW RM UVYIFZIB 1992 RM EVIHRLM 1.0 ZMW
WRHGIRYFGVW YB BZOV FMREVIHRGB KIVHH.

XLMHRHGRMT VMGRIVOB LU KIRNZIB NZGVIRZOH, KVIHVFH RMXOFWVH ZMXRVMG TIVVP
GVCGH ZMW GIZMHOZGRLMH LU GSLHV GVCGH XZGZOLT VMGIRVHGSZG RH, NFHVFN
XZGZOLT VMGIRVH, MLG ORYIZIB XZGZOLT VMGIRVHLM EZHVH, HRGVH, XLRMH,
HXFOKGFIV, ZMW ZIXSZVLOLTRXZO LYQVXGH NZKH ZMW Z WRXGRLMZIB, ZNLMT
LGSVI HLFIXVH.  GSV MFNYVI LU LYQVXGH ZMW GSV LYQVXGH ULI DSRXS XZGZOLT
VMGIRVH VCRHG ZIV ZXXLNKZMRVW YB GSLFHZMWH LU XLOLI RNZTVH, DSRXS
XLMHGRGFGV Z NZQLI UVZGFIV LU GSV WZGZYZHV.  KVIHVFH XLMGZRMH
ZKKILCRNZGVOB 30 NVTZYBGVH LU GVCG, ZM ZNLFMG GSZG DROO WLFYOV RM
HFYHVJFVMG EVIHRLMH.  RM ZWWRGRLM GL GSVHV KIRNZIB NZGVIRZOH, GSV KVIHVFH
KILQVXG SZH YVVM YFROWRMT GLLOH ULI FHRMT GSVN, NZPRMT ZXXVHH ZMW
MZERTZGRLM VZHRVI, GSV TLZO YVRMT GL YFROW KZIG LU GSV VOVXGILMRX
VMERILMNVMG WRHXFHHVW VZIORVI RM GSV NLIMRMT RM DSRXS HGFWVMGH LI
HXSLOZIH XZM DLIP DRGS GSVRI HLFIXVH.

GSV WVNLMHGIZGRLM LU KVIHVFH DROO HSLD LMOB Z UIZXGRLM LU GSV IVZO DLIP
GSZG SZH TLMV RMGL RG, YVXZFHV GSV KILQVXG SZW GL UZXV GSV WROVNNZ LU
DSZG GL VMGVI DSVM KFGGRMT HLNVGSRMT RMGL NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV ULIN:  HSLFOW
LMV ZRN ULI EVIB SRTS JFZORGB LI NZPV XLMXVHHRLMH RM LIWVI GL TVG GSV
NZGVIRZO RM?  HRMXV KVIHVFH WVXRWVW GL LKG ULI EVIB SRTS JFZORGB, ZOO LU
RGH KIRNZIB NZGVIRZOH VCRHG RM Z HBHGVNRMWVKVMWVMGRMHLUZI ZH RG RH
KLHHRYOV GL YV HBHGVNRMWVKVMWVMGZIXSREZO ULIN.  WVXRWRMT DSZG GSZG
ZIXSREZO ULIN DLFOW YV ZMW ZGGZRMRMT RG IVJFRIVW NFXS DLIP ZMW GSLFTSG.
ULI VCZNKOV, ZOO GSV GVCGH ZIV NZIPVW FK RM HTNO, DSRXS DROO YV NZWV
XLNKZGRYOV DRGS GSV TFRWVORMVH LU GSV GVCG VMXLWRMT RMRGRZGREV GVR DSVM
GSVB ZIV RHHFVW.

WIZDRMTH ZIV KLHGHXIRKG UROVH, MLG NVVGRMT RMGVIMZGRLMZO HGZMWZIWH, YFG
ZG OVZHG WVHRTMVW GL TL ZXILHH KOZGULINH.  RNZTVH, LI IZGSVI GSV IVZO
ZIXSREZO ULINH, XLMHRHG LU GSV YVHG ZEZROZYOV HORWVH, DSRXS ZIV YVRMT
WRTRGRAVW.  NFXS LU GSV XZGZOLT NZGVIRZO VCRHGH RM WZGZYZHV ULINZ ULIN
GSZG GSV ZEVIZTV FHVI XLFOW FHV, NZMRKFOZGV, ZMW WRHKOZB LM Z KVIHLMZO
XLNKFGVI, YFG LMOB ZG TIVZG XLHG.  GSFH, GSRH RH DSVIV GSV XLMXVHHRLM
XLNVH RM:  ZOO LU GSRH IRXS, DVOONZIPVWFK RMULINZGRLM RH HGIRKKVW LU
NFXS LU RGH XLMGVMG GSV RNZTVH ZIV XLMEVIGVW RMGL YRGNZKH ZMW GSV GVCG
RMGL HNZOO ULINZGGVW XSFMPH.  ZOO GSRH RMULINZGRLM XZM GSVM YV RNKLIGVW
RMGL SBKVIXZIW ZMW IFM LM Z NRWIZMTV NZXRMGLHS, DSRXS RH DSZG KVIHVFH
FHVIH SZEV.  GSRH UZXG SZH NZWV RG KLHHRYOV ULI KVIHVFH GL ZGGZRM DRWV
FHV UZRIOB IZKRWOB.  DRGSLFG GSLHV ZIXSREZO ULINH GSV SBKVIXZIW EVIHRLM
YVRMT WVNLMHGIZGVW XLFOW MLG YV NZWV VZHROB, ZMW GSV KILQVXG XLFOW MLG
SZEV GSV KLGVMGRZO GL NLEV GL LGSVI ULINH ZMW NZXSRMVH ZMW HLUGDZIV ZH
GSVB ZKKVZI, MLMV LU DSRXS RMULINZGRLM RH RM KVIHVFH LM GSV XW.

LU GSV MFNVILFH NFOGRNVWRZ ZHKVXGH LU KVIHVFH, NBOLMZH ULXFHVW LM GSV
GVCGFZO.  KZIG LU DSZG NZPVH KVIHVFH HFXS Z KOVZHFIV GL FHV, NBOLMZH
HZRW, RH GSRH VUULIG ZG HVZNOVHH RMGVTIZGRLM ZMW GSV ZYRORGB GL NLEV
ZILFMW YLGS ERHFZO ZMW GVCGFZO NZGVIRZO.  KVIHVFH ZOHL NZWV GSV WVXRHRLM
MLG GL ZGGVNKG GL RMGVIKIVG RGH NZGVIRZO ZMB NLIV GSZM LMV RMGVIKIVGH YB
HVOVXGRMT.  YFG, NBOLMZH VNKSZHRAVW, KVIHVFH RH MLG XLFIHVDZIV:  ML
HBOOZYFH VCRHGH.  GSVIV RH ML VUULIG GL WVURMV SLD LMV GVZXSVH Z GLKRX
FHRMT KVIHVFH, ZOGSLFTS GSV KILQVXG NZB VEVMGFZOOB XLOOVXG KZKVIH YB
KVLKOV DSL SZEV FHVW RG GL GVZXS.  IZGSVI, KVIHVFH ZRNH GL KILERWV
KIRNZIB NZGVIRZO RM Z PRMW LU VOVXGILMRX ORYIZIB, ZM VOVXGILMRX HZMWYLC,
HL GL HZB, RM DSRXS HGFWVMGH ZMW HXSLOZIH DSL ZIV DLIPRMT LM GSRH
NZGVIRZO XZM VCKOLIV YB GSVNHVOEVH.  DRGS GSZG, NBOLMZH WVNLMHGIZGVW
KVIHVFH, YVTRMMRMT DRGS GSV KVIHVFH TZGVDZB, GSV URIHG GSRMT LMV HVVH
FKLM LKVMRMT KVIHVFHZM VUULIG RM KZIG GL HLOEV GSV XLMGVCGFZORARMT
KILYOVNDSRXS GVOOH GSV FHVI DSZG GSV HBHGVN XLMGZRMH.

NBOLMZH WVNLMHGIZGVW LMOB Z EVIB HNZOO KLIGRLM, YVTRMMRMT DRGS KIRNZIB
GVCGH ZMW IFMMRMT LUU GSV XWILN.  SZERMT HVOVXGVW ZVHXSBOFH KILNVGSVFH
YLFMW, DSRXS DZH ERVDZYOV RM TIVVP ZMW VMTORHS KIVGGB NFXS RM GSV HZNV
HVTNVMGH GLTVGSVI, NBOLMZH WVNLMHGIZGVW GLLOH GL FHV DRGS GSV TIVVP GVCG,
HLNVGSRMT MLG KLHHRYOV DRGS Z YLLP:  OLLPRMT FK GSV WRXGRLMZIB VMGIB ULIN
LU ZM FMUZNRORZI DLIW RM TIVVP ZUGVI HFYQVXGRMT RG GL KVIHVFH
NLIKSLOLTRXZO ZMZOBHRH ULI ZOO GSV GVCGH.  ZUGVI URMWRMT LFG ZYLFG Z
DLIW, Z FHVI NZB GSVM WVXRWV GL HVV RU RG RH FHVW ZMBDSVIV VOHV RM TIVVP.
YVXZFHV EZHG ZNLFMGH LU RMWVCRMT HFKKLIG ZOO LU GSV KIRNZIB NZGVIRZO, LMV
XZM URMW LFG DSVIV VOHV ZOO ULINH LU Z KZIGRXFOZI TIVVP DLIW ZKKVZI
LUGVM MLG Z GIRERZO NZGGVI YVXZFHV TIVVP RH SRTSOB RMUOVXGVW.  UFIGSVI,
HRMXV GSV HGLIB LU KILNVGSVFH SZH GL WL DRGS GSV LIRTRMH LU HZXIRURXV, Z
FHVI NZB DRHS GL HGFWB ZMW VCKOLIV HZXIRURXV RM TIVVP ORGVIZGFIV YB
GBKRMT HZXIRURXV RMGL Z HNZOO DRMWLD, Z FHVI TLVH GL GSV VMTORHSTIVVP
DLIW ORHGHLNVGSRMT LMV XZMMLG WL DRGSLFG GSV XLNKFGVI KVIHVFH SZH
RMWVCVW GSV WVURMRGRLMH LU RGH WRXGRLMZIBGSV HGIRMT HZXIRURXV ZKKVZIH
RM GSV WVURMRGRLMH LU GSVHV HRCGBUREV DLIWH.  LMV NZB GSVM URMW LFG
DSVIV ZMB LU GSLHV DLIWH RH FHVW RM GSV DLIPH LU Z KZIGRXFOZI ZFGSLI.
GSV VMTORHS WVURMRGRLMH ZIV MLG OVNNZGRAVW.

ZOO LU GSV RMWRXVH WIRERMT GSRH PRMW LU FHZTV DVIV LIRTRMZOOB WVERHVW ULI
HKVVW, NBOLMZH LYHVIEVW RM LGSVI DLIWH, ZOO GSZG PRMW LU RMULINZGRLM
ZOO ULINH LU ZOO DLIWH, DSVIV GSVB VCRHG, GSV WRXGRLMZIB ULIN GSVB YVOLMT
GLDVIV XLOOVXGVW RMGL WZGZYZHVH, DSRXS DROO VCKVWRGV HVZIXSRMT.  GSVM
RG DZH WRHXLEVIVW GSZG LMV XZM WL GSRMTH HVZIXSRMT RM GSVHV WZGZYZHVH
GSZG XLFOW MLG YV WLMV HVZIXSRMT RM GSV UFOO GVCGH.  GSFH, ZOGSLFTS GSVIV
ZIV UFOOGVCG HVZIXSVH RM KVIHVFH, NFXS LU GSV DLIP RH WLMV YVSRMW GSV
HXVMVH, FHRMT KIVKZIVW RMWRXVH.  IV GSV RMWVCRMT GSZG RH WLMV YVSRMW GSV
HXVMVH, NBOLMZH KLRMGVW LFG GSZG DRGSLFG GSV HTNO ULINH LU GSV GVCG, RG
XLFOW MLG YV WLMV VUUVXGREVOB.  NFXS LU GSRH RMWVCRMT RH YZHVW LM GSV
HGIFXGFIVH GSZG ZIV NZWV VCKORXRG YB GSV HTNO GZTTRMT.

RG DZH ULFMW GSZG LMV LU GSV GSRMTH NZMB LU KVIHVFH MLMTIVVPIVZWRMT
FHVIH WL RH HGZIG UILN GSV WRXGRLMZIB ZMW GSVM NLEV RMGL GSV XOLHV HGFWB
LU DLIWH ZMW XLMXVKGH ERZ GSRH PRMW LU VMTORHSTIVVP DLIW HVZIXS, YB DSRXS
NVZMH GSVB NRTSG HVOVXG Z XLMXVKG.  GSRH VCVIXRHV SZH YVVM ZHHRTMVW GL
HGFWVMGH RM XLIV XLFIHVH ZG SZIEZIWGL HGFWB Z XLMXVKG YB OLLPRMT ULI GSV
VMTORHS DLIW RM GSV WRXGRLMZIB, URMWRMT GSV TIVVP DLIWH, ZMW GSVM URMWRMT
GSV DLIWH RM GSV TIVVP YFG, LU XLFIHV, IVZWRMT ZXILHH RM GSV VMTORHS.
GSZG GVOOH GSVN Z TIVZG WVZO ZYLFG DSZG Z GIZMHOZGRLM NVZMH ZH DVOO.

HSLFOW LMV ZOHL DRHS GL HVV RNZTVH GSZG SZEV GL WL DRGS HZXIRURXV, GSZG
KVIHLM DLFOW TL GL GSV LYQVXG PVB DLIW HVZIXS, DSRXS ZOOLDH LMV GL
KVIULIN Z HRNROZI PRMW LU RMWVC IVGIRVEZO LM GSV WZGZYZHV LU
ZIXSZVLOLTRXZO LYQVXGH.  DRGSLFG DLIWH, KRXGFIVH ZIV FHVOVHH KVIHVFH SZH
MLG IVZXSVW GSV KLRMG DSVIV RG XZM WL NFXS DRGS RNZTVH GSZG ZIV MLG
XZGZOLTVW.  GSFH, ZOGSLFTS RG RH KLHHRYOV RM KVIHVFH DRGS GVCG ZMW RNZTVH
GL MZERTZGV YB PMLDRMT DSVIV LMV DZMGH GL VMW FKULI VCZNKOV, Z
IVWURTFIV EZHV UILN GSV YLHGLM NFHVFN LU URMV ZIGHLMV XZM KVIULIN GSRH
PRMW LU MZERTZGRLM EVIB VZHROB YB GIZXRMT WLDM RMWRXVH.  NBOLMZH
ROOFHGIZGVW HVEVIZO TVMVIRX HXVMVH LU HZXIRURXV LM EZHVH.  GSV UVZGFIVH
WVNLMHGIZGVW WVIREVW UILN KVIHVFH 1.0 EVIHRLM 2.0 DROO RNKOVNVMG VEVM
YVGGVI NVZMH LU IVGIRVEZO.

NBOLMZH XOLHVW YB OLLPRMT ZG LMV LU GSV KRXGFIVH ZMW MLGRMT ZTZRM GSZG
LMV XZM WL Z TIVZG WVZO LU IVHVZIXS FHRMT GSV RXLMLTIZKSB ZH DVOO ZH GSV
GVCGH.  ULI RMHGZMXV, HGFWVMGH RM Z XLIV XLFIHV ZG SZIEZIW GSRH BVZI DVIV
SRTSOB RMGVIVHGVW RM TIVVP XLMXVKGH LU ULIVRTMVIH ZMW IVKIVHVMGZGRLMH LU
MLMTIVVPH.  HL GSVB KVIULINVW Z TIVZG WVZO LU IVHVZIXS, YLGS DRGS GVCGH
V.T., SVILWLGFH ZMW DRGS RXLMLTIZKSB LM EZHVH ZMW XLRMH, LM SLD GSV
TIVVPH KLIGIZBVW MLMTIVVPH.  ZG GSV HZNV GRNV, ZIG SRHGLIRZMH DSL HGFWB
RXLMLTIZKSB DVIV ZOHL RMGVIVHGVW, ZMW DVIV ZYOV GL FHV GSRH NZGVIRZO.

                                 


WRHXFHHRLM  RMWVCRMT ZMW HVZIXSZYRORGB LU ZOO VMTORHS DLIWH RM KVIHVFH 
HVEVIZO UVZGFIVH LU KVIHVFH 1.0  HVEVIZO OVEVOH LU XFHGLNRAZGRLM
KLHHRYOV  KVIHVFH FHVW ULI TVMVIZO VWFXZGRLM  KVIHVFH VUUVXGH LM
VWFXZGRLM  XLMGVCGFZO RMULINZGRLM RM KVIHVFH  NZRM XSZOOVMTV ZMW
VNKSZHRH LU KVIHVFH 


HVEVIZO KLRMGH VNVITVW RM GSV WRHXFHHRLM GSZG ULOOLDVW NBOLMZHH KIVHVMGZGRLM.

ZOGSLFTS NBOLMZH SZW MLG WVNLMHGIZGVW KVIHVFH ZYRORGB GL XILHHHVZIXS
WLXFNVMGH, HSV XLMURINVW GSZG ZOO VMTORHS DLIWH RM KVIHVFH ZIV RMWVCVW
ZMW XZM YV HVZIXSVW.  HL, ULI VCZNKOV, HZXIRURXV XLFOW SZEV YVVM HVZIXSVW
RM ZOO GVCGH, GSV SRHGLIRXZO VHHZB, ZMW ZOO GSV XZGZOLTFV VMGIRVH DRGS
GSVRI WVHXIRKGRLMHRM HSLIG, RM ZOO LU KVIHVFH.

YLLOVZM OLTRX RH MLG RM KVIHVFH 1.0 YFG DROO YV ZWWVW GL GSV MVCG
EVIHRLM, ZOGSLFTS ZM VUULIG RH YVRMT NZWV MLG GL IVHGIRXG KVIHVFH GL Z
WZGZYZHV RM DSRXS LMV QFHG KVIULINH HVZIXSRMT, YLLOVZM LI LGSVIDRHV.  RG
RH KLHHRYOV GL NLEV OZGVIZOOB GSILFTS GSV WLXFNVMGH YB HVOVXGRMT Z DLIW
LMV RH RMGVIVHGVW RM ZMW HVOVXGRMT ZM ZIVZ LU RMULINZGRLM LMV RH
RMGVIVHGVW RM ZMW GIBRMT GL OLLP GSZG DLIW FK RM GSZG ZIVZ.

HRMXV KVIHVFH DZH WVEVOLKVW RM SBKVIXZIW, HVEVIZO OVEVOH LU XFHGLNRAZGRLM
ZIV KLHHRYOV.  HRNKOV ZFGSLIRMT GLLOH VCRHG GSZG ZOOLD LMV GL XIVZGV
ZMMLGZGVW KZGSH GSILFTS GSV RMULINZGRLM, DSRXS ZIV FHVUFO ULI MLGVGZPRMT
ZMW ULI TFRWVW GLFIH ULI GVZXSRMT KFIKLHVH ZMW ULI VCKLHRGLIB DIRGRMT.
DRGS Z ORGGOV NLIV RMTVMFRGB RG RH KLHHRYOV GL YVTRM GL ZWW LI HFYHGRGFGV
NZGVIRZO RM KVIHVFH.

KVIHVFH SZH MLG YVVM FHVW HL NFXS ULI XOZHHRXH VWFXZGRLM ZH ULI TVMVIZO
VWFXZGRLM, DSVIV RG HVVNVW GL SZEV ZM RNKZXG LM GSV HGFWVMGH RM GSV XLIV
XLFIHV ZG SZIEZIW Z TVMVIZO IVJFRIVW XLFIHV GSZG HGFWVMGH NFHG GZPV RM
XVIGZRM ZIVZH.  HGFWVMGH DVIV ZYOV GL FHV KIRNZIB NZGVIRZO NFXS NLIV.

GSV KVIHVFH KILQVXG SZH ZM VEZOFZGRLM GVZN ZG GSV FMREVIHRGB LU NZIBOZMW
GSZG SZH YVVM WLXFNVMGRMT KVIHVFH VUUVXGH LM VWFXZGRLM.  KVIHVFH RH EVIB
KLKFOZI, ZMW ZMVXWLGZO VERWVMXV RMWRXZGVH GSZG RG RH SZERMT ZM VUUVXG ZG
KOZXVH LGSVI GSZM SZIEZIW, ULI VCZNKOV, GVHG HRGVH ZG YZOO HGZGV
FMREVIHRGB, WIFIB XLOOVTV, ZMW MFNVILFH HNZOO KOZXVH DSVIV LKKLIGFMRGRVH
GL FHV EZHG ZNLFMGH LU KIRNZIB WZGZ NZB MLG VCRHG.  LMV WLXFNVMGVW VUUVXG
RH GSZG ZIXSZVLOLTRXZO, ZMGSILKLOLTRXZO, ZMW KSROLOLTRXZO IVHVZIXS RH
YVRMT WLMV YB GSV HZNV KVIHLM RMHGVZW LU YB GSIVV WRUUVIVMG KVLKOV.

GSV XLMGVCGFZO RMULINZGRLM RM KVIHVFH RMXOFWVH ZM LEVIERVD VHHZB, Z
UZRIOB ORMVZI SRHGLIRXZO VHHZB LM GSV URUGS XVMGFIB Y.X. GSZG KILERWVH
ORMPH RMGL GSV KIRNZIB NZGVIRZO V.T., SVILWLGFH, GSFXBWRWVH, ZMW
KOFGZIXS, ERZ HNZOO TIZB FMWVIHXLIRMT LM GSV HXIVVM LU ORMPVW
KZHHZTVH.  GSVHV ZIV SZMWNZWV ORMPH RMGL LGSVI NZGVIRZO.

GL WRUUVIVMG VCGVMGH, NLHG LU GSV KILWFXGRLM DLIP DZH WLMV ZG SZIEZIW,
DSVIV GSV KVLKOV ZMW GSV VJFRKNVMG ZIV OLXZGVW.  NFXS LU GSV
XLOOZYLIZGREV ZXGRERGB RMELOEVW WZGZ XLOOVXGRLM ZMW HGIFXGFIRMT, YVXZFHV
GSV NZRM XSZOOVMTV ZMW GSV VNKSZHRH LU KVIHVFH RH GSV TZGSVIRMT LU
KIRNZIB NZGVIRZO, GSZG RH, YFROWRMT Z FHVUFO VMERILMNVMG ULI HGFWBRMT
XOZHHRXZO TIVVXV, XLOOVXGRMT WZGZ, ZMW NZPRMT RG FHVUFO.
HBHGVNHYFROWRMT RH WVURMRGVOB MLG GSV NZRM XLMXVIM.  GSFH, NFXS LU GSV
DLIP SZH RMELOEVW DIRGRMT VHHZBH, XLOOVXGRMT RMULINZGRLM, IVDIRGRMT RG,
ZMW GZTTRMT RG.  GSZG XZM YV WLMV LUU HRGV.  GSV XIVZGREV ORMP ULI GSV
LEVIERVD VHHZB ZH DVOO ZH ULI YLGS HBHGVNH ZMW WZGZ DZH XLOOZYLIZGREV,
ZMW DZH ULITVW ERZ VNZRO ZMW KZKVI NZRO DRGS KILUVHHLIH ZG KLNLMZ ZMW
YLDWLRM.

                                 


XZOZOFXZ  KOWH KIRMXRKZO ULXFH ZMW XLMGIRYFGRLM GL HXSLOZIHSRK 
EZIRLFH JFVHGRLMH KIVKZIZGLIB GL YVTRMMRMT GSV KILQVXG  YZHRH ULI
KILQVXG  YZHRX IFOV RM XLMEVIGRMT KOW  XLMXVIMRMT GSV RNZTVH RM KOW 
IFMMRMT KOW FMWVI Z EZIRVGB LU IVGIRVEZO HLUGDZIVH  VMXLWRMT GSV
WZGZYZHV Z SZIWULFTSG RHHFV  EZIRLFH UVZGFIVH WVNLMHGIZGVW  RNKLIGZMXV
LU FHVI WLXFNVMGZGRLM  ORNRGZGRLMH LU GSV XWILN EVIHRLM 


VIRX XZOZOFXZ, ERXV KIVHRWVMG, XSZWDBXPSVZOVB, RMX., WVNLMHGIZGVW Z
HLUGDZIV RMGVIKIVGZGRLM LU GSV KZGILOLTRZ OZGRMZ WZGZYZHV KOW.  KOWH
KIRMXRKZO ULXFH UILN GSV YVTRMMRMT LU GSV KILQVXG ZYLFG GSIVVZMWZSZOU
BVZIH ZTL DZH LM XLMEVIGRMT NRTMVH OZGRM HVIRVH, ZMW RM GSV VMW,
XZOZOFXZ HFTTVHGVW, XLMEVIHRLM LU GSV GVCG DROO YV GSV NZQLI XLMGIRYFGRLM
GL HXSLOZIHSRK.  XZOZOFXZ HGIVHHVW GSZG, ZH KLHHRYOB GSV LMOB KIREZGV
KFYORHSRMT LITZMRAZGRLM ZG GSV DLIPHSLK, XSZWDBXPSVZOVB SZW HLFTSG ML
UVWVIZO UFMWH LI MZGRLMZO ULFMWZGRLM HFKKLIG YVULIV VNYZIPRMT FKLM GSV
KILQVXG, YFG RMHGVZW SZW IVORVW FKLM Z TIVZG WVZO LU SLNVDLIP ZMW
NZIPVGRMT GL ZXXLNKORHS GSV GZHP LU XLMEVIHRLM.

VEVI HRMXV GSV KLHHRYRORGRVH LU XLNKFGVIHVZIXSRMT SZEV VNVITVW, HXSLOZIH
RM GSV URVOW LU OZGV ZMXRVMG ZMW VZIOB NVWRVEZO HGFWRVH KSROLHLKSVIH,
GSVLOLTRZMH, XOZHHRXRHGH, ZMW GSLHV HGFWBRMT GSV SRHGLIB LU MZGFIZO OZD
ZMW GSV SRHGLIB LU GSV OVTZO WVEVOLKNVMG LU DVHGVIM XRERORAZGRLM SZEV
YVVM OLMTRMT ULI Z UFOOB HVZIXSZYOV EVIHRLM LU DVHGVIM ORGVIZGFIV, ULI
VCZNKOV, ZOO GSV GVCGH LU ZFTFHGRMV ZMW YVIMZIW LU XOZRIEZFC ZMW
YLVGSRFH, MLG GL NVMGRLM ZOO GSV HVXLMWZIB ZMW GVIGRZIB ZFGSLIH.

EZIRLFH JFVHGRLMH ZILHV, XZOZOFXZ HZRW.  HSLFOW LMV XLMEVIG NRTMV?
HSLFOW GSV WZGZYZHV YV VMXLWVW?  RH RG MVXVHHZIB GL WL GSZG?  SLD HSLFOW
RG YV WVOREVIVW?  DSZG ZYLFG XWILN?  HRMXV GSRH RH Z GIZMHRGRLMZO
NVWRFN, DSB VEVM YLGSVI GL XIVZGV HLUGDZIV GL IFM LM Z XWILN?  HRMXV
VEVIBYLWB PMLDH KVLKOV DROO YV MVGDLIPRMT RMULINZGRLM, DSB TL GL GSV
GILFYOVDSRXS RH UZI TIVZGVI DRGS XWILN GSZM DRGS GSV KILWFXGRLM LU
NZTMVGRX WZGZ?  URMZOOB, SLD WLVH LMV NZPV GSV WZGZ ZEZROZYOV?  XZM NZMB
LU GSV SFIWOVH GL FHRMT VOVXGILMRX RMULINZGRLM GSZG HLNV KFYORHSVIH SZEV
RNKLHVW FKLM WZGZYZHVH YV VORNRMZGVW?

GSV KOW KILQVXG DZH YZHVW LM GSV KIRMXRKOV GSZG XLNKFGVIHVZIXSRMT LU
GVCGH RH NLHG VUUVXGREV DSVM RG RH WLMV DRGS Z OZITV WZGZYZHV.  YVXZFHV
KOW IVKIVHVMGVW Z XLOOVXGRLM GSZG HVIEVH HL NZMB WRHXRKORMVH ZXILHH HL
NZMB KVIRLWH, RG DZH RIIVHRHGRYOV.

GSV YZHRX IFOV RM XLMEVIGRMT KOW DZH GL WL ML SZIN, GL ZELRW GSV HRMH LU
RMGIFHRLM RM HFXS Z WZGZYZHV:  ML RMGILWFXGRLM LU MVDVI VWRGRLMH, ML
LMGSVHKLG XSZMTVH, ML VIZWRXZGRMT LU ZOO KLHHRYOV UZOHVSLLWH UILN ZM
VWRGRLM.  GSFH, KOW RH MLG GSV URMZO ZXG RM VOVXGILMRX KFYORHSRMT ULI
GSRH WRHXRKORMV, YFG HRNKOB GSV YVTRMMRMT.  GSV XLMEVIHRLM LU KOW SZH
VELPVW MFNVILFH FMZMGRXRKZGVW JFVHGRLMH:  SLD DROO RMULINZGRLM YV FHVW?
DSZG ZYLFG MVGDLIPRMT?  XZM GSV IRTSGH LU Z WZGZYZHV YV KILGVXGVW?
HSLFOW LMV KILGVXG GSV IRTSGH LU Z WZGZYZHV?  SLD XZM RG YV NZWV
ZEZROZYOV?

GSLHV XLMEVIGRMT KOW ZOHL GIRVW GL ZELRW GSV HRMH LU LNRHHRLM, GSZG RH,
VCXOFWRMT KLIGRLMH LU GSV XLOOVXGRLMH LI DSLOV HVXGRLMH.  DSZG ZYLFG GSV
RNZTVH?  KOW RH UFOO LU RNZTVH, HLNV ZIV VCGIVNVOB KRLFH
MRMVGVVMGSXVMGFIB IVKIVHVMGZGRLMH LU GSV UZGSVIH, DSROV LGSVIH XLMGZRM
SRTSOB RMGVIVHGRMT VOVNVMGH.  GSV TLZO DZH GL XLEVI ZOO GSV GVCG LU NRTMV
RMXOFWRMT MLGVH, RM TIVVP ZMW RM SVYIVD, GSV OZGGVI LU DSRXS, RM
KZIGRXFOZI, XZFHVH KILYOVNH RM XIVZGRMT Z HVZIXS HGIFXGFIV, ZOO GSV
RMWRXVH, ZMW VEVM GSV RNZTVH, DSRXS ZIV YVRMT HXZMMVW RM HVKZIZGVOB
HVZIXSZYOV UROVH.

HVEVIZO MLIGS ZNVIRXZM RMHGRGFGRLMH GSZG SZEV KOZXVW ZXJFRHRGRLM IVJFVHGH
ULI GSV KOW WZGZYZHV SZEV IVJFVHGVW RG RM NZTMVGRX ULIN DRGSLFG HLUGDZIV,
DSRXS NVZMH GSVB ZIV ZOIVZWB IFMMRMT RG DRGSLFG HLUGDZIV, DRGSLFG
ZMBGSRMT WVNLMHGIZGVW ZG GSV DLIPHSLK.

DSZG XZMMLG KIZXGRXZOOB YV WLMV RH TL YZXP ZMW IVXLMEVIG ZMW IVVMXLWV
WZGZ, Z GRNVXLMHFNRMT ZMW VCGIVNVOB XLHGOB VMGVIKIRHV.  XZOZOFXZ HVVH
KOW ZH Z WZGZYZHV GSZG XZM, ZMW HSLFOW, YV IFM FMWVI Z EZIRVGB LU
IVGIRVEZO HLUGDZIVH.  GSRH DROO KVINRG GSV DRWVHG KLHHRYOV HVZIXSVH.
XLMHVJFVMGOB, GSV MVVW GL KILWFXV Z XWILN LU KOW, ZH DVOO ZH GL WVEVOLK
HLUGDZIV GSZG XLFOW SZMWOV HLNV 1.3 TRTZYBGV LU SVZEROB VMXLWVW GVCG,
WVEVOLKVW LFG LU XLMEVIHZGRLMH DRGS XLOOVXGRLM WVEVOLKNVMG ZMW IVUVIVMXV
ORYIZIRZMH DSL DZMGVW HLUGDZIV YLGS XLNKZHHRLMZGV VMLFTS ULI GSV
KVWVHGIRZM YFG ZOHL XZKZYOV LU RMXLIKLIZGRMT GSV NLHG WVGZROVW
OVCRXLTIZKSRXZO HGFWRVH GSZG Z FHVI WVHRIVH GL XLMWFXG.  RM GSV VMW, GSV
VMXLWRMT ZMW XLMEVIHRLM LU GSV WZGZ DROO KILEV GSV NLHG VMWFIRMT
GVHGZNVMG GL GSV EZOFV LU GSV KILQVXG.

GSV VMXLWRMT LU GSV WZGZYZHV DZH ZOHL Z SZIWULFTSG RHHFV:  WRW GSV
WZGZYZHV MVVW GL YV VMXLWVW? DVIV GSVIV MLINZGREV HGIFXGFIVH ULI VMXLWRMT
SFNZMRHG GVCGH?  HSLFOW RG YV HTNO?  DSZG ZYLFG GSV GVRDROO RG OZHG,
DROO RG KILEV FHVUFO?  XZOZOFXZ VCKIVHHVW HLNV NRMLI WLFYGH ZH GL DSVGSVI
Z WZGZ YZMP XZM YV UFOOB GVRXLMULINZMG.  VEVIB VUULIG XZM YV NZWV, YFG
RM GSV VMW GL YV GVRXLMULINZMG NVZMH GL ZXXVKG GSV MVVW GL NZPV HLNV
URIN VMXLWRMT WVXRHRLMH GSZG XZM, RMWVVW, YV WRHKFGVW.  GSV GVR KLRMGH
GSV KFYORHSVI RM Z KILKVI WRIVXGRLM YFG WLVH MLG KIVHFNV GL NZPV ZOO GSV
WVXRHRLMH ULI SRN LI SVI.  VHHVMGRZOOB, GSV TLZO LU VMXLWRMT DZH GL
VORNRMZGV, ZH NFXS ZH KLHHRYOV, GSV SRMWIZMXVH GL RMULINZGRLMMVGDLIPRMT,
HL GSZG RU ZM RMHGRGFGRLM ZXJFRIVH Z WZGZYZHV, VEVIBYLWB ZHHLXRZGVW DRGS
GSV RMHGRGFGRLM XZM SZEV ZXXVHH GL RG.

XZOZOFXZ WVNLMHGIZGVW Z KLIGRLM LU ELOFNV 160, YVXZFHV RG SZW GSV NLHG
ZMLNZORVH RM RG.  GSV HLUGDZIV DZH XIVZGVW YB VOVXGILMRX YLLP
GVXSMLOLTRVH LU KILERWVMXV, IR, ZMW RH XZOOVW WBMZGVCG.  GSV HLUGDZIV
DLIPH LMOB DRGS HTNOXLWVW WZGZ.

ERVDRMT Z GZYOV LU XLMGVMGH LM GSV HXIVVM, GSV ZFWRVMXV HZD SLD WBMZGVCG
GIVZGH VZXS VOVNVMG ZH Z YLLP ZMW ZGGVNKGH GL HRNKORUB NLEVNVMG GSILFTS Z
ELOFNV.  UZNRORZIRGB DRGS GSV KZGILOLTRZ RM KIRMG R.V., GSV GVCG, RGH
HLFIXV, ZMW GSV VWRGRLMH DROO NZPV GSV NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV EVIHRLMH SRTSOB
FHVUFO.  HLUGDZIV DRGS Z DRMWLDH ZKKORXZGRLM DZH HLFTSG ULI KOW,
XZOZOFXZ HZRW, YVXZFHV GSRH DZH GSV NZRM GIVMW ULI HXSLOZIOB FHV.

XZOZOFXZ ZOHL WVNLMHGIZGVW SLD Z FHVI XZM KVIULIN Z EZIRVGB LU HVZIXSVH
ZMW JFRXPOB NLEV GL ZMB KZIG LU Z ELOFNV GSV OLLPFK HXIVVM KILERWVH
HLNV YZHRX, HRNKOV DLIWHVZIXSRMT.

XZOZOFXZ ZITFVW GSZG LMV LU GSV NZQLI WRUURXFOGRVH RH MLG GSV HLUGDZIV.
IZGSVI, RM XIVZGRMT Z KILWFXG GSZG DROO YV FHVW YB HXSLOZIH IVKIVHVMGRMT
Z YILZW HKVXGIFN LU XLNKFGVI HLKSRHGRXZGRLM,  FHVI WLXFNVMGZGRLM KILEVH
GL YV GSV NLHG RNKLIGZMG HVIERXV LMV XZM KILERWV.

XZOZOFXZ MVCG ROOFHGIZGVW Z GIFMXZGVW HVZIXS FMWVI NBHGVIRFN DRGSRM GVM
DLIWH LU ERIGFH ZMW SLD LMV DLFOW YV ZYOV GL URMW RGH XLMGVMGH GSILFTSLFG
GSV VMGRIV WZGZYZHV.  SV HZRW GSZG GSV VCXRGRMT GSRMT ZYLFG KOW RH GSZG
NZMB LU GSV ZKKORXZGRLMH RM GSV IVGIRVEZO HLUGDZIV YVRMT DIRGGVM ULI RG
DROO VCXVVW GSV XZKZYRORGRVH LU GSV HLUGDZIV VNKOLBVW MLD ULI GSV XWILN
EVIHRLM.  GSV XWILN UZXVH TVMFRMV ORNRGZGRLMH, RM GVINH LU HKVVW ZMW
XLNKIVSVMHREVMVHH, RM GSV XIVZGRLM LU Z IVGIRVEZO HLUGDZIV GL IFM RG.
XZOZOFXZ HZRW SV SLKVW GSZG RMWRERWFZO HXSLOZIH DROO WLDMOLZW GSV WZGZ,
RU GSVB DRHS, GL GSVRI KVIHLMZO XLNKFGVIH, ZMW SZEV IVZWB ZXXVHH GL
RNKLIGZMG GVCGH LM Z XLMHGZMG YZHRH, DSRXS GSVB DROO YV ZYOV GL FHV RM
GSVRI IVHVZIXS ZMW UILN DSRXS GSVB NRTSG VEVM YV ZYOV GL KFYORHS.

XZOZOFXZ VCKOZRMVW GSZG GSV YOFV MFNYVIH IVKIVHVMGVW NRTMVH XLOFNM MFNYVIH,
DSRXS ZIV GSV HGZMWZIW HXSLOZIOB IVUVIVMXVH.  KFOORMT FK Z MLGV, SV HGZGVW
GSZG GSVHV GVCGH DVIV SVZEROB VWRGVW ZMW GSV RNZTV UROVH DLFOW ZKKVZI HRNKOB
ZH Z MLGV ZH DVOO, HL GSZG LMV XLFOW JFRXPOB ZXXVHH ZM RNZTV.

                                 


UOVRHXSSZFVIVIDZB  HVEVIZO KILYOVNH DRGS DSRXS ZN RH HGROO DIVHGORMT 
EZIRLFH HVZIXS ZMW IVGIRVEZO XZKZYRORGRVH  ROOFHGIZGRLM LU ZFGLNZGRX
HGVNNRMT ZMW Z GIFMXZGVW HVZIXS  ZNH ZGGVNKG GL URMW DZBH GL XLMMVXG
XZGZOLTRMT GL GSV GVCGH  ZNH TIZERGZGRLM GLDZIWH HTNO  HGIRPRMT Z
YZOZMXV YVGDVVM JFZMGRGB ZMW JFZORGB  SLD ZN UFIMRHSVH FHVIH IVXLFIHV GL
RNZTVH  XLMWFXGRMT Z HVZIXS RM Z UFOOGVCG VMERILMNVMG  NZXRMGLHS ZMW
RYN KILGLGBKVH LU ZN  NFOGRNVWRZ ZHKVXGH LU ZN 


Z WVNLMHGIZGRLM LU ZNVIRXZM NVNLIB YB RGH XLLIWRMZGLI, XZIO UOVRHXSSZFVI,
ZMW IRXPB VIDZB, ZHHLXRZGV XLLIWRMZGLI, ORYIZIB LU XLMTIVHH, XLMXOFWVW
GSV NLIMRMT HVHHRLM.  YVTRMMRMT DRGS Z XLOOVXGRLM LU YILZWHRWVH UILN GSV
XLMGRMVMGZO XLMTIVHH ZMW GSV XLMHGRGFGRLMZO XLMEVMGRLM, GSV LMOB GVCG
XLOOVXGRLM RM Z KIVHVMGZYOV ULIN ZG GSV GRNV LU GSV DLIPHSLK, UOVRHXSSZFVI
SRTSORTSGVW HVEVIZO LU GSV KILYOVNH DRGS DSRXS ZN RH HGROO DIVHGORMT.
RM RGH URMZO ULIN, GSV WRHP DROO XLMGZRM GDL XLOOVXGRLMH, MLG LMOB GSV
YILZWHRWVH YFG ZOHL GSV UFOO GVCG DRGS ROOFHGIZGRLMH LU Z HVG LU
ZKKILCRNZGVOB 300 ZUIRXZMZNVIRXZM KZNKSOVGH UILN GSV KVIRLW 1870 GL 1910.

ZH UIVVNZM SZW VCKOZRMVW VZIORVI, ZN SZH ZGGVNKGVW GL FHV Z HNZOO ZNLFMG
LU RMGVIKIVGZGRLM GL RMGILWFXV XLOOVXGRLMH.  RM GSV KIVHVMG XZHV, GSV
XLMGIZXGLI, Z XLNKZMB MZNVW JFRXP HLFIXV, RM HROEVI HKIRMT, NW., FHVW
HLUGDZIV XZOOVW GLLOYLLP ZMW KFG GLTVGSVI Z NLWVHGOB RMGVIZXGREV
RMGILWFXGRLM GL GSV XLOOVXGRLM.  ORPV GSV GDL KIVXVWRMT HKVZPVIH,
UOVRHXSSZFVI ZITFVW GSZG GSV IVZO ZHHVG DZH GSV FMWVIOBRMT XLOOVXGRLM.

UOVRHXSSZFVI KILXVVWVW GL WVHXIRYV EZIRLFH HVZIXS ZMW IVGIRVEZO
XZKZYRORGRVH DSROV VIDZB DLIPVW GSV XLNKFGVI.  RM GSRH KZIGRXFOZI KZXPZTV
GSV "TL GL" KFOOWLDM ZOOLDVW GSV FHVI RM VUUVXG GL QFNK LFG LU GLLOYLLP,
DSVIV GSV RMGVIZXGREV KILTIZN DZH OLXZGVW, ZMW VMGVI GSV GSRIWKZIGB
HLUGDZIV FHVW YB ZN ULI GSRH GVCG XLOOVXGRLM, DSRXS RH XZOOVW KVIHLMZO
ORYIZIRZM.  GSRH DZH GSV DRMWLDH EVIHRLM LU KVIHLMZO ORYIZIRZM, Z
HLUGDZIV ZKKORXZGRLM KFG GLTVGSVI YB Z XLNKZMB RM ILXPEROOV, NW.

HRMXV GSV YILZWHRWVH XZNV UILN GSV IVELOFGRLMZIB DZI KVIRLW, Z HVZIXS DZH
XLMWFXGVW FHRMT GSV DLIWH YIRGRHS LI DZI, DRGS GSV WVUZFOG LKVIZGLI IVHVG
ZH LI.  UOVRHXSSZFVI WVNLMHGIZGVW YLGS ZFGLNZGRX HGVNNRMT DSRXS URMWH
LGSVI ULINH LU GSV HZNV ILLG ZMW Z GIFMXZGVW HVZIXS.  LMV LU KVIHLMZO
ORYIZIRZMH HGILMTVHG UVZGFIVH, GSV IVOVEZMXV IZMPRMT, DZH IVKIVHVMGVW YB
Z XSZIG GSZG RMWRXZGVW SLD LUGVM DLIWH YVRMT HLFTSG ZKKVZIVW RM
WLXFNVMGH, DRGS GSV LMV IVXVRERMT GSV NLHG "SRGH" LYGZRMRMT GSV SRTSVHG
HXLIV.  GSV "SRG ORHG" GSZG RH HFKKORVW GZPVH GSV IVOVEZMXV IZMPRMT RMGL
ZXXLFMG, NZPRMT GSV URIHG SRG, RM VUUVXG, GSV LMV GSV HLUGDZIV SZH
HVOVXGVW ZH GSV NLHG IVOVEZMG VCZNKOV.

DSROV RM GSV GVCG LU LMV LU GSV YILZWHRWV WLXFNVMGH, UOVRHXSSZFVI
IVNZIPVW ZNH ZGGVNKG GL URMW DZBH GL XLMMVXG XZGZOLTRMT GL GSV GVCGH,
DSRXS RG WLVH RM WRUUVIVMG DZBH RM WRUUVIVMG NZMRUVHGZGRLMH.  RM GSV XZHV
HSLDM, GSV XZGZOLTRMT DZH KZHGVW LM:  ZN GLLP NZIX IVXLIWH GSZG DVIV
DIRGGVM ZH LMORMV IVXLIWH IRTSG RMGL LMV LU GSV ORYIZIBH NZRMUIZNV
IVGIRVEZO KILTIZNH, KFOOVW GSVN LFG, ZMW SZMWVW GSVN LUU GL GSV XLMGIZXGLI,
DSL NZHHZTVW GSVN HLNVDSZG GL WRHKOZB GSVN RM GSV NZMMVI HSLDM.  LMV LU
ZNH JFVHGRLMH RH, WLVH GSV XZGZOLTFRMT MLINZOOB KVIULINVW RM GSV NZRMUIZNV
DLIP RM GSRH XLMGVCG, LI SZW ZN LFTSG GL GSRMP GSILFTS ZWQFHGNVMGH?

UOVRHXSSZFVI NZWV GSV ZWWRGRLMZO KLRMG GSZG, ZH UZI ZH GSV GVCG TLVH, ZN
SZH TIZERGZGVW GLDZIWH HTNO SV KLRMGVW GL GSV YLOWUZXV RM GSV FKKVI KZIG
LU GSV HXIVVM.  ZOGSLFTS VCGIVNVOB ORNRGVW RM RGH ZYRORGB GL GIZMHOZGV
LI RMGVIKIVG HTNO, KVIHLMZO ORYIZIRZM DROO UFIMRHS YLGS YLOW ZMW RGZORXH
LM HXIVVM Z UZRIOB VZHB GSRMT GL WL, YFG RG RH LMV LU GSV DZBH RM DSRXS
HTNO RH FHVUFO.

HGIRPRMT Z YZOZMXV YVGDVVM JFZMGRGB ZMW JFZORGB SZH YVVM Z NZQLI XLMXVIM
LU ZN, DRGS ZXXFIZXB YVRMT LMV LU GSV KOZXVH DSVIV KILQVXG HGZUU SZEV
UVOG GSZG OVHH GSZM 100KVIXVMG ZXXFIZXB DZH MLG FMZXXVKGZYOV.
UOVRHXSSZFVI XRGVW GSV VCZNKOV LU GSV HGZMWZIW LU GSV IVPVBRMT RMWFHGIB,
MZNVOB 99.95 KVIXVMG ZH LMV HVIERXV YFIVZF RMULINVW SRN, GL TL UILN
99.95 GL 100 KVIXVMG DLFOW WLFYOV GSV XLHG.

UOVRHXSSZFVI MVCG WVNLMHGIZGVW SLD ZN UFIMRHSVH FHVIH IVXLFIHV GL RNZTVH,
ZMW ZG GSV HZNV GRNV IVXZOOVW OVHPH KLRMGVW JFVHGRLM XLMXVIMRMT GSV
MFNYVI LU KVLKOV DSL DLFOW OLLP ZG GSLHV RNZTVH ZMW GSV MFNYVI DSL DLFOW
DLIP LMOB DRGS GSV GVCG.  RU GSV RNKORXZGRLM LU OVHPH JFVHGRLM DZH
HLFMW, UOVRHXSSZFVI HZRW, RG IZRHVW GSV HGZPVH ULI GVCG ZXXFIZXB ZMW
IVWFXVW GSV EZOFV LU GSV HGIZGVTB ULI RNZTVH.

XLMGVMWRMT GSZG KIVHVIEZGRLM RH ZODZBH Z YFTZYLL, UOVRHXSSZFVI
WVNLMHGIZGVW HVEVIZO RNZTVH WVIREVW UILN Z HXZM LU Z KIVHVIEZGRLM
NRXILURON GSZG ZN SZW NZWV.  SV ZDZIWVW Z TIZWV LU X ZG YVHG, KVISZKH Z
X NRMFH LI Z X KOFH, ULI SLD DVOO RG DLIPVW LFG.  RMWVVW, GSV NZGGVI LU
OVZIMRMT RU LGSVI KVLKOV SZW YVGGVI RWVZH ZYLFG HXZMMRMT RM TVMVIZO, ZMW,
RM KZIGRXFOZI, HXZMMRMT UILN NRXILURON, DZH LMV LU GSV UZXGLIH GSZG WILEV
ZN GL ZGGVNKG GL GSRMP GSILFTS GSV ZTVMWZ ULI GSV DLIPHSLK.  HPVD, ULI
VCZNKOV, DZH LMV LU GSV RHHFVH GSZG ZN RM RGH RTMLIZMXV SZW MLG IVXPLMVW
DLFOW KILEV HL WRUURXFOG.

UFIGSVI, GSV SZMWORMT LU RNZTVH LU GSV HLIG HSLDM, RM Z WVHPGLK XLNKFGVI
VMERILMNVMG, RMELOEVW Z XLMHRWVIZYOV ZNLFMG LU ALLNRMT ZMW HXILOORMT.
FOGRNZGVOB, ZN HGZUU UVVO GSZG KVISZKH GSV KZKVI XLKB GSZG RH KIRMGVW LFG
NRTSG YV GSV NLHG FHVUFO LMV, YFG GSVB IVNZRM FMXVIGZRM ZH GL SLD NFXS
LMHXIVVM IVZWRMT FHVIH DROO WL.

IVGFIMRMT GL GSV GVCG, UOVRHXSSZFVI ZHPVW ERVDVIH GL RNZTRMV Z KVIHLM DSL
NRTSG YV XLMWFXGRMT Z HVZIXS RM Z UFOOGVCG VMERILMNVMG.  DRGS GSRH
HXVMZIRL, SV KILXVVWVW GL ROOFHGIZGV LGSVI UVZGFIVH LU KVIHLMZO ORYIZIRZM
GSZG SV XLMHRWVIVW SVOKUFO ULI VCZNKOV, RG KILERWVH GSV ZYRORGB GL
MLGRXV DLIWH ZH LMV IVZWH.  XORXPRMT GSV "RMXOFWV" YFGGLM LM GSV YLGGLN
LU GSV HVZIXS DRMWLD KLKH GSV DLIWH GSZG SZEV YVVM SRTSORTSGVW RMGL GSV
HVZIXS.  GSFH, Z FHVI XZM IVURMV GSV HVZIXS ZH SV LI HSV IVZWH,
IVVCVXFGRMT GSV HVZIXS ZMW XLMGRMFRMT GL URMW GSRMTH RM GSV JFVHG ULI
NZGVIRZOH.  GSRH HLUGDZIV MLG LMOB XLMGZRMH IVOVEZMXV IZMPRMT, YLLOVZM
LKVIZGLIH, ZMW GIFMXZGRLM, RG ZOHL KVINRGH LMV GL KVIULIN DLIW ZOTVYIZ,
HL GL HZB, DSVIV LMV KFGH GDL LI GSIVV DLIWH RM KZIVMGSVHVH ZMW ORMPH
GSVN DRGS LMV YLLOVZM LKVIZGLI ZMW GSVM Z XLFKOV LU DLIWH RM ZMLGSVI HVG
LU KZIVMGSVHVH ZMW ZHPH ULI GSRMTH DRGSRM HL NZMB DLIWH LU LGSVIH.

FMGRO GSVB YVXZNV ZXJFZRMGVW IVXVMGOB DRGS HLNV LU GSV DLIP YVRMT WLMV RM
XOZHHRXH, GSV ZN HGZUU SZW MLG IVZORAVW GSZG Z OZITV MFNYVI LU GSV
KILQVXGH GSZG RMELOEV VOVXGILMRX GVCGH DVIV YVRMT WLMV YB KVLKOV DRGS Z
KILULFMW RMGVIVHG RM OZMTFZTV ZMW ORMTFRHGRXH.  GSVRI HVZIXS HGIZGVTRVH
ZMW GSRMPRMT ZIV LIRVMGVW GL GSLHV URVOWH, ZH RH HSLDM RM KZIGRXFOZI YB
GSV KVIHVFH VCZNKOV.  ZH ZNZGVFI SRHGLIRZMH, GSV ZN HGZUU DVIV GSRMPRMT
NLIV LU HVZIXSRMT ULI XLMXVKGH ZMW RWVZH GSZM ULI KZIGRXFOZI DLIWH.
LYERLFHOB, UOVRHXSSZFVI XLMXVWVW, HVZIXSRMT ULI XLMXVKGH ZMW RWVZH ZMW
HVZIXSRMT ULI DLIWH NZB YV GDL IZGSVI XOLHVOB IVOZGVW GSRMTH.

DSROV WRHKOZBRMT HVEVIZO RNZTVH, UOVRHXSSZFVI LYHVIEVW GSZG GSV NZXRMGLHS
KILGLGBKV YFROG YB ZN XLMGZRMH Z TIVZGVI WREVIHRGB LU ULINZGH.  VXSLRMT Z
KIVERLFH HKVZPVI, SV HZRW GSZG RG DZH VZHRVI GL HGRGXS GSRMTH GLTVGSVI RM
GSV NZXRMGLHS, GSLFTS RG GVMWVW GL YV Z ORGGOV NLIV ZMVNRX RM HVZIXS ZMW
IVGIRVEZO.  ZN, GSVIVULIV, RMXIVZHRMTOB SZH YVVM RMEVHGRTZGRMT
HLKSRHGRXZGVW IVGIRVEZO VMTRMVH RM GSV RYN ULINZG.

UOVRHXSSZFVI WVNLMHGIZGVW HVEVIZO ZWWRGRLMZO VCZNKOVH LU GSV KILGLGBKV
RMGVIUZXVH:  LMV DZH ZNH NVGZKSLI ULI GSV MVGDLIP UFGFIV, RM DSRXS Z
PRMW LU IVZWRMTILLN TIZKSRX HFTTVHGH SLD LMV DLFOW YV ZYOV GL TL ZILFMW
GL WRUUVIVMG NZGVIRZOH.  ZN XLMGZRMH Z OZITV MFNYVI LU KSLGLTIZKSH RM
ZMZOLT ERWVL ULIN DLIPVW FK UILN Z ERWVLWRHX, DSRXS VMZYOV FHVIH GL NZPV
XLKRVH GL KIRMG LI RMXLIKLIZGV RM WRTRGZO WLXFNVMGH.  Z UIZNVTIZYYVI RH
YFROG RMGL GSV HBHGVN, NZPRMT RG KLHHRYOV GL YIRMT ZM RNZTV RMGL Z DRMWLD
ZMW WRTRGRAV LI KIRMG RG LFG.

UOVRHXSSZFVI MVCG WVNLMHGIZGVW HLFMW IVXLIWRMT, DSRXS RMXOFWVW GVCGH.
IVXBXOVW UILN Z KIVERLFH KILQVXG, GSV XLOOVXGRLM RMXOFWVW HRCGB 78IKN
KSLMLTIZKS IVXLIWH LU KLORGRXZO HKVVXSVH GSZG DVIV NZWV WFIRMT ZMW
RNNVWRZGVOB ZUGVI DLIOW DZI R.  GSVHV XLMHGRGFGVW ZKKILCRNZGVOB GSIVV
SLFIH LU ZFWRL, ZH ZN SZH WRTRGRAVW RG, DSRXS LXXFKB 150 NVTZYBGVH LM Z
XW.  GSFH, GSVB ZIV XLMHRWVIZYOB XLNKIVHHVW.  UILN GSV XZGZOLTFV XZIW,
UOVRHXSSZFVI KILXVVWVW GL Z GIZMHXIRKG LU Z HKVVXS DRGS GSV ZFWRL
ZEZROZYOV ZMW DRGS SRTSORTSGVW GVCG ULOOLDRMT RG ZH RG KOZBVW.
Z KSLGLTIZKS SZH YVVM ZWWVW ZMW Z GIZMHXIRKGRLM NZWV.

XLMHRWVIZYOV EZOFV SZH YVVM ZWWVW YVBLMW DSZG GSV ORYIZIB LU XLMTIVHH
MLINZOOB DLFOW WL RM XZGZOLTFRMT Z HLFMW IVXLIWRMT, DSRXS IZRHVH HVEVIZO
JFVHGRLMH ULI ZN XLMXVIMRMT DSVIV GL WIZD ORMVH ZYLFG SLD NFXS EZOFV RG XZM
ZUULIW GL ZWW ZMW ZG DSZG KLRMG, KVISZKH, GSRH YVXLNVH NLIV GSZM ZN XLFOW
IVZHLMZYOB WL LI IVZHLMZYOB DRHS GL WL.  UOVRHXSSZFVI ZOHL WVNLMHGIZGVW
Z NLGRLM KRXGFIV.  ZH UIVVNZM SZW IVKLIGVW VZIORVI, GSV NLGRLM KRXGFIV
NZGVIRZOH SZEV KILEVW GSV NLHG KLKFOZI, MLG HFIKIRHRMTOB.  GSRH HZBH NLIV
ZYLFG GSV NVWRFN, SV GSLFTSG, GSZM ZYLFG ZNH KIVHVMGZGRLM LU RG.

YVXZFHV ZNH TLZO DZH GL YIRMT GLTVGSVI GSRMTH GSZG XLFOW YV FHVW YB
SRHGLIRZMH LI YB KVLKOV DSL DVIV XFIRLFH ZYLFG SRHGLIB,
GFIMLUGSVXVMGFIB ULLGZTV HVVNVW GL IVKIVHVMG GSV NLHG ZKKILKIRZGV
XLOOVXGRLMH UILN GSV ORYIZIB LU XLMTIVHH RM NLGRLM KRXGFIVH. GSVHV DVIV
GSV EVIB URIHG URONH NZWV YB GSLNZH VWRHLMH XLNKZMB ZMW HLNV LGSVIH ZG
GSZG GRNV.  GSV KZIGRXFOZI VCZNKOV ROOFHGIZGVW DZH Z YRLTIZKS URON,
YILFTSG RM DRGS Z UIZNVTIZYYVI RMGL Z DRMWLD.  Z HRMTOV ERWVLWRHX
XLMGZRMH ZYLFG URUGB GRGOVH ZMW KRVXVH LU URON UILN GSZG KVIRLW, ZOO LU
MVD BLIP XRGB.  GZPVM GLTVGSVI, ZN YVORVEVH, GSVB KILERWV ZM RMGVIVHGRMT
WLXFNVMGZIB IVHLFIXV.

                                 


WRHXFHHRLM  FHRMT GSV UIZNVTIZYYVI RM ZN  ELOFNV LU NZGVIRZO KILXVHHVW
ZMW GL YV KILXVHHVW  KFIKLHV LU ZN DRGSRM OX  XZGZOLTFRMT ZMW GSV
MZGFIV LU ZNH NZGVIRZO  HTNO XLWRMT ZMW GSV JFVHGRLM LU JFZORGB EVIHFH
JFZMGRGB 


WFIRMT GSV JFVHGRLMZMWZMHDVI KVIRLW GSZG ULOOLDVW UOVRHXSSZFVIH
KIVHVMGZGRLM, HVEVIZO XOZIRURXZGRLMH DVIV NZWV.

ZN RH YIRMTRMT RM NLGRLM KRXGFIVH UILN Z ERWVLWRHX.  GSV UIZNVTIZYYVI
WVERXVH XIVZGV Z DRMWLD LM Z XLNKFGVI HXIVVM, DSRXS KVINRGH FHVIH GL
WRTRGRAV Z HRMTOV UIZNV LU GSV NLERV LI LMV LU GSV KSLGLTIZKSH.  RG
KILWFXVH Z XIFWV, ILFTSZMWIVZWB RNZTV GSZG SRTS HXSLLO HGFWVMGH XZM
RMXLIKLIZGV RMGL KZKVIH, ZMW GSZG SZH DLIPVW EVIB MRXVOB RM GSRH DZB.

XLNNVMGRMT LM UOVRHXSSZFVIH ZHHVIGRLM GSZG ZN DZH OLLPRMT NLIV ZG
HVZIXSRMT RWVZH GSZM DLIWH, NBOLMZH ZITFVW GSZG DRGSLFG DLIWH ZM RWVZ
WLVH MLG VCRHG.  UOVRHXSSZFVI XLMXVWVW GSZG SV LFTSG GL SZEV ZIGRXFOZGVW
SRH KLRMG NLIV XOVZIOB.  NBOLMZH HGZGVW GSZG GSVB DVIV RM UZXG YLGS
GZOPRMT ZYLFG GSV HZNV GSRMT.  YB HVZIXSRMT ULI DLIWH ZMW YB ULIXRMT
KVLKOV GL ULXFH LM GSV DLIW, GSV KVIHVFH KILQVXG UVOG GSZG GSVB DLFOW TVG
GSVN GL GSV RWVZ.  GSV DZB LMV IVERVDH IVHFOGH RH GZROLIVW NLIV GL LMV
PRMW LU FHVI GSZM ZMLGSVI.

XLMXVIMRMT GSV GLGZO ELOFNV LU NZGVIRZO GSZG SZH YVVM KILXVHHVW RM GSRH
DZB, ZN ZG GSRH KLRMG SZH RM IVGIRVEZYOV ULIN HVEVM LI VRTSG XLOOVXGRLMH,
ZOO LU GSVN KSLGLTIZKSRX.  RM GSV NZXRMGLHS VMERILMNVMG, ULI VCZNKOV,
GSVIV KILYZYOB ZIV 35,00040,000 KSLGLTIZKSH.  GSV HLFMW IVXLIWRMTH
MFNYVI HRCGB RGVNH.  GSV YILZWHRWVH MFNYVI ZYLFG 300 RGVNH.  GSVIV ZIV
500 KLORGRXZO XZIGLLMH RM GSV ULIN LU WIZDRMTH.  GSV NLGRLM KRXGFIVH, ZH
RMWRERWFZO RGVNH, MFNYVI HRCGB GL HVEVMGB.

ZN ZOHL SZH Z NZMFHXIRKG XLOOVXGRLM, GSV ORUV SRHGLIB KLIGRLM LU LMV LU
GSV UVWVIZO KILQVXG HVIRVH, DSRXS DROO XLMGZRM 2,900 RMWRERWFZO
WLXFNVMGH, ZOO URIHGKVIHLM MZIIZGREVH.  ZN SZH RM KILXVHH ZYLFG 350
ZUIRXZMZNVIRXZM KZNKSOVGH, LI ZYLFG 12,000 KIRMGVW KZTVH ULI GSV KVIRLW
18701910.  ZOHL RM GSV DLIPH ZIV HLNV 4,000 KZMLIZNRX KSLGLTIZKSH.  ZN
SZH IVXBXOVW Z UZRI ZNLFMG LU GSV DLIP WLMV YB OXH KIRMGH ZMW
KSLGLTIZKSH WRERHRLM WFIRMT GSV ORYIZIBH LKGRXZO WRHP KROLG KILQVXG RM
GSV 1980H.  ULI VCZNKOV, Z HKVXRZO WRERHRLM LU OX SZH GLLOVW FK ZMW
GSLFTSG GSILFTS ZOO GSV IZNRURXZGRLMH LU VOVXGILMRX KIVHVMGZGRLM LU
KSLGLTIZKSH.  RMWVVW, GSVB ZIV DSVVORMT GSVN LFG RM TIVZG YZIIVO OLZWH.
GSV KFIKLHV LU ZN DRGSRM GSV ORYIZIB, RG RH SLKVW, RH GL XZGZOBAV HVEVIZO
LU GSV LGSVI HKVXRZO XLOOVXGRLM WRERHRLMH DSRXS SZEV ML KZIGRXFOZI
VCKVIRVMXV DRGS, RM HLNV XZHVH, NRCVW UVVORMTH ZYLFG, ZM ZXGRERGB HFXS ZH
ZN.  NLIVLEVI, RM NZMB XZHVH GSV WRERHRLMH NZB YV XSZIZXGVIRAVW ZH MLG
LMOB OZXPRMT VCKVIRVMXV RM "VOVXGILMRUBRMT" GSRMTH YFG ZOHL RM ZFGLNZGVW
XZGZOLTFRMT.  NZIX XZGZOLTFRMT ZH KIZXGRXVW RM GSV FMRGVW HGZGVH RH
SVZEROB DVRTSGVW GLDZIW GSV WVHXIRKGRLM LU NLMLTIZKS ZMW HVIRZO
NZGVIRZOH, YFG RH NFXS GSRMMVI DSVM LMV VMGVIH GSV DLIOW LU NZMFHXIRKGH
ZMW GSRMTH GSZG ZIV SVOW RM GSV ORYIZIBH NFHRX XLOOVXGRLM ZMW LGSVI
FMRGH.  RM IVHKLMHV GL Z XLNNVMG YB OVHP, GSZG ZNH NZGVIRZO RH EVIB
SVZEROB KSLGLTIZKSRX, ZMW RH HL KIRNZIROB YVXZFHV RMWRERWFZO IVXLIWH SZEV
YVVM NZWV ULI VZXS KSLGLTIZKS, UOVRHXSSZFVI LYHVIEVW GSZG ZM RGVNOVEVO
XZGZOLT IVXLIW VCRHGH, ULI VCZNKOV, ULI VZXS KSLGLTIZKS RM GSV WVGILRG
KFYORHSRMT XLOOVXGRLM LU 25,000 KRXGFIVH.  RM GSV XZHV LU GSV UVWVIZO
DIRGVIH KILQVXG, ULI DSRXS MVZIOB 3,000 WLXFNVMGH VCRHG, IVKIVHVMGRMT
RMULINZGRLM UILN GDVMGBHRC WRUUVIVMG HGZGVH, ZN DRGS GSV ZHHRHGZMXV LU
PZIVM HGFZIG LU GSV NZMFHXIRKG WRERHRLM DROO ZGGVNKG GL URMW HLNV DZB MLG
LMOB GL SZEV Z XLOOVXGRLMOVEVO IVXLIW YFG KVISZKH Z NZIX IVXLIW ULI VZXS
HGZGV, DSRXS DROO GSVM HVIEV ZH ZM FNYIVOOZ ULI GSV 100200 WLXFNVMGH
GSZG XLNV FMWVI RG.  YFG GSZG WIZNZ IVNZRMH GL YV VMZXGVW.  GSV ZN HGZUU
RH XLMHVIEZGREV ZMW XORMTH GL XZGZOLTFRMT, GSLFTS LU XLFIHV ERHRGLIH GLFG
ZIGRURXRZO RMGVOORTVMXV ZMW MVFIZO MVGDLIPH RM Z NZMMVI GSZG HFTTVHGH GSZG
KVISZKH LMV MVVW MLG SZEV XZGZOLTFRMT LI GSZG NFXS LU RG XLFOW YV KFG ZHRWV.

GSV NZGGVI LU HTNO XLWRMT, UOVRHXSSZFVI XLMXVWVW, IVGFIMVW GSV WRHXFHHRLM
GL GSV VZIORVI GIVZGVW JFVHGRLM LU JFZORGB EVIHFH JFZMGRGB RM GSV ORYIZIB
LU XLMTIVHH.  LU XLFIHV, GVCG XLMEVIHRLM XZM YV WLMV DRGS 100KVIXVMG
ZXXFIZXB, YFG RG NVZMH GSZG DSVM LMVH SLOWRMTH ZIV ZH EZHG ZH OXH LMOB
Z GRMB ZNLFMG DROO YV VCKLHVW, DSVIVZH KVINRGGRMT OLDVI OVEVOH LU
ZXXFIZXB XZM OVZW GL VCKLHRMT LI HSZIRMT OZITVI ZNLFMGH, YFG DRGS GSV
JFZORGB XLIIVHKLMWRMTOB RNKZRIVW.

                                 


GDLSRT  Z XLMGIZIB VCKVIRVMXV XLMXVIMRMT VOVXGILMRX LKGRLMH  ELOFNV LU
NZGVIRZO RM GSV DZHSRMTGLM KZKVIH ZMW Z HFTTVHGRLM LU WZERW KZXPZIW 
RNKORXZGRLMH LU KZXPZIWH HFTTVHGRLM  GIZMHXIRYRMT GSV WLXFNVMGH ULI GSV
XWILN  ZXXFIZXB LU GIZMHXIRKGRLMH  GSV XWILN VWRGRLM LU GSV ULFMWRMT
UZGSVIH WLXFNVMGH 


URMWRMT VMXLFIZTVNVMG RM Z XLNNVMG LU NRXSVOHLMH UILN GSV NLIMRMT
HVHHRLMGSZG MFNVILFH KVLKOV RM GSV SFNZMRGRVH DVIV XSLLHRMT VOVXGILMRX
LKGRLMH GL WL GSVRI DLIPWLILGSB GDLSRT, VWRGLI, GSV KZKVIH LU TVLITV
DZHSRMTGLM, LKVMVW SVI ROOFHGIZGVW GZOP YB MLGRMT GSZG SVI VCKVIRVMXV
DRGS ORGVIZIB HXSLOZIH ZMW MFNVILFH KVLKOV RM VWRGRMT DZH XLMGIZIB GL
NRXSVOHLMH.  GDLSRT VNKSZHRAVW ORGVIZIB HXSLOZIH XLNKOVGV RTMLIZMXV LU
GSV GVXSMLOLTRXZO LKGRLMH ZEZROZYOV GL GSVN LI GSVRI IVOFXGZMXV LI, RM
HLNV XZHVH, GSVRI WLDMIRTSG SLHGRORGB GLDZIW GSVHV LKGRLMH.

ZUGVI KILERWRMT ZM LEVIERVD LU GSV UREV ULFMWRMT UZGSVIH KILQVXGH
QVUUVIHLM ZG KIRMXVGLM, UIZMPORM ZG BZOV, QLSM ZWZNH ZG GSV
NZHHZXSFHVGGH SRHGLIRXZO HLXRVGB, ZMW NZWRHLM WLDM GSV SZOO UILN SVI ZG
GSV FMREVIHRGB LU ERITRMRZ, GDLSRT LYHVIEVW GSZG GSV DZHSRMTGLM KZKVIH,
ORPV ZOO LU GSV KILQVXGH, RMXOFWV YLGS HRWVH LU GSV DZHSRMTGLM
XLIIVHKLMWVMXV ZMW WVZO DRGS HLNV 135,000 WLXFNVMGH GL YV KFYORHSVW DRGS
VCGVMHREV ZMMLGZGRLM RM VRTSGB GL VRTSGBUREV ELOFNVH, Z KILQVXG GSZG
DROO MLG YV XLNKOVGVW FMGRO DVOO RMGL GSV MVCG XVMGFIB.  GSFH, RG DZH
DRGS XLMHRWVIZYOV VMGSFHRZHN HVEVIZO BVZIH ZTL GSZG GSV DZHSRMTGLM KZKVIH
KILQVXG DKK TIVVGVW WZERW KZXPZIWH HFTTVHGRLM GSZG GSV KZKVIH LU GSV
ULFMWRMT UZGSVIH XLFOW YV KFYORHSVW VZHROB ZMW RMVCKVMHREVOB, ZMW GL GSV
TIVZG YVMVURG LU ZNVIRXZM HXSLOZIHSRK, ERZ XWILN.

RM KIZTNZGRX GVINH, UFMWRMT UILN GSV KZXPZIW ULFMWZGRLM DLFOW VCKVWRGV
GSV GIZMHXIRKGRLM LU GSLFHZMWH LU WLXFNVMGH DZRGRMT GL YV KFG LM WRHP RM
GSV DKK LUURXVH.  UFIGSVI, HRMXV GSV XLHGH LU XLOOVXGRMT, VWRGRMT, ZMW
XLMEVIGRMT GSV ULFMWRMT UZGSVIH WLXFNVMGH RMGL OVGGVIKIVHH VWRGRLMH DVIV
IFMMRMT RMGL GSV NROORLMH LU WLOOZIH, ZMW GSV XLMHRWVIZYOV HGZUUH
RMELOEVW RM ZOO LU GSVHV KILQVXGH DVIV WVELGRMT GSVRI XZIVVIH GL
KILWFXRMT GSV DLIP, GSV KZXPZIW ULFMWZGRLMH HFTTVHGRLM SZW Z
IVELOFGRLMZIB ZHKVXG:  GIZMHXIRKGRLMH LU GSV VMGRIV XLIKFH LU GSV
ULFMWRMT UZGSVIH KZKVIH DLFOW YV ZEZROZYOV LM XWILN GL KFYORX ZMW
XLOOVTV ORYIZIRVH, VEVM SRTS HXSLLOH, ZG Z UIZXGRLM LU GSV XLHG
100150 ULI GSV ZMMFZO ORXVMHV UVVGL KILWFXV Z ORNRGVW FMREVIHRGB
KIVHH IFM LU 1,000 LU VZXS ELOFNV LU GSV KFYORHSVW KZKVIH ZG 45150 KVI
KIRMGVW ELOFNV.  TREVM GSV XFIIVMG YFWTVG XIFMXS RM VWFXZGRLMZO HBHGVNH
ZMW GSV XLIIVHKLMWRMT XLMHGIZRMGH LM ORYIZIRZMH RM HNZOOVI RMHGRGFGRLMH
DSL DRHS GL ZWW GSVHV ELOFNVH GL GSVRI XLOOVXGRLMH, KILWFXRMT GSV
WLXFNVMGH LM XWILN DLFOW ORPVOB LKVM Z TIVZGOB VCKZMWVW ZFWRVMXV ULI GSV
KZKVIH.  GDLSRT HGIVHHVW, SLDVEVI, GSZG WVEVOLKNVMG LU GSV ULFMWRMT
UZGSVIH XWILN RH HGROO RM RGH RMUZMXB.  HVIRLFH HLUGDZIV KILYOVNH IVNZRM
GL YV IVHLOEVW YVULIV GSV NZGVIRZO XZM YV KFG RMGL IVZWZYOV ULIN.

UFMWRMT UILN GSV KZXPZIW ULFMWZGRLM IVHFOGVW RM Z NZQLI KFHS GL
GIZMHXIRYV GSV 75,000 LI HL WLXFNVMGH LU GSV DZHSRMTGLM KZKVIH IVNZRMRMT
GL YV GIZMHXIRYVW LMGL XLNKFGVI WRHPH.  HORWVH ROOFHGIZGVW HVEVIZO LU GSV
KILYOVNH VMXLFMGVIVW, ULI VCZNKOV, GSV KIVHVMG RMZYRORGB LU XWILN GL
RMWRXZGV GSV XILHHLFGH WVOVGVW NZGVIRZO RM VRTSGVVMGS XVMGFIB
WLXFNVMGH.  GDLSRT MVCG WVHXIRYVW WLXFNVMGH UILN EZIRLFH KVIRLWH RM GSV
VRTSGVVMGS XVMGFIB GSZG SZEV YVVM GIZMHXIRYVW RM XSILMLOLTRXZO LIWVI ZMW
WVOREVIVW GL GSV KZXPZIW LUURXVH RM XZORULIMRZ, DSVIV GSVB ZIV XLMEVIGVW
GL GSV XWILN, Z KILXVHH GSZG RH VCKVXGVW GL XLMHFNV UREV BVZIH GL
XLNKOVGV GSZG RH, IVXPLMRMT UILN WZERW KZXPZIWH HFTTVHGRLM NZWV HVEVIZO
BVZIH ZTL, FMGRO ZYLFG QFOB 1994.  GDLSRT ULFMW ZM VMXLFIZTRMT
RMWRXZGRLM LU GSV KILQVXGH YVMVURGH RM GSV LMTLRMT FHV NZWV YB HXSLOZIH
LU GSV HVZIXS UFMXGRLMH LU GSV XWILN, KZIGRXFOZIOB RM IVWFXRMT GSV GRNV
HKVMG RM NZMFZOOB GFIMRMT GSV KZTVH LU GSV DZHSRMTGLM KZKVIH.

GDLSRT MVCG UFIMRHSVW WVGZROH XLMXVIMRMT GSV ZXXFIZXB LU GIZMHXIRKGRLMH.
ULI RMHGZMXV, GSV RMHVIGRLM LU GSLFHZMWH LU WLXFNVMGH LM GSV XWILN
XFIIVMGOB WLVH MLG KVINRG VZXS WLXFNVMG GL YV EVIRURVW ZTZRMHG GSV
LIRTRMZO NZMFHXIRKG HVEVIZO GRNVH ZH RM GSV XZHV LU WLXFNVMGH GSZG ZKKVZI
RM GSV KFYORHSVW VWRGRLM.  SLDVEVI, GSV GIZMHXIRKGRLMH IVXVREV Z XFIHLIB
XSVXP ULI LYERLFH GBKLH, GSV NRHHKVOORMTH LU KILKVI MZNVH, ZMW LGSVI
VIILIH UILN GSV DKK XWILN VWRGLI.  VEVMGFZOOB, ZOO WLXFNVMGH GSZG ZKKVZI
RM GSV VOVXGILMRX EVIHRLM DROO YV XSVXPVW YB KILQVXG VWRGLIH.  ZOGSLFTS
GSRH KILXVHH SZH NVG DRGS LKKLHRGRLM UILN HLNV LU GSV VWRGLIH LM GSV
TILFMWH GSZG RNKVIUVXG DLIP NZB OVZEV GSVRI LUURXVH, GSV ZWEZMGZTVH RM
NZPRMT GSRH NZGVIRZO ZEZROZYOV ZH Z IVHVZIXS GLLO LFGDVRTS  UVZIH ZYLFG GSV
NRHHKVOORMT LU KILKVI MZNVH ZMW LGSVI IVOZGREVOB NRMLI VWRGLIRZO NZGGVIH.

XLNKOVGRLM LU ZOO UREV ULFMWRMT UZGSVIH KILQVXGH R.V., IVGIRVEZYRORGB
ZMW HVZIXSZYRORGB LU ZOO LU GSV WLXFNVMGH YB KILKVI MZNVH, ZOGVIMZGV
HKVOORMTH, LI EZIRVGRVH LU HFYQVXGH DROO KILERWV LMV LU GSV IRXSVHG
HLFIXVH LU GSRH HRAV ULI GSV SRHGLIB LU GSV FMRGVW HGZGVH RM GSV OZGGVI
KZIG LU GSV VRTSGVVMGS XVMGFIB.  UFIGSVI, KFYORXZGRLM LM XWILN DROO
ZOOLD VWRGLIH GL RMXOFWV VEVM NRMFGRZV, HFXS ZH OZFMWIB ORHGH, MLG
RMXOFWVW RM GSV KIRMGVW ELOFNVH.

RG HVVNH KLHHRYOV GSZG GSV VCGVMHREV ZMMLGZGRLM KILERWVW RM GSV KIRMGVW
ELOFNVH VEVMGFZOOB DROO YV ZWWVW GL GSV XWILN VWRGRLM, KVMWRMT
MVTLGRZGRLMH DRGS GSV KFYORHSVIH LU GSV KZKVIH.  ZG GSV NLNVMG, GSV
ULFMWRMT UZGSVIH XWILN RH ZXXVHHRYOV LMOB LM GSV RYBXFH, Z XLNKFGVI
WVEVOLKVW LFG LU GSV GSVHZFIFH ORMTFZV TIZVXZV KILQVXG ZMW WVHRTMVW ULI
GSV FHV LU XOZHHRXZO HXSLOZIH.  GSVIV ZIV KVISZKH 400 RYBXFH XLNKFGVIH RM
GSV XLFMGIB, NLHG LU DSRXS ZIV RM FMREVIHRGB XOZHHRXH WVKZIGNVMGH.
FOGRNZGVOB, RG RH ZMGRXRKZGVW GSZG GSV XWILN VWRGRLM LU GSV ULFMWRMT
UZGSVIH WLXFNVMGH DROO IFM LM ZMB RYNXLNKZGRYOV LI NZXRMGLHS XLNKFGVI
DRGS Z XWILN WIREV.  MFNVILFH XSZMTVH RM GSV HLUGDZIV DROO ZOHL LXXFI
YVULIV GSV KILQVXG RH XLNKOVGVW.  VWRGLIH MLGV: ZM RYBXFH DZH
FMZEZROZYOV GL WVNLMHGIZGV GSV XWILN.

                                 


WRHXFHHRLM  HVEVIZO ZWWRGRLMZO UVZGFIVH LU DKK XOZIRURVW 


WRHXFHHRLM ULOOLDRMT GDLSRTH KIVHVMGZGRLM HVIEVW GL XOZIRUB HVEVIZO
ZWWRGRLMZO UVZGFIVH, RMXOFWRMT 1 GSZG GSV KILQVXGH KIRNZIB
RMGVOOVXGFZO KILWFXG XLMHRHGH RM GSV VOVXGILMRX GIZMHXIRKGRLM LU GSV
NZGVIRZO 2 GSZG GSV GVCG GIZMHNRGGVW GL GSV XWILN KVLKOV RH MLG
NZIPVW FK 3 GSZG XZGZOLTRMT ZMW HFYQVXGRMWVCRMT LU GSV NZGVIRZO
IVNZRM GL YV DLIPVW LFG GSLFTS ZG GSRH KLRMG NZGVIRZO XZM YV IVGIRVEVW
YB MZNV ZMW 4 GSZG YVXZFHV ZOO GSV HVZIXSRMT RH WLMV RM GSV SZIWDZIV,
GSV RYBXFH RH WVHRTMVW GL IVZW Z XWILN DSRXS XLMGZRMH LMOB HVJFVMGRZO
GVCG UROVH.  GVXSMRXZOOB, RG GSVM YVXLNVH EVIB VZHB GL IVZW GSV NZGVIRZO
LUU ZMW KFG RG LM ZMLGSVI WVERXV.

                                 


OVYILM  LEVIERVD LU GSV SRHGLIB LU GSV QLRMG KILQVXG YVGDVVM ZZZH ZMW
LXOX  HVEVIZO KIZXGRXVH GSV LMORMV VMERILMNVMG HSZIVH DRGS GIZWRGRLMZO
KFYORHSRMT LM SZIW XLKB  HVEVIZO GVXSMRXZO ZMW YVSZERLIZO YZIIRVIH GL
VOVXGILMRX KFYORHSRMT  SLD ZZZH ZMW LXOX ZIIREVW ZG GSV HFYQVXG LU
XORMRXZO GIRZOH  ZWEZMGZTVH LU GSV VOVXGILMRX ULINZG ZMW LGSVI UVZGFIVH
LU LQXXG  ZM ROOFHGIZGVW GLFI LU GSV QLFIMZO 


NZIRZ OVYILM, NZMZTRMT VWRGLI, GSV LMORMV QLFIMZO LU XFIIVMG XORMRXZO
GIRZOH LQXXG, KIVHVMGVW ZM ROOFHGIZGVW LEVIERVD LU GSV SRHGLIB LU GSV
QLRMG KILQVXG YVGDVVM GSV ZNVIRXZM ZHHLXRZGRLM ULI GSV ZWEZMXVNVMG LU
HXRVMXV ZZZH ZMW GSV LMORMV XLNKFGVI ORYIZIB XVMGVI, RMX. LXOX.  GSV
QLRMG EVMGFIV YVGDVVM ZZZH ZMW LXOX LDVH RGH YVTRMMRMT GL Z
IVLITZMRAZGRLM OZFMXSVW YB GSV MVD XSRVU VCVXFGREV LUURXVI ZG LXOX ZYLFG
GSIVV BVZIH ZTL ZMW XLNYRMVH GSV HGIVMTGSH LU GSVHV GDL WRHKZIZGV
LITZMRAZGRLMH.  RM HSLIG, LQXXG IVKIVHVMGH GSV KILXVHH LU HXSLOZIOB
KFYORHSRMT LM ORMV.

OVYILM MVCG WRHXFHHVW HVEVIZO KIZXGRXVH GSV LMORMV VMERILMNVMG HSZIVH
DRGS GIZWRGRLMZO KFYORHSRMT LM SZIW XLKBULI VCZNKOV, KVVI IVERVD LU
NZMFHXIRKGHGSZG ZIV SRTSOB RNKLIGZMG RM GSV ZXZWVNRX DLIOW.  OVYILM
MLGVW RM KZIGRXFOZI GSV RNKORXZGRLMH LU XRGZGRLM XLFMGH ULI GVMFIV
XLNNRGGVVH ZMW TIZMGH XLNNRGGVVH.  RM GSV GIZWRGRLMZO SZIWXLKB
VMERILMNVMG, XRGZGRLM XLFMGH ZIV IVZWROB WVNLMHGIZYOV, DSVIVZH GSV
LMORMV VMERILMNVMG IVKIVHVMGH ZM VGSVIVZO NVWRFN GL NLHG ZXZWVNRXH.

OVYILM IVNZIPVW HVEVIZO GVXSMRXZO ZMW YVSZERLIZO YZIIRVIH GL VOVXGILMRX
KFYORHSRMT, ULI RMHGZMXV, GSV KILYOVNH RM GIZMHNRHHRLM XIVZGVW YB HKVXRZO
XSZIZXGVIH LI YB XLNKOVC TIZKSRXH ZMW SZOUGLMVH.  RM ZWWRGRLM, HSV MLGVW
VXLMLNRX ORNRGZGRLMH HFXS ZH GSV HGLIZTV XLHGH LU NZRMGZRMRMT YZXP RHHFVH
ZMW NZIPVG LI ZFWRVMXV VWFXZGRLM.

NZMFHXIRKGH XZMMLG YV FKOLZWVW GL LQXXG, OVYILM VCKOZRMVW, YVXZFHV RG RH
MLG Z YFOOVGRM YLZIW LI VNZRO, ULINH LU VOVXGILMRX GIZMHNRHHRLM LU
RMULINZGRLM GSZG SZEV XIVZGVW ZM ZNYRVMXV XOLFWRMT KVLKOVH FMWVIHGZMWRMT
LU DSZG GSV QLFIMZO RH ZGGVNKGRMT GL WL.  LQXXG, DSRXS KFYORHSVH
KVVIIVERVDVW NVWRXZO ZIGRXOVH WVZORMT DRGS GSV HFYQVXG LU XORMRXZO
GIRZOH, RMXOFWVH GVCG, GZYFOZI NZGVIRZO, ZMW TIZKSRXH, ZOGSLFTS ZG GSRH
GRNV RG XZM GIZMHNRG LMOB ORMV ROOFHGIZGRLMH.

MVCG, OVYILM WVHXIRYVW SLD ZZZH ZMW LXOX ZIIREVW ZG GSV HFYQVXG LU
XORMRXZO GIRZOH:  RG RH 1 Z SRTSOB HGZGRHGRXZO WRHXRKORMV GSZG 2 WLVH
MLG IVJFRIV SZOUGLMVH YFG XZM HZGRHUB GSV MVVWH LU RGH ZFWRVMXV DRGS ORMV
ROOFHGIZGRLMH ZMW TIZKSRX NZGVIRZO, ZMW 3 GSVIV RH Z MVVW ULI GSV HKVVWB
WRHHVNRMZGRLM LU SRTSJFZORGB IVHVZIXS IVHFOGH.  XORMRXZO GIRZOH ZIV
IVHVZIXS ZXGRERGRVH GSZG RMELOEV GSV ZWNRMRHGIZGRLM LU Z GVHG GIVZGNVMG
GL HLNV VCKVIRNVMGZO FMRG RM LIWVI GL GVHG RGH FHVUFOMVHH YVULIV RG RH
NZWV ZEZROZYOV GL GSV TVMVIZO KLKFOZGRLM.  OVYILM KILXVVWVW GL TREV
ZWWRGRLMZO RMULINZGRLM LM LQXXG XLMXVIMRMT RGH VWRGLIRMXSRVU, VWRGLIRZO
YLZIW, VWRGLIRZO XLMGVMG, ZMW GSV GBKVH LU ZIGRXOVH RG KFYORHSVH
RMXOFWRMT KVVIIVERVDVW IVHVZIXS IVKLIGH ZMW IVERVDH, ZH DVOO ZH
UVZGFIVH HSZIVW YB LGSVI GIZWRGRLMZO SZIWXLKB QLFIMZOH.

ZNLMT GSV ZWEZMGZTVH LU GSV VOVXGILMRX ULINZG ZIV UZHGVI WRHHVNRMZGRLM LU
RMULINZGRLM, RMXOFWRMT IZD WZGZ, ZMW GSV ZYHVMXV LU HKZXV XLMHGIZRMGH
YVXZFHV KZTVH WL MLG VCRHG.  GSRH OZGGVI UZXG XIVZGVH ZM RMGVIVHGRMT
HRGFZGRLM DSVM RG XLNVH GL XRGZGRLMH.  MLI ZIV GSVIV ZMB RHHFVH.  ZZZHH
XZKZXRGB GL WLDMOLZW NZGVIRZOH WRIVXGOB UILN GSV QLFIMZO GL Z
HFYHXIRYVIH KIRMGVI, SZIW WIREV, LI UOLKKB WRHP SVOKH VMHFIV SRTSOB
ZXXFIZGV GIZMHXIRKGRLM.  LGSVI UVZGFIVH LU LQXXG RMXOFWV LMHXIVVM ZOVIGH
GSZG ZOOLD ORMPZTV LU HFYHVJFVMGOB KFYORHSVW WLXFNVMGH GL GSV LIRTRMZO
WLXFNVMGH LMORMV HVZIXSRMT YB HFYQVXG, ZFGSLI, GRGOV, VGX. RMWVCRMT LU
VEVIB HRMTOV DLIW GSZG ZKKVZIH RM ZM ZIGRXOV ERVDRMT ZXXVHH GL ZM
ZIGRXOV YB XLNKLMVMG ZYHGIZXG, UFOO GVCG, LI TIZKSH MFNYVIVW
KZIZTIZKSH GL IVKOZXV KZTV XLFMGH KFYORXZGRLM RM HXRVMXV VEVIB GSRIGB
WZBH LU RMWVCRMT LU ZOO ZIGRXOVH KFYORHSVW RM GSV QLFIMZO
GBKVHVGJFZORGB HXIVVMH ZMW SBKVIGVCG ORMPH GSZG VMZYOV HFYHXIRYVIH GL
YIRMT FK NVWORMV ZYHGIZXGH WRIVXGOB DRGSLFG OVZERMT GSV QLFIMZO.

ZUGVI WVGZRORMT GSV GDL KIRNZIB DZBH GL TZRM ZXXVHH GL GSV QLFIMZO,
GSILFTS GSV LXOX MVGDLIP ZMW XLNKFHVIE RU LMV WVHRIVH TIZKSRXH LI GSILFTS
GSV RMGVIMVG RU QFHG ZM ZHXRR UROV RH WVHRIVW, OVYILM ROOFHGIZGVW GSV
HKVVWB VWRGLIRZO KILXVHH ZMW GSV XLWRMT LU GSV WLXFNVMG FHRMT HTNO GZTH
ZUGVI RG SZH YVVM ZXXVKGVW ULI KFYORXZGRLM.  HSV ZOHL TZEV ZM ROOFHGIZGVW
GLFI LU GSV QLFIMZO, RGH HVZIXSZMWIVGIRVEZO XZKZYRORGRVH RM KZIGRXFOZI,
YFG ZOHL RMXOFWRMT KILYOVNH ZHHLXRZGVW DRGS HXZMMRMT RM ROOFHGIZGRLMH,
ZMW GSV RNKLIGZMXV LU LMHXIVVM ZOVIGH GL GSV NVWRXZO KILUVHHRLM IV
IVGIZXGRLMH LI XLIIVXGRLMH, LI NLIV UIVJFVMGOB, VWRGLIRZOH, OVGGVIH GL
GSV VWRGLIH, LI ULOOLDFK IVKLIGH.  HSV XOLHVW YB RMERGRMT GSV ZFWRVMXV
GL QLRM ZZZH LM 1 QFOB, DSVM LQXXG DZH HXSVWFOVW GL TL LMORMV.

                                 


WRHXFHHRLM  ZWWRGRLMZO UVZGFIVH LU LQXXG 


RM GSV OVMTGSB WRHXFHHRLM GSZG ULOOLDVW OVYILMH KIVHVMGZGRLM, GSVHV
KLRMGH VNVITVW:

      GSV HTNO GVCG XZM YV GZROLIVW ZH FHVIH DRHS.

      ZOO GSVHV ZIGRXOVH SZEV Z UZRIOB HRNKOV WLXFNVMG WVURMRGRLM.

      WLXFNVMGGBKV WVURMRGRLMH WGWH DVIV WVEVOLKVW ZMW TREVM GL LQXXG
     ULI XLWRMT.

      ML ZIGRXOVH DROO YV IVNLEVW UILN GSV QLFIMZO.  YVXZFHV GSVIV ZIV
     ML YZXP RHHFVH, GSVIV ZIV ML OLHG RHHFVH VRGSVI.  LMXV Z HFYHXIRYVI
     OLTH LMGL GSV QLFIMZO SV LI HSV SZH ZXXVHH MLG LMOB GL GSV XFIIVMGOB
     KFYORHSVW NZGVIRZOH, YFG IVGILHKVXGREVOB GL VEVIBGSRMT GSZG SZH YVVM
     KFYORHSVW RM RG.  GSFH GSV GZYOV LU XLMGVMGH TILDH YRTTVI.  GSV WZGV
     LU KFYORXZGRLM HVIEVH GL WRHGRMTFRHS YVGDVVM XFIIVMGOB KFYORHSVW
     NZGVIRZOH ZMW LOWVI NZGVIRZOH.

      GSV KIRXRMT HBHGVN ULI GSV QLFIMZO IVHVNYOVH GSZG ULI NLHG NVWRXZO
     QLFIMZOH:  ULI 1992, 95 ULI Z BVZI, KOFH GVOVXLNNFMRXZGRLMH XSZITVH
     GSVIV ZIV ML XLMMVXG GRNV XSZITVH    ULI 1993, 110 ULI GSV
     VMGRIV BVZI ULI HRMTOV FHVIH, GSLFTS GSV QLFIMZO XZM YV KFG LM Z
     OLXZO ZIVZ MVGDLIP OZM.  SLDVEVI, LMOB LMV KVIHLM XZM ZXXVHH GSV
     QLFIMZO ZG Z GRNV.  HRGV ORXVMHVH NZB XLNV RM GSV UFGFIV.

      ZZZH RH DLIPRMT XOLHVOB DRGS XLOOVZTFVH ZG LXOX GL WRHKOZB
     NZGSVNZGRXZO VJFZGRLMH LM HXIVVM.

      DRGSLFG XLNKILNRHRMT ZMB HGVKH RM GSV VWRGLIRZO KILXVHH, GSV
     GVXSMLOLTB SZH IVWFXVW GSV GRNV OZT YVGDVVM DSVM Z NZMFHXIRKG RH
     LIRTRMZOOB HFYNRGGVW ZMW GSV GRNV RG RH ZXXVKGVW GSV IVERVD KILXVHH
     WLVH MLG WRUUVI TIVZGOB UILN GSV HGZMWZIW HRCGLVRTSG DVVPH
     VNKOLBVW YB NZMB LU GSV SZIWXLKB QLFIMZOH.  GSV KILXVHH HGROO
     WVKVMWH LM KVLKOV.

      ZH UZI ZH Z KIVHVIEZGRLM XLKB RH XLMXVIMVW, ZIGRXOVH DROO YV
     NZRMGZRMVW LM GSV XLNKFGVI KVINZMVMGOB ZMW HFYHXIRYVIH, ZH KZIG LU
     GSVRI HFYHXIRKGRLM, DROO IVXVREV Z NRXILURXSVJFZORGB ZIXSREZO XLKB
     LU VEVIBGSRMT KFYORHSVW WFIRMT GSZG BVZI RM ZWWRGRLM, IVKIRMGH XZM
     YV KFIXSZHVW RM NFXS GSV HZNV DZB ZH RM Z SZIWXLKB VMERILMNVMG.
     SZIW XLKRVH ZIV KIVKZIVW YFG ZIV MLG GSV KIRNZIB NVWRFN ULI GSV
     WRHHVNRMZGRLM LU GSV RMULINZGRLM.

      YVXZFHV LQXXG RH MLG BVG LM ORMV, RG RH WRUURXFOG GL PMLD SLD NZMB
     KVLKOV DLFOW HRNKOB YILDHV GSILFTS GSV QLFIMZO LM GSV HXIVVM ZH
     LKKLHVW GL WLDMOLZWRMT GSV DSLOV GSRMT ZMW KIRMGRMT RG LFG Z NRC LU
     YLGS GBKVH LU FHVIH ORPVOB DROO IVHFOG.

                                 


KVIHLMRFH  WVEVOLKNVMGH RM GVXSMLOLTB LEVI GSV KZHG WVXZWV  GSV XOZHH
KILQVXG  ZWEZMGZTVH ULI GVXSMLOLTB ZMW ULI GSV XOZHH KILQVXG 
WVEVOLKRMT Z MVGDLIP ZKKORXZGRLM ZM FMWVIOBRMT ZHHFNKGRLM LU GSV KILQVXG
 WVGZROH LU GSV HXZMMRMT KILXVHH  KIRMGLMWVNZMW XLKRVH LU YLLPH 
UFGFIV KOZMH RMXOFWV WVEVOLKNVMG LU Z YILDHRMT GLLO 


OBMMV KVIHLMRFH, ZHHRHGZMG WRIVXGLI, XLIMVOO RMULINZGRLM GVXSMLOLTRVH ULI
HXSLOZIOB RMULINZGRLM HVIERXVH, XLIMVOO FMREVIHRGB, URIHG XLNNVMGVW LM
GSV GIVNVMWLFH RNKZXG GSZG WVEVOLKNVMGH RM GVXSMLOLTB LEVI GSV KZHG GVM
BVZIHMVGDLIPRMT, RM KZIGRXFOZISZEV SZW LM GSV DZB RMULINZGRLM RH
SZMWOVW, ZMW SLD, RM SVI LDM XZHV, GSVHV WVEVOLKNVMGH SZEV XLFMGVIYZOZMXVW
XLIMVOOH IVOZGREV TVLTIZKSRXZO RHLOZGRLM.  LGSVI HRTMRURXZMG GVXSMLOLTRVH
RMXOFWV HXZMMVIH, DSRXS ZIV NFXS NLIV HLKSRHGRXZGVW GSZM GSVB DVIV GVM BVZIH
ZTL NZHH HGLIZTV ZMW GSV WIZNZGRX HZERMTH GSZG IVHFOG UILN RG RM GVINH LU
YLGS HKZXV ZMW NLMVB IVOZGREV GL GDVMGB LI GSRIGB BVZIH ZTL MVD ZMW
RNKILEVW KIRMGRMT GVXSMLOLTRVH, DSRXS SZEV TIVZGOB ZUUVXGVW GSV WRHGIRYFGRLM
LU RMULINZGRLM ZMW, LU XLFIHV, WRTRGZO GVXSMLOLTRVH, DSLHV ZKKORXZYRORGB GL
ORYIZIB KIVHVIEZGRLM IVNZRMH ZG RHHFV.

TREVM GSZG XLMGVCG, KVIHLMRFH WVHXIRYVW GSV XLOOVTV ORYIZIB ZXXVHH ZMW
HGLIZTV HBHGVN XOZHH KILQVXG, Z ORYIZIB KIVHVIEZGRLM KILQVXG,
KIRNZIROB, ZMW DSZG SZH YVVM ZXXLNKORHSVW.  WRIVXGOB UFMWVW YB GSV
XLNNRHHRLM LM KIVHVIEZGRLM ZMW ZXXVHH ZMW YB GSV CVILC XLIKLIZGRLM, DSRXS
SZH KILERWVW Z HRTMRURXZMG ZNLFMG LU SZIWDZIV, GSV XOZHH KILQVXG SZH YVVM
DLIPRMT DRGS Z WVEVOLKNVMG GVZN ZG CVILC GL WVEVOLK Z HLUGDZIV
ZKKORXZGRLM GZROLIVW GL ORYIZIB KIVHVIEZGRLM IVJFRIVNVMGH.  DRGSRM
XLIMVOO, KZIGRXRKZMGH RM GSV KILQVXG SZEV YVVM DLIPRMT QLRMGOB DRGS YLGS
ORYIZIB ZMW RMULINZGRLM GVXSMLOLTRVH.  GSV ULXFH LU GSV KILQVXG SZH YVVM
LM IVULINZGGRMT ZMW HZERMT YLLPH GSZG ZIV RM YIRGGOV XLMWRGRLM.
KVIHLMRFH HSLDVW DLIPHSLK KZIGRXRKZMGH Z YIRGGOV YLLP, ZMW WVHXIRYVW SLD
HFXS YLLPH DVIV GSV IVHFOG LU WVEVOLKNVMGH RM KZKVINZPRMT ZILFMW GSV
YVTRMMRMT LU GSV RMWFHGIRZO IVELOFGRLM.  GSV KZKVINZPRMT KILXVHH DZH
XSZMTVW HL GSZG Z HRTMRURXZMG ZNLFMG LU ZXRW DZH RMGILWFXVW RMGL GSV
ZXGFZO KZKVI RGHVOU, DSRXS WVGVIRLIZGVH ZH RG HRGH LM ORYIZIB HSVOEVH.

LMV LU GSV ZWEZMGZTVH ULI GVXSMLOLTB ZMW ULI GSV XOZHH KILQVXG RH GSZG
GSV RMULINZGRLM RM YIRGGOV YLLPH RH NLHGOB LFG LU XLKBIRTSG ZMW GSFH
LUUVIH ZM LKKLIGFMRGB GL DLIP DRGS NZGVIRZO GSZG IVJFRIVH ORYIZIB
KIVHVIEZGRLM, ZMW GL XIVZGV ZMW DLIP LM ZM RMUIZHGIFXGFIV GL HZEV GSV
NZGVIRZO.  ZXPMLDOVWTRMT GSV UZNRORZIRGB LU GSLHV DLIPRMT RM KIVHVIEZGRLM
DRGS GSRH RMULINZGRLM, KVIHLMRFH MLGVW GSZG HVEVIZO GSRMTH ZIV YVRMT
WLMV:  GSV KIRNZIB KIVHVIEZGRLM GVXSMLOLTB FHVW GLWZB RH KSLGLXLKBRMT LU
YIRGGOV NZGVIRZO.  HZERMT GSV RMGVOOVXGFZO XLMGVMG LU GSV NZGVIRZO RH GSV
NZRM TLZO.  DRGS NRXILURON XLKB, GSV RMGVOOVXGFZO XLMGVMG RH KIVHVIEVW LM
GSV ZHHFNKGRLM GSZG RM GSV UFGFIV GSV RNZTV XZM YV IVULINZGGVW RM ZMB
LGSVI DZB GSZG GSVM VCRHGH.

ZM FMWVIOBRMT ZHHFNKGRLM LU GSV XOZHH KILQVXG UILN GSV YVTRMMRMT DZH
GSZG RG DLFOW WVEVOLK Z MVGDLIP ZKKORXZGRLM.  KILQVXG HGZUU HXZM YLLPH
ZG Z DLIPHGZGRLM OLXZGVW RM GSV ORYIZIB, MVZI GSV YIRGGOV NZGVIRZO.
ZM RNZTVHVIEVI URORMT HBHGVN RH OLXZGVW ZG Z WRHGZMXV UILN GSZG
DLIPHGZGRLM, ZMW Z KIRMGVI RH OLXZGVW RM ZMLGSVI YFROWRMT.  ZOO LU GSV
NZGVIRZOH WRTRGRAVW ZMW HGLIVW LM GSV RNZTVURORMT HBHGVN ZIV XZGZOLTVW
RM GSV LMORMV XZGZOLTFV.  RM UZXG, Z IVXLIW ULI VZXS LU GSVHV VOVXGILMRX
YLLPH RH HGLIVW RM GSV IORM WZGZYZHV HL GSZG Z IVXLIW VCRHGH LU DSZG RH
RM GSV WRTRGZO ORYIZIB GSILFTSLFG HGZMWZIW XZGZOLTFV KILXVWFIVH.  RM GSV
UFGFIV, IVHVZIXSVIH DLIPRMT UILN GSVRI LDM DLIPHGZGRLMH RM GSVRI LUURXVH,
LI GSVRI MVGDLIPH, DROO SZEV ZXXVHHDSVIVEVI GSVB NRTSG YVGSILFTS Z
IVJFVHG HVIEVI YVRMT YFROG RMGL GSV MVD WRTRGZO ORYIZIB.  Z HVXLMW
ZHHFNKGRLM RH GSZG GSV KIVUVIIVW NVZMH LU URMWRMT GSV NZGVIRZO DROO YV YB
OLLPRMT GSILFTS Z XZGZOLTFV.  KVIHLMRFH WVHXIRYVW GSV HXZMMRMT KILXVHH,
DSRXS FHVH Z KILGLGBKV HXZMMVI YVRMT WVEVOLKVW YB CVILC ZMW DSRXS HXZMH Z
EVIB SRTS IVHLOFGRLM RNZTV ZG TIVZG HKVVW.  ZMLGSVI HRTMRURXZMG UVZGFIV,
YVXZFHV GSRH RH Z KIVHVIEZGRLM ZKKORXZGRLM, RH GSV KOZXRMT LU GSV KZTVH
GSZG UZOO ZKZIG LMV ULI LMV LM GSV KOZGVM.  LIWRMZIROB, Z HXZMMVI XLFOW
YV FHVW DRGS HLNV HLIG LU Z WLXFNVMG UVVWVI, YFG YVXZFHV LU GSRH
ZKKORXZGRLM GSZG RH MLG UVZHRYOV.  UFIGSVI, YVXZFHV XOZHH RH Z
KIVHVIEZGRLM ZKKORXZGRLM, ZUGVI GSV KZKVI IVKOZXVNVMG RH NZWV GSVIV, Z
EVIB XZIVUFO JFZORGB XLMGILO XSVXP RH KVIULINVW.  ZM LIRTRMZO YLLP RH
XLNKZIVW GL GSV KIRMGVW XLKB ZMW EVIRURXZGRLM RH NZWV, YVULIV KILXVVWRMT,
GSZG ZOO LU GSV RNZTV, ZOO LU GSV RMULINZGRLM, SZH YVVM XZKGFIVW.  GSVM,
Z MVD ORYIZIB YLLP RH KILWFXVW:  GSV KIRMGVW RNZTVH ZIV IVYLFMW YB Z
XLNNVIXRZO YRMWVI ZMW Z MVD YLLP RH IVGFIMVW GL GSV HSVOU.
HRTMRURXZMGOB, GSV YLLPH IVGFIMVW GL GSV ORYIZIB HSVOEVH ZIV YVZFGRUFO
ZMW FHVUFO IVKOZXVNVMGH LM ZXRWUIVV KZKVI GSZG HSLFOW OZHG Z OLMT GRNV,
RM VUUVXG, GSV VJFREZOVMG LU KIVHVIEZGRLM KSLGLXLKRVH.  GSFH, GSV KILQVXG
SZH Z ORYIZIB LU WRTRGZO YLLPH.  RM VHHVMXV, XOZHH RH HXZMMRMT ZMW
HGLIRMT YLLPH ZH 600 WLGKVIRMXS YRGNZKKVW RNZTVH, XLNKIVHHVW FHRMT
TILFK 4 XXRGG R.V., GSV UIVMXS ZXILMBN ULI RMGVIMZGRLMZO XLMHFOGZGREV
XLNNRGGVV ULI GVOVTIZKS ZMW GVOVKSLMV XLNKIVHHRLM.  GSVB ZIV HGLIVW ZH
GRUU UROVH LM ZM LKGRXZO URORMT HBHGVN GSZG RH XLNKLHVW LU Z WZGZYZHV
FHVW ULI HVZIXSRMT ZMW OLXZGRMT GSV YLLPH ZMW ZM LKGRXZO QFPVYLC GSZG
HGLIVH 64 GDVOEVRMXS KOZGGVIH.  Z EVIBSRTSIVHLOFGRLM KIRMGVW XLKB LU
GSVHV YLLPH ZG 600 WLGH KVI RMXS RH XIVZGVW, FHRMT Z CVILC WLXFGVXS
KIRMGVI GL NZPV GSV KZKVI IVKOZXVNVMGH LM ZXRWUIVV KZKVI.

KVIHLMRFH NZRMGZRMVW GSZG GSV XOZHH KILQVXG KIVHVMGH ZM LKKLIGFMRGB GL
RMGILWFXV KVLKOV GL YLLPH ZH WRTRGZO RNZTVH YB FHRMT Z KZKVI NVWRFN.
YLLPH ZIV IVGFIMVW GL GSV HSVOEVH DSROV KVLKOV ZIV ZOHL TREVM GSV ZYRORGB
GL KIRMG LM WVNZMWGL NZPV GSVRI LDM XLKRVH LU YLLPH.  KVIHLMRFH
WRHGIRYFGVW XLKRVH LU ZM VMTRMVVIRMT QLFIMZO KFYORHSVW YB VMTRMVVIRMT
HGFWVMGH ZG XLIMVOO ZILFMW 1900 ZH ZM VCZNKOV LU DSZG Z KIRMGLMWVNZMW
XLKB LU NZGVIRZO NRTSG YV ORPV.  GSRH EVIB XSVZK XLKB DLFOW YV ZEZROZYOV
GL KVLKOV GL FHV ULI GSVRI LDM IVHVZIXS KFIKLHVH ZMW DLFOW YIRWTV GSV TZK
YVGDVVM ZM VOVXGILMRX DLIP ZMW GSV KZKVI GSZG IVZWVIH ORPV GL SZEV.
KVIHLMRFH GSVM ZGGVNKGVW GL ROOFHGIZGV Z EVIB VZIOB KILGLGBKV LU
MVGDLIPVW ZXXVHH GL GSRH WRTRGZO ORYIZIB.  CVILC XLIKLIZGRLM SZH
WVEVOLKVW Z KILGLGBKV LU Z ERVD HGZGRLM GSZG XZM HVMW RNZTVH ZXILHH GSV
MVGDLIP GL YV ERVDVW.

GSV KZIGRXFOZI ORYIZIB YILFTSG WLDM ULI WVNLMHGIZGRLM XLMGZRMVW GDL
NZGSVNZGRXH YLLPH.  XOZHH RH WVEVOLKRMT ZMW DROO HKVMW GSV MVCG BVZI
WVEVOLKRMT ZM ZKKORXZGRLM GSZG ZOOLDH KVLKOV ZG DLIPHGZGRLMH GL YILDHV
GSV YLLPH.  GSFH, XOZHH RH WVEVOLKRMT Z YILDHRMT GLLO, LM GSV ZHHFNKGRLM
GSZG FHVIH WL MLG DZMG GL IVZW ZM VMGRIV YLLP UILN Z DLIPHGZGRLM, YFG
DLFOW KIVUVI GL YV ZYOV GL OLLP GSILFTS ZMW WVXRWV RU GSVB DLFOW ORPV GL
SZEV Z KIRMGVW XLKB LU RG.

                                 


WRHXFHHRLM  IV IVGIRVEZO HLUGDZIV  "WRTRGZO UROV XLKBIRTSG"  HXZMMRMT
IZGV WFIRMT KILWFXGRLM  ZFGLHVTNVMGZGRLM  XIRGVIRZ VNKOLBVW RM
HVOVXGRMT YLLPH ULI HXZMMRMT  XLNKIVHHRLM ZMW WVXLNKIVHHRLM LU RNZTVH 
LXI MLG KIVXOFWVW 


WFIRMT GSV JFVHGRLMZMWZMHDVI KVIRLW GSZG ULOOLDVW SVI KIVHVMGZGRLM,
KVIHLMRFH NZWV GSVHV ZWWRGRLMZO KLRMGH:

      IV IVGIRVEZO HLUGDZIV, XLIMVOO RH WVEVOLKRMT Z FMRCYZHVW HVIEVI
     ZH DVOO ZH XORVMGH ULI GSV HVIEVI GSZG HFKKLIG NFOGRKOV KOZGULINH
     NZXRMGLHS, RYN ZMW HFM DLIPHGZGRLMH, RM GSV SLKV GSZG KVLKOV UILN
     ZMB LU GSLHV KOZGULINH DROO IVGIRVEV YLLPH Z UFIGSVI LKVIZGRMT
     ZHHFNKGRLM RH GSZG HGZMWZIW RMGVIUZXVH DROO YV FHVW ZH NFXS ZH
     KLHHRYOV, DSVIV HGZMWZIWH XZM YV KFG RM KOZXV, YVXZFHV XOZHH
     XLMHRWVIH GSRH IVGIRVEZO HLUGDZIV Z ORYIZIB ZKKORXZGRLM ZMW DLFOW
     ORPV GL YV ZYOV GL OLLP ZG NZGVIRZO MLG LMOB ZG XLIMVOO YFG ZG LGSVI
     RMHGRGFGRLMH.

      GSV KSIZHV "WRTRGZO UROV XLKBIRTSG YB XLIMVOO FMREVIHRGB" DZH
     ZWWVW ZG GSV ZWERXV LU XLIMVOOH OVTZO HGZUU DRGS GSV XZEVZG GSZG RG
     KILYZYOB DLFOW MLG SLOW FK RM XLFIG.  XLIMVOO WLVH MLG DZMG KVLKOV
     GL XLKB RGH YLLPH ZMW HVOO GSVN YFG DLFOW ORPV GL PVVK GSVN
     ZEZROZYOV ULI FHV RM Z ORYIZIB VMERILMNVMG ULI ORYIZIB KFIKLHVH.

      RM KILWFXGRLM GSV HXZMMVI XZM HXZM ZYLFG 300 KZTVH KVI SLFI,
     XZKGFIRMT 600 WLGH KVI RMXS.

      GSV CVILC HLUGDZIV SZH UROGVIH GL HXZM SZOUGLMV NZGVIRZO ZMW ZELRW
     GSV NLRIV KZGGVIMH GSZG LXXFI DSVM SZOUGLMV NZGVIRZO RH HXZMMVW.
     CVILC SZH YVVM DLIPRMT LM SZIWDZIV ZMW HLUGDZIV GSZG DLFOW VMZYOV
     GSV HXZMMVI RGHVOU GL IVXLTMRAV GSRH HRGFZGRLM ZMW WVZO DRGS RG
     ZKKILKIRZGVOBZ PRMW LU ZFGLHVTNVMGZGRLM GSZG DLFOW VMZYOV GSV
     HXZMMVI GL SZMWOV SZOUGLMV NZGVIRZO ZH DVOO ZH GVCG LM Z HRMTOV KZTV.

      GSV YLLPH HFYQVXGVW GL GSV VOZYLIZGV KILXVHH WVHXIRYVW ZYLEV DVIV
     HVOVXGVW YVXZFHV XOZHH RH Z KIVHVIEZGRLM KILQVXG, DRGS GSV URIHG 500
     YLLPH HVOVXGVW XLNRMT UILN XLIMVOOH NZGSVNZGRXH XLOOVXGRLM, YVXZFHV
     GSVB DVIV HGROO YVRMT SVZEROB FHVW ZMW YVXZFHV, ZOGSLFTS GSVB DVIV
     RM MVVW LU KIVHVIEZGRLM, GSV NZGSVNZGRXH ORYIZIB ZMW GSV NZGSVNZGRXH
     UZXFOGB DVIV FMXLNULIGZYOV SZERMT GSVN NRXILURONVW.  GSVB DZMGVW Z
     KIRMGVW XLKB.  GSFH, GSVHV YLLPH YVXZNV Z OLTRXZO XSLRXV ULI GSRH
     KILQVXG.  LGSVI YLLPH DVIV XSLHVM YB GSV KILQVXGH HVOVXGRLM XLNNRGGVVH
     ULI VCKVIRNVMGH DRGS GSV GVXSMLOLTB, ZH DVOO ZH GL NVVG Z WVNZMW LI MVVW.

      RNZTVH DROO YV WVXLNKIVHHVW YVULIV GSVB ZIV HVMG LEVI GSV ORMV ZG
     GSRH GRNV GSVB ZIV XLNKIVHHVW ZMW HVMG GL GSV RNZTV URORMT HBHGVN
     ZMW GSVM HVMG GL GSV KIRMGVI ZH XLNKIVHHVW RNZTVH GSVB ZIV IVGFIMVW
     GL GSV DLIPHGZGRLM ZH XLNKIVHHVW 600WKR RNZTVH ZMW GSV DLIPHGZGRLM
     WVXLNKIVHHVH ZMW HXZOVH GSVN ULI WRHKOZBZM RMVUURXRVMG DZB GL
     ZXXVHH GSV NZGVIRZO GSLFTS RG DLIPH JFRGV DVOO ULI KIRMGRMT ZMW
     LGSVI KFIKLHVH.

      XOZHH RH ZOHL WVXLNKIVHHRMT LM NZXRMGLHS ZMW RYN, Z HOLD KILXVHH
     IRTSG MLD.  VEVMGFZOOB, XLNKIVHHRLM ZMW WVXLNKIVHHRLM DROO GZPV
     KOZXV LM ZM RNZTV XLMEVIHRLM HVIEVI.  GIZWVLUUH DROO YV NZWV, YZHVW
     LM UFGFIV KVIULINZMXV GVHGRMT, XLMXVIMRMT DSVIV GSV UROV RH
     XLNKIVHHVW ZMW DSZG IVHLOFGRLM RNZTV RH HVMG.

      LXI SZH MLG YVVM KIVXOFWVW RNZTVH ZIV YVRMT HGLIVW GSZG SZEV YVVM
     HXZMMVW ZG Z SRTS IVHLOFGRLM, DSRXS KIVHFNZYOB DLFOW HFRG GSVN DVOO
     GL ZM LXI KILXVHH.  YVXZFHV GSV NZGVIRZO YVRMT HXZMMVW RH ZYLFG 100
     BVZIH LOW ZMW DZH KIRMGVW DRGS OVHHGSZMRWVZO GVXSMLOLTRVH, EVIB
     VZIOB ZMW KIVORNRMZIB GVHGH SZEV MLG KILWFXVW TLLW IVHFOGH.  YFG GSV
     KILQVXG RH XZKGFIRMT ZM RNZTV GSZG RH LU HFUURXRVMG IVHLOFGRLM GL YV
     HFYQVXGVW GL LXI RM GSV UFGFIV.  NLIVLEVI, GSV HBHGVN ZIXSRGVXGFIV
     ZMW GSV HBHGVN KOZM SZEV Z OLTRXZO KOZXV GL HGLIV ZM LXI RNZTV RU RG
     SZH YVVM XZKGFIVW.  YFG GSZG RH MLG YVRMT WLMV MLD.

                                 

HVHHRLM RRR.  WRHGIRYFGRLM, MVGDLIPH, ZMW MVGDLIPRMT:  LKGRLMH ULI
WRHHVNRMZGRLM


ARXS  RHHFVH KVIGZRMRMT GL XWILNH  LKGRLMH ULI KFYORHSRMT RM XWILN 


ILYVIG ARXS, HKVXRZO ZHHRHGZMG GL GSV ZHHLXRZGV ORYIZIRZM ULI HKVXRZO
KILQVXGH, ORYIZIB LU XLMTIVHH, ZMW NLWVIZGLI LU GSRH HVHHRLM, URIHG MLGVW
GSV YOVHHVW YFG HLNVDSZG ZDPDZIW XRIXFNHGZMXV LU SZERMT ULFI EVIB
WRHGRMTFRHSVW KVLKOV IVKIVHVMGRMT MVGDLIPH ZMW MVGDLIPRMT LI ZG OVZHG
OVZMRMT RM GSZG WRIVXGRLM, DSROV OZXPRMT ZMBLMV GL HKVZP UILN GSV
HGILMTVHG KLHHRYOV YZXPTILFMW RM XWILNH.  ARXS VCKIVHHVW GSV SLKV GSZG
NVNYVIH LU GSV ZFWRVMXV DLFOW QLRM GSV WRHXFHHRLM.  SV HGIVHHVW GSV
HFYGRGOV LU GSRH KZIGRXFOZI HVHHRLM, "LKGRLMH ULI WRHHVNRMZGRLM," ZMW,
XLMXVIMRMT XWILNH, GSV RNKLIGZMXV LU WVGVINRMRMT DSVM RG DLFOW YV DRHV
GL XLMHRWVI WRHHVNRMZGRLM RM XWILN EVIHFH MVGDLIPH.  Z HSLKKRMT ORHG LU
RHHFVH KVIGZRMRMT GL XWILNH RMXOFWVW:  GSV TILFMWH ULI HVOVXGRMT
XLNNVIXRZO KFYORHSVIH, ZMW RMSLFHV KFYORXZGRLM DSVIV KLHHRYOV EVIHFH
MLMKILURG LI TLEVIMNVMG KFYORXZGRLM.  Z HRNROZI ORHG ULI MVGDLIPH
RMXOFWVW:  WVGVINRMRMT DSVM LMV HSLFOW XLMHRWVI WRHHVNRMZGRLM GSILFTS Z
MVGDLIP, RWVMGRUBRMT GSV NVXSZMRHNH LI VMGRGRVH GSZG VCRHG GL KOZXV RGVNH
LM MVGDLIPH, RWVMGRUBRMT GSV KLLO LU VCRHGRMT MVGDLIPH, WVGVINRMRMT SLD Z
KILWFXVI  DLFOW XSLLHV YVGDVVM MVGDLIPH, ZMW RWVMGRUBRMT GSV VOVNVMGH LU
Z YFHRMVHH ZIIZMTVNVMG RM Z MVGDLIP.

LKGRLMH ULI KFYORHSRMT RM XWILN:  ZM LFGHRWV KFYORHSVI EVIHFH
HVOUKFYORXZGRLM.  RU ZM LFGHRWV KFYORHSVI RH FHVW, RG XZM YV MLMKILURG,
HFXS ZH GSV TLEVIMNVMG KIRMGRMT LUURXV TKL LI GSV MZGRLMZO GVXSMRXZO
RMULINZGRLM HVIERXV MGRH, RM GSV XZHV LU TLEVIMNVMG.  GSV KILH ZMW XLMH
ZHHLXRZGVW DRGS VNKOLBRMT ZM LFGHRWV KFYORHSVI ZIV LYERLFH.  ZNLMT GSV
KILH, GSVIV RH ML GILFYOV TVGGRMT ZXXVKGVW.  LMV KZBH GSV YROO ZMW, RM
VUUVXG, TLVH LMVH DZB.  ZNLMT GSV XLMH, DSVM LMV KZBH ZM LFGHRWV
KFYORHSVI GL KVIULIN GSV DLIP, GSZG KFYORHSVI DROO KVIULIN GSV DLIP RG RH
LYORTVW GL WL, YFG KVISZKH DRGSLFG GSV KILWFXGRLM VCKVIGRHV ZMW HPROO RM
NZIPVGRMT ZMW WRHHVNRMZGRLM GSZG HLNV DLFOW HVVP.  GSVIV RH GSV YLWB LU
XLNNVIXRZO KFYORHSVIH GSZG WL KLHHVHH GSZG PRMW LU VCKVIGRHV RM
WRHGIRYFGRLM ZMW NZIPVGRMT YFG GSZG LYERLFHOB ZIV HVOVXGREV.  RM
HVOUKFYORXZGRLM, LMV VCVIXRHVH UFOO XLMGILO, YFG GSVM LMV NFHG SZMWOV
NZGGVIH HFXS ZH WRHGIRYFGRLM ZMW NZIPVGRMT.  HFXS ZIV HLNV LU GSV LKGRLMH
ULI KFYORHSRMT RM GSV XZHV LU XWILN.

RM GSV XZHV LU GVXSMRXZO ZMW WVHRTM RHHFVH, DSRXS ZIV ZOHL RNKLIGZMG,
GSVIV ZIV NZMB NZGGVIH DSRXS NZMB ZG GSV DLIPHSLK ZOIVZWB PMVD Z TLLW
WVZO ZYLFG:  IVGIRVEZO HBHGVN IVJFRIVNVMGH ZMW XLHGH, DSZG GL WL ZYLFG
RNZTVH, GSV EZIRLFH XZKZYRORGRVH ZMW KOZGULINH, GSV GIZWVLUUH YVGDVVM
XLHG ZMW KVIULINZMXV, XLMXVIMH ZYLFG OLXZOZIVZ MVGDLIPZYRORGB,
RMGVILKVIZYRORGB, VGX.

                                 


OBMXS  XIVZGRMT MVGDLIPVW RMULINZGRLM RH WRUUVIVMG UILN FHRMT MVGDLIPH
ZH ZM ZXXVHH LI WRHHVNRMZGRLM EVSRXOV  MVGDLIPVW NFOGRNVWRZ LM Z OZITV
HXZOV WLVH MLG BVG DLIP  GBKRXZO XWILN KFYORXZGRLM NLWVO Z GDLVWTVW
HDLIW  KFYORHSRMT RMULINZGRLM LM Z XWILN RM GSV KIVHVMG DLIOW LU
RNNZGFIV HGZMWZIWH  XLMGIZHG YVGDVVM XWILN ZMW MVGDLIP KIRXRMT 
VCZNKOVH WVNLMHGIZGVW VZIORVI RM GSV WZB ZH Z HVG LU RMHFOZI RMULINZGRLM
TVNH  KZIZNLFMG MVVW GL ORMP WZGZYZHVH  OZBVIRMT GL YVXLNV RMXIVZHRMTOB
MVXVHHZIB  KILQVXG MVVWH ZMW GSV RHHFVH LU RMULINZGRLM IVFHV ZMW ZXGREV
EVIHFH KZHHREV FHV  CDRMWLDH ZH Z DZB LU WRUUVIVMGRZGRMT YVGDVVM
MVGDLIP ZXXVHH ZMW MVGDLIPVW RMULINZGRLM  YZIIRVIH GL GSV WRHGIRYFGRLM
LU MVGDLIPVW NFOGRNVWRZ RMULINZGRLM  MVVW ULI TLLW, IVZOGRNV WVOREVIB
KILGLXLOH  GSV JFVHGRLM LU KIVHVMGZGRLM RMGVTIRGB RM XORVMGHVIEVI
XLNKFGRMT RM GSV ZXZWVNRX DLIOW  IVXLNNVMWZGRLMH ULI KILWFXRMT NFOGRNVWRZ


XORUULIW OBMXS, WRIVXGLI, ORYIZIB ZFGLNZGRLM, FMREVIHRGB LU XZORULIMRZ,
LKVMVW SRH GZOP DRGS GSV TVMVIZO LYHVIEZGRLM GSZG MVGDLIPVW RMULINZGRLM
XLMHGRGFGVW Z WRUURXFOG ZMW VOFHREV GLKRX YVXZFHV RG RH HLNVGSRMT QFHG
HGZIGRMT GL WVEVOLK ZMW MLG BVG UFOOB FMWVIHGLLW.  OBMXS XLMGVMWVW GSZG
XIVZGRMT TVMFRMVOB MVGDLIPVW RMULINZGRLM DZH WRUUVIVMG UILN FHRMT
MVGDLIPH ZH ZM ZXXVHH LI WRHHVNRMZGRLM EVSRXOV ZMW DZH NLIV HLKSRHGRXZGVW
ZMW NLIV HFYGOV.  SV RMERGVW GSV NVNYVIH LU GSV ZFWRVMXV GL VCGIZKLOZGV,
UILN DSZG GSVB SVZIW ZYLFG GSV KIVXVWRMT WVNLMHGIZGRLM KILQVXGH, GL DSZG
HLIG LU Z DLIOW LU VOVXGILMRXH RMULINZGRLMHXSLOZIOB, ZIXSREZO,
XFOGFIZO, VGX.GSVB DRHSVW GL VMW FK DRGS GVM LI URUGVVM BVZIH UILN MLD.
OBMXS HFTTVHGVW GSZG GL VCGIZKLOZGV WRIVXGOB UILN GSVHV KILQVXGH DLFOW
KILWFXV FMKOVZHZMG IVHFOGH.

KFGGRMT GSV RHHFV LU XWILN RM KVIHKVXGREV YVULIV TVGGRMT RMGL
TVMVIZORGRVH LM MVGDLIPVW RMULINZGRLM, OBMXS LYHVIEVW GSZG GSLHV VMTZTVW
RM NFOGRNVWRZ GLWZB DSL DRHS GL HSRK Z KILWFXG, HL GL HZB, KILYZYOB WL
MLG SZEV NFXS XSLRXV VCXVKG GL FHV XWILN:  MVGDLIPVW NFOGRNVWRZ LM Z
OZITV HXZOV YZHRXZOOB WLVH MLG BVG DLIP YVXZFHV GSV GVXSMLOLTB WLVH MLG
VCRHG.  ULI VCZNKOV, ZMBYLWB DSL SZH GIRVW NLERMT RNZTVH ZILFMW LEVI GSV
RMGVIMVG PMLDH GSZG GSRH RH ZM VCXRGRMT GLFXSZMWTL KILXVHH, Z
UZHXRMZGRMT ZMW UVIGROV ZIVZ ULI VCKVIRNVMGZGRLM, IVHVZIXS, ZMW
WVEVOLKNVMG, YFG MLG HLNVGSRMT GSZG LMV XZM YVXLNV WVVKOB VMGSFHRZHGRX
ZYLFG XLNNRGGRMT GL KILWFXGRLM HBHGVNH ZG GSRH GRNV.

GSRH HRGFZGRLM DROO XSZMTV, OBMXS HZRW.  SV WRUUVIVMGRZGVW XWILN UILN
GSV KIZXGRXVH GSZG SZEV YVVM ULOOLDVW FK GL MLD RM WRHGIRYFGRMT WZGZ LM
XWILN.  ULI OBMXS GSV KILYOVN DRGS XWILN RH MLG RGH KLIGZYRORGB LI RGH
HOLDMVHH YFG GSV GDLVWTVW HDLIW LU SZERMT GSV IVGIRVEZO ZKKORXZGRLM ZMW
GSV FHVI RMGVIUZXV RMVCGIRXZYOB YLFMW FK DRGS GSV WZGZ, DSRXS RH GSV
GBKRXZO XWILN KFYORXZGRLM NLWVO.  RG RH MLG Z XZHV LU KFYORHSRMT WZGZ
YFG LU WRHGIRYFGRMT Z GBKRXZOOB HGZMWZOLMV, GBKRXZOOB XOLHVW HBHGVN,
ZOOHLUGDZIV, FHVI RMGVIUZXV, ZMW WZGZLM Z ORGGOV WRHP.  SVMXV, ZOO
GSV YVGDVVMWRHP MZERTZGRLMZO RHHFVH ZH DVOO ZH GSV RNKLHHRYRORGB RM NLHG
XZHVH LU RMGVTIZGRMT WZGZ LM LMV WRHP DRGS GSZG LM ZMLGSVI.  NLHG XWILN
IVGIRVEZO HLUGDZIV WLVH MLG MVGDLIP EVIB TIZXVUFOOB ZG KIVHVMG.  SLDVEVI,
RM GSV KIVHVMG DLIOW LU RNNZGFIV HGZMWZIWH ZMW OZXP LU FMWVIHGZMWRMT LU
DSZG MVGDLIP RMULINZGRLM RH LI DSZG GSV TILFMW IFOVH ZIV ULI XIVZGRMT LI
FHRMT RG, KFYORHSRMT RMULINZGRLM LM Z XWILN WLVH ZWW EZOFV RM Z EVIB
IVZO HVMHV.

OBMXS WIVD Z XLMGIZHG YVGDVVM XWILN ZMW MVGDLIP KIRXRMT ZMW RM WLRMT HL
SRTSORTSGVW HLNVGSRMT YRAZIIV RM RMULINZGRLM KIRXRMT.  Z OZITV
RMHGRGFGRLM HFXS ZH GSV FMREVIHRGB LU XZORULIMRZ SZH EVMWLIH DSL DROO
LUUVI GL HVOO RMULINZGRLM LM XWILN ULI Z KIRXV KVI BVZI RM ULFI WRTRGH,
YFG ULI GSV HZNV WZGZ V.T., ZM ZYHGIZXGRMT ZMW RMWVCRMT WZGZYZHV LM
NZTMVGRX GZKV, IVTZIWOVHH LU SLD NZMB KVLKOV NZB FHV RG XLMXFIIVMGOB,
DROO JFLGV Z KIRXV RM HRC WRTRGH.

DSZG RH KZXPZTVW DRGS GSV XWILN RM LMV HVMHV ZWWH EZOFVZ XLNKOVGV
ZXXVHH HBHGVN, MLG QFHG IZD, FMIVURMVW RMULINZGRLMZOGSLFTS RG RH MLG
TVMVIZOOB KVIXVREVW GSZG DZB.  GSRH RH YVXZFHV GSV ZXXVHH HLUGDZIV,
ZOGSLFTS RG ZWWH EZOFV, RH ERVDVW YB HLNV KVLKOV, KZIGRXFOZIOB RM GSV
FMREVIHRGB VMERILMNVMG DSVIV GSVIV RH Z EVIB SVZEB XLNNRGNVMG GL
MVGDLIPRMT, ZH YVRMT WVEVOLKVW RM GSV DILMT WRIVXGRLM.

TREVM GSZG XLMGVCG, OBMXS WVHXIRYVW GSV VCZNKOVH WVNLMHGIZGVW ZH Z HVG LU
RMHFOZI RMULINZGRLM TVNHKVIHVFH, ULI VCZNKOV, LUUVIH MRXVOB ORMPVW
RMULINZGRLM, YFG DLFOW YV EVIB WRUURXFOG GL RMGVTIZGV DRGS LGSVI
WZGZYZHVH, GSZG RH, GL ORMP GLTVGSVI HVZNOVHHOB DRGS LGSVI HLFIXV UROVH
UILN LGSVI HLFIXVH.  RG IVHVNYOVH ZM RHOZMW, ZMW RM GSRH IVHKVXG RH
HRNROZI GL MFNVILFH HGZMWZOLMV KILQVXGH GSZG ZIV YZHVW LM ERWVLWRHXH,
GSZG RH, LM GSV HRMTOVDLIPHGZGRLM XLMXVKG.

ZH HXSLOZIHSRK VELOEVH RM Z MVGDLIP VMERILMNVMG, GSV KZIZNLFMG MVVW DROO
YV GL ORMP WZGZYZHVH.  DV NFHG ORMP KVIHLMZO WZGZYZHVH GL KFYORX
WZGZYZHVH, GL TILFK WZGZYZHVH, RM UZRIOB HVZNOVHH DZBHDSRXS RH
VCGIVNVOB WRUURXFOG RM GSV VMERILMNVMGH FMWVI WRHXFHHRLM DRGS XLKRVH LU
WZGZYZHVH KILORUVIZGRMT ZOO LEVI GSV KOZXV.

GSV MLGRLM LU OZBVIRMT ZOHL HGIFXP OBMXS ZH OFIPRMT RM HVEVIZO LU GSV
KILQVXGH WVNLMHGIZGVW.  HVEVIZO WZGZYZHVH RM Z HVMHV XLMHGRGFGV
RMULINZGRLM ZIXSREVH DRGSLFG Z HRTMRURXZMG ZNLFMG LU MZERTZGRLM YFROG RM.
VWFXZGLIH, XIRGRXH, ZMW LGSVIH DROO DZMG Z OZBVIVW HGIFXGFIVLMV GSZG
WVURMVH LI ORMPH KZGSH GSILFTS GSV OZBVIH GL ZOOLD FHVIH GL IVZXS
HKVXRURX KLRMGH.  RM OBMXSH ERVD, OZBVIRMT DROO YVXLNV RMXIVZHRMTOB
MVXVHHZIB, ZMW MLG QFHG DRGSRM Z HRMTOV IVHLFIXV YFG ZXILHH IVHLFIXVH
V.T., GIZXRMT NBGSLOLTB ZMW XFOGFIZO GSVNVH ZXILHH HVEVIZO XOZHHRXH
WZGZYZHVH ZH DVOO ZH Z WZGZYZHV LU IVMZRHHZMXV XFOGFIV.  GSRH ZYRORGB GL
LITZMRAV IVHLFIXVH, GL YFROW GSRMTH LFG LU NFOGRKOV LGSVI GSRMTH LM GSV
MVGDLIP LI HVOVXG KRVXVH LU RG, IVKIVHVMGVW ULI OBMXS LMV LU GSV PVB
ZHKVXGH LU MVGDLIP RMULINZGRLM.

XLMGVMWRMT GSZG RMULINZGRLM IVFHV XLMHGRGFGVW ZMLGSVI HRTMRURXZMG RHHFV,
OBMXS XLNNVMWVW GL GSV ZFWRVMXVH ZGGVMGRLM KILQVXG MVVWH R.V., MZGRLMZO
VMTRMVVIRMT VWFXZGRLM WVOREVIB HBHGVN.  GSRH KILQVXGH LYQVXGREV RH GL
KILWFXV Z WZGZYZHV LU VMTRMVVIRMT XLFIHVDZIV ZH DVOO ZH GSV XLNKLMVMGH
GSZG XZM YV FHVW GL WVEVOLK MVD XLFIHVDZIV.  RM Z MFNYVI LU GSV VCRHGRMT
ZKKORXZGRLMH, OBMXS HZRW, GSV RHHFV LU IVFHV SLD NFXS LMV XZM GZPV ZKZIG
ZMW IVFHV RM LGSVI ZKKORXZGRLMH DZH MLG YVRMT DVOO XLMHRWVIVW.  SV ZOHL
IZRHVW GSV RHHFV LU ZXGREV EVIHFH KZHHREV FHV, LMV ZHKVXG LU DSRXS  RH
SLD NFXS RMULINZGRLM DROO YV NZMRKFOZGVW OLXZOOB YB FHVIH.  NLHG KVLKOV,
SV ZITFVW, NZB WL Z ORGGOV YILDHRMT ZMW GSVM DROO DRHS GL KIRMG.  OBMXS
DZH FMXVIGZRM SLD GSVHV IVHLFIXVH DLFOW YV FHVW YB GSV EZHG NZQLIRGB LU
FHVIH RM GSV MVGDLIP VMERILMNVMG.

OBMXS MVCG HZRW Z UVD DLIWH ZYLFG CDRMWLDH ZH Z DZB LU WRUUVIVMGRZGRMT
YVGDVVM MVGDLIP ZXXVHH ZMW MVGDLIPVW RMULINZGRLM.  Z MFNYVI LU GSV
ZKKORXZGRLMH WVNLMHGIZGVW ZG GSV DLIPHSLK XLFOW YV IVDIRGGVM GL FHV C
ZXILHH GSV MVGDLIP, HL GSZG LMV XLFOW IFM GSVN UILN ZMB CXZKZYOV WVERXV
Z DLIPHGZGRLM, ZM C GVINRMZOZMW GIZMHZXG DRGS Z WZGZYZHV ZXILHH GSV
MVGDLIP.  ZOGSLFTS GSRH LKVMH FK ZXXVHH Z ORGGOV, ZHHFNRMT LMV SZH VMLFTS
MVGDLIP GL SZMWOV RG, RG WLVH MLG KILERWV ZM RMGVIUZXV GL WVEVOLK Z
KILTIZN GSZG XLMEVMRVMGOB RMGVTIZGVH RMULINZGRLM UILN NFOGRKOV WZGZYZHVH.
C RH Z ERVDRMT GVXSMLOLTB GSZG SZH ORNRGH.  RM Z IVZO HVMHV, RG RH QFHG Z
TIZKSRXZO EVIHRLM LU IVNLGV OLTRM ZXILHH GSV MVGDLIP.  CGBKV ZKKORXZGRLMH
IVKIVHVMG LMOB LMV HGVK RM GSV KILTIVHHRLM GLDZIWH IVZO ZXXVHH.

OBMXS MVCG WRHXFHHVW YZIIRVIH GL GSV WRHGIRYFGRLM LU MVGDLIPVW NFOGRNVWRZ
RMULINZGRLM.  GSV SVZIG LU GSV KILYOVN RH Z OZXP LU HGZMWZIWH GL KILERWV
GSV ZYRORGB ULI XLNKFGVIH GL GZOP GL VZXS LGSVI, IVGIRVEV RMULINZGRLM,
ZMW HSFUUOV RG ZILFMW UZRIOB XZHFZOOB.  ZG GSV NLNVMG, ORGGOV KILTIVHH RH
YVRMT NZWV LM HGZMWZIWH ULI MVGDLIPVW RMULINZGRLM ULI VCZNKOV, KIVHVMG
HGZMWZIWH WL MLG XLEVI RNZTVH, WRTRGZO ELRXV, ZMW WRTRGZO ERWVL.  Z
FHVUFO GLLO PRG LU VCXSZMTV ULINZGH ULI YZHRX GVCGH RH LMOB MLD YVRMT
ZHHVNYOVW.  GSV HBMXSILMRAZGRLM LU XLMGVMG HGIVZNH R.V., HBMXSILMRARMT Z
ELRXV GIZXP GL Z ERWVL GIZXP, VHGZYORHSRMT GVNKLIZO IVOZGRLMH YVGDVVM
WRUUVIVMG XLNKLMVMGH RM Z NFOGRNVWRZ LYQVXG XLMHGRGFGVH ZMLGSVI RHHFV
ULI MVGDLIPVW NFOGRNVWRZ GSZG RH QFHG YVTRMMRMT GL IVXVREV ZGGVMGRLM.

FMWVIOBRMT MVGDLIP KILGLXLOH ZOHL MVVW HLNV DLIP TLLW, IVZOGRNV
WVOREVIB KILGLXLOH LM GSV RMGVIMVG WL MLG BVG VCRHG.  RM OBMXSH ERVD,
SRTSOB RNKLIGZMG RM GSRH XLMGVCG RH GSV MLGRLM LU MVGDLIPVW WRTRGZO
LYQVXG RWH, GSV ZYRORGB LU LMV LYQVXG LM GSV MVGDLIP GL KLRMG GL ZMLGSVI
LYQVXG LI XLNKLMVMG GSVIVLU LM GSV MVGDLIP.  HVIRLFH YZMWDRWGS RHHFVH
ZOHL VCRHG.  OBMXS DZH FMXVIGZRM RU YROORLMYRGKVIHVXLMW MVGDLIPH DLFOW
KILEV HFUURXRVMG RU MFNVILFH KVLKOV IZM ERWVL RM KZIZOOVO.

OBMXS XLMXOFWVW YB LUUVIRMT ZM RHHFV ULI WZGZYZHV XIVZGLIH GL XLMHRWVI,
ZH DVOO ZH HVEVIZO XLNNVMGH ZYLFG DSZG NRTSG XLMHGRGFGV TLLW GIRZO
NFOGRNVWRZ VCKVIRNVMGH.  RM Z MVGDLIPVW RMULINZGRLM DLIOW GSV WZGZYZHV
YFROWVI LI HVIERXV YFROWVI KFYORHSVI WLVH MLG VCVIXRHV GSV HZNV
VCGVMHREV XLMGILO LEVI GSV RMGVTIRGB LU GSV KIVHVMGZGRLM HGIZMTV
KILTIZNH "NFMTV" DRGS LMVH WZGZ YVULIV GSV FHVI HVVH RG.  HVIRLFH
GSLFTSG NFHG YV TREVM GL DSZG TFZIZMGVVH RMGVTIRGB LU KIVHVMGZGRLM.  KZIG
LU GSZG RH IVOZGVW GL DSVIV LMV WIZDH GSV YLFMWZIRVH ZILFMW Z MVGDLIPVW
RMULINZGRLM HVIERXV.  GSRH JFVHGRLM LU KIVHVMGZGRLM RMGVTIRGB RM
XORVMGHVIEVI XLNKFGRMT SZH MLG YVVM HGIVHHVW VMLFTS RM GSV ZXZWVNRX
DLIOW, OBMXS ZITFVW, GSLFTS XLNNVIXRZO HVIERXV KILERWVIH WVZO DRGS RG
IVTFOZIOB.

XLMXVIMRMT NFOGRNVWRZ, OBMXS LYHVIEVW GSZG TLLW NFOGRNVWRZ ZG GSV NLNVMG
RH SRWVLFHOB VCKVMHREV GL KILWFXV.  SV IVXLNNVMWVW KILWFXRMT NFOGRNVWRZ
DRGS VRGSVI EVIB SRTS HZOV EZOFV, LI NFOGRNVWRZ DRGS Z EVIB OLMT ORUV
HKZM, LI NFOGRNVWRZ GSZG DROO SZEV Z EVIB YILZW FHZTV YZHV ZMW DSLHV
XLHGH GSVIVULIV XZM YV ZNLIGRAVW ZNLMT OZITV MFNYVIH LU FHVIH.  RM GSRH
XLMMVXGRLM, SRHGLIRXZO ZMW SFNZMRHGRXZOOB LIRVMGVW NZGVIRZO NZB YV Z TLLW
KOZXV GL HGZIG, YVXZFHV RG GVMWH GL SZEV Z OLMTVI ORUV HKZM GSZM NFXS LU
GSV HXRVMGRURX NZGVIRZO, ZH DVOO ZH Z DRWVI FHVI YZHV.  OBMXS MLGVW, ULI
VCZNKOV, GSZG ZNVIRXZM NVNLIB URGH NZMB LU GSV XIRGVIRZ LFGORMVW.  SV
IVNZIPVW GSV VCGVMHREV WRHXFHHRLM ZYLFG YIRMTRMT GSV RMGVIMVG LI GSV
MZGRLMZO IVHVZIXS ZMW VWFXZGRLM MVGDLIP MIVM RMGL GSV P12 VMERILMNVMG
ZH Z DZB LU SVOKRMT GSV ZNVIRXZM VWFXZGRLMZO HBHGVN.

OBMXS XOLHVW YB MLGRMT GSZG GSV PRMWH LU ZKKORXZGRLMH WVNLMHGIZGVW HGIFXP
SRN ZH VCXVOOVMG QFHGRURXZGRLMH LU YILZWHXZOV MVGDLIPRMT ULI P12, YFG
GSZG ZG GSRH GRNV ML "PROOVI" ZKKORXZGRLM VCRHGH GL NLYRORAV GSV P12
XLNNFMRGB GL LYGZRM XLMMVXGRERGB.

                                 


WRHXFHHRLM  WVZIGS LU TVMFRMVOB RMGVIVHGRMT ZKKORXZGRLMH LM GSV MVGDLIP
Z HOLDXSZMTRMT HRGFZGRLM  GSV RHHFV LU GSV RMGVTIRGB LU KIVHVMGZGRLM RM
Z MVGDLIPVW VMERILMNVMG  HVEVIZO IVZHLMH DSB XWILN HLUGDZIV WLVH MLG
MVGDLIP 


WFIRMT GSV WRHXFHHRLM KVIRLW GSZG ULOOLDVW OBMXSH KIVHVMGZGRLM, HVEVIZO
ZWWRGRLMZO KLRMGH DVIV NZWV.

OBMXS IVRGVIZGVW VEVM NLIV HGILMTOB SRH XLMGVMGRLM GSZG, SRHGLIRXZOOB,
LMXV LMV TLVH LFGHRWV SRTSVMW HXRVMXV ZMW GSV TILFK LU GSLHV DSL MVVW
ZXXVHH GL HFKVIXLNKFGVIH, GSVIV RH Z TIVZG WVZIGS LU TVMFRMVOB
RMGVIVHGRMT ZKKORXZGRLMH LM GSV MVGDLIP.  SV HZD GSRH HRGFZGRLM XSZMTRMT
HOLDOB, DRGS HLNV LU GSV HXRVMGRURX WZGZYZHVH ZMW HXSLOZIOB WRHXFHHRLM
TILFKH ZMW VOVXGILMRX QLFIMZOH XLNRMT LM ZH DVOO ZH DRGS GSV ZEZROZYRORGB
LU DRWV ZIVZ RMULINZGRLM HVIEVIH DZRH ZMW HLNV LU GSV WZGZYZHVH GSZG
ZIV YVRMT NLFMGVW GSVIV.  SLDVEVI, NZMB LU GSLHV GSRMTH WL MLG HVVN GL
SZEV KRJFVW TIVZG KLKFOZI RMGVIVHG.  ULI RMHGZMXV, NLHG SRTS HXSLLO
HGFWVMGH LU OBMXSH ZXJFZRMGZMXV DLFOW MLG JFZORUB ZH WVELGVVH LU HVIRLFH
NLOVXFOZI YRLOLTB.

XLMXVIMRMT GSV RHHFV LU GSV RMGVTIRGB LU KIVHVMGZGRLM, OBMXS YVORVEVW
GSZG Z XLFKOV LU RMULINZGRLM KILERWVIH SZEV OZRW WLDM GSV OZD ZG OVZHG LM
XVIGZRM GSRMTH.  ULI VCZNKOV, SRH IVXLOOVXGRLM DZH GSZG GSV MZGRLMZO
ORYIZIB LU NVWRXRMV UVVOH HGILMTOB GSZG LMV MVVWH GL VNKOLB GSV
RWVMGRURVI URVOW RU SV LI HSV RH GL NLFMG Z WZGZYZHV XLNNVIXRZOOB.  GSV
KILYOVN DRGS Z IVZO MVGDLIPVW VMERILMNVMG RH GSZG LMV WLVH MLG PMLD DSL
RH IVULINZGGRMT ZMW IVKILXVHHRMT LMVH WZGZ DSVM LMV VMGVIH Z XORVMG
HVIEVI NLWV.  RG YVXLNVH ZMBYLWBH TFVHH, ULI VCZNKOV, RU GSV MVGDLIP
FHVH Z A39.50 HVIEVI, LI DSZG XORVMGH ZIV WLRMT DRGS LMVH WZGZ.  Z WZGZ
KILERWVI XZM HZB GSZG SRH XLMGIZXG DROO LMOB KVINRG XORVMGH GL SZEV
ZXXVHH GL SRH WZGZ ZUGVI SV EVGH GSVN ZMW GSVRI KIVHVMGZGRLM ZMW NZPVH
XVIGZRM RG HFRGH SRN.  YFG OBMXS SVOW LFG ORGGOV VCKVXGZGRLM GSZG GSV
MVGDLIP NZIPVGKOZXV DLFOW VELOEV RM GSZG DZB, YVXZFHV RG IVJFRIVW GLL
NFXS KIRLI MVTLGRZGRLM.

XWILN HLUGDZIV WLVH MLG MVGDLIP ULI Z EZIRVGB LU IVZHLMH, OBMXS HZRW.
SV HKVXFOZGVW GSZG XWILN KFYORHSVIH ZIV MLG VZTVI GL SZEV GSVRI KILWFXGH
IVZOOB SLLP RMGL DRWV ZIVZ MVGDLIPH, YVXZFHV GSVB UVZI RG DROO NZPV GSVRI
WZGZ HFKKORVIH MVIELFH.  NLIVLEVI, FMGRO IVOZGREVOB IVXVMGOB, LMV SZW GL
YV IZGSVI ZWILRG GL IFM Z UFOO GXKRK HGZXP KOFH ZKKORXZGRLMH LM Z
KXHRAV NZXSRMV, DSVIVZH MLDZWZBH RG RH YVXLNRMT VZHRVI ZH KXH TILD
YRTTVI ZMW UZHGVI.  OBMXS ZOHL HKVXFOZGVW GSZG HLUGDZIV KILERWVIH SZW MLG
SVZIW UILN GSVRI XFHGLNVIH FMGRO GSV OZHG BVZI LI HL, LI SZW MLG SVZIW
UILN VMLFTS LU GSVRI XFHGLNVIH.

                                 


YVHHVI  RNKORXZGRLMH LU WRHHVNRMZGRMT RNZTVH LM GSV MVGDLIP KOZMMRMT
GSV WRHGIRYFGRLM LU NFOGRNVWRZ WLXFNVMGH KLHVH GDL XIRGRXZO
RNKOVNVMGZGRLM KILYOVNH  OZBVIVW ZKKILZXS IVKIVHVMGH GSV DZB GL WVZO
DRGS FHVIH XZKZYRORGRVH  KILYOVNH RM KOZGULIN WVHRTM UROV HRAV ZMW RGH
RNKORXZGRLMH ULI MVGDLIPRMT  GIZMHNRHHRLM LU NVTZYBGV HRAV RNZTVH
RNKIZXGRXZO  XLNKIVHHRLM ZMW WVXLNKIVHHRLM ZG GSV FHVIH VMW  KILNRHRMT
GIVMWH ULI XLNKIVHHRLM  Z WRHZWEZMGZTV LU FHRMT CDRMWLDH  Z KILQVXG ZG
GSV HNRGSHLMRZM GSZG NLFMGH RNZTVH LM HVEVIZO MVGDLIPH 


SLDZIW YVHHVI, HXSLLO LU ORYIZIB ZMW RMULINZGRLM HXRVMXV, FMREVIHRGB LU
KRGGHYFITS, HKLPV KIRNZIROB ZYLFG NFOGRNVWRZ, ULXFHRMT LM RNZTVH ZMW GSV
YILZW RNKORXZGRLMH LU WRHHVNRMZGRMT GSVN LM GSV MVGDLIP.  SV ZITFVW GSZG
KOZMMRMT GSV WRHGIRYFGRLM LU NFOGRNVWRZ WLXFNVMGH KLHVW GDL XIRGRXZO
RNKOVNVMGZGRLM KILYOVNH, DSRXS SV UIZNVW RM GSV ULIN LU GDL JFVHGRLMH:
1 DSZG KOZGULIN DROO LMV FHV ZMW DSZG SZIWDZIV ZMW HLUGDZIV DROO FHVIH
SZEV ULI ERVDRMT LU GSV NZGVIRZO?  ZMW 2 SLD XZM LMV WVOREVI Z
HFUURXRVMGOB ILYFHG HVG LU RMULINZGRLM RM ZM ZXXVHHRYOV ULINZG RM Z
IVZHLMZYOV ZNLFMG LU GRNV?  WVKVMWRMT LM DSVGSVI MVGDLIP LI XWILN RH GSV
NVWRFN FHVW, GSRH JFVHGRLM IZRHVH WRUUVIVMG RHHFVH LU HGLIZTV,
XLNKIVHHRLM, ZMW GIZMHNRHHRLM.

XLMXVIMRMT GSV WVHRTM LU KOZGULINH V.T., HLFMW, TIZB HXZOV, HRNKOV
XLOLI, VGX. ZMW GSV EZIRLFH XZKZYRORGRVH FHVIH NZB SZEV, YVHHVI
NZRMGZRMVW GSZG Z OZBVIVW ZKKILZXS DZH GSV DZB GL WVZO DRGS FHVIH
XZKZYRORGRVH.  Z IVHFOG DLFOW YV GSZG FHVIH DRGS OVHH KLDVIUFO
DLIPHGZGRLMH DLFOW HRNKOB SZEV OVHH UFMXGRLMZORGB.  SV FITVW NVNYVIH LU
GSV ZFWRVMXV GL ZWELXZGV HGZMWZIWH ZMW ZXXLNKZMBRMT HLUGDZIV GSZG SZMWOV
OZBVIVW UFMXGRLMZORGB ZXILHH Z DRWV EZIRVGB LU KOZGULINH.

YVHHVI ZOHL ZWWIVHHVW KILYOVNH RM KOZGULIN WVHRTM, MZNVOB, WVXRWRMT SLD
OZITV Z NZXSRMV GL WVHRTM ULI HRGFZGRLMH DSVM GSV OZITVHG MFNYVI LU FHVIH
SZEV GSV OLDVHG OVEVO LU GSV NZXSRMV, ZMW LMV WVHRIVH SRTSVI
UFMXGRLMZORGB.  YVHHVI GSVM KILXVVWVW GL GSV JFVHGRLM LU UROV HRAV ZMW
RGH RNKORXZGRLMH ULI MVGDLIPRMT.  SV WRHXFHHVW HGROO RNZTVH RM GSV NZRM.
ULI VCZNKOV, Z WRTRGZO XLOLI RNZTV GSZG UROOH GSV HXIVVM LU Z HGZMWZIW
NVTZKVO DLIPHGZGRLM HFM LI MVCG DROO IVJFRIV LMV NVTZYBGV LU HGLIZTV
ULI ZM VRTSGYRG RNZTV LI GSIVV NVTZYBGVH LU HGLIZTV ULI Z GIFV XLOLI LI
GDVMGBULFIYRG RNZTV.  OLHHOVHH XLNKIVHHRLM ZOTLIRGSNH GSZG RH,
XLNKFGZGRLMZO KILXVWFIVH RM DSRXS ML WZGZ RH OLHG RM GSV KILXVHH LU
XLNKIVHHRMT ZMW WVXLNKIVHHRMT ZM RNZTVGSV VCZXG YRGIVKIVHVMGZGRLM RH
NZRMGZRMVW NRTSG YIRMT HGLIZTV WLDM GL Z GSRIW LU Z NVTZYBGV KVI RNZTV,
YFG MLG NFXS UFIGSVI GSZM GSZG.  GSV JFVHGRLM LU HRAV NZPVH RG WRUURXFOG
GL URG ZM ZKKILKIRZGVOB HRAVW HVG LU GSVHV RNZTVH LM Z HRMTOV WRHP LI GL
GIZMHNRG GSVN JFRXPOB VMLFTS LM Z MVGDLIP.

DRGS GSVHV UFOO HXIVVM NVTZKVO RNZTVH GSZG XLMHGRGFGV Z GSRIW LU Z
NVTZYBGV, LMV TVGH 1,0003,000 UFOOHXIVVM RNZTVH LM Z LMVTRTZYBGV WRHP
Z HGZMWZIW XWILN IVKIVHVMGH ZKKILCRNZGVOB 60 KVIXVMG LU GSZG.  HGLIRMT
RNZTVH GSV HRAV LU Z KX HXIVVM QFHG 8 YRG XLOLI RMXIVZHVH HGLIZTV
XZKZXRGB GL 4,00012,000 RNZTVH KVI TRTZYBGV 60 KVIXVMG LU GSZG TREVH
LMV GSV HRAV LU Z XWILN, DSRXS RM GFIM XIVZGVH Z NZQLI KILYOVN.  LMV
XZMMLG SZEV UFOOHXIVVM, UFOOXLOLI RNZTVH DRGS OLHHOVHH XLNKIVHHRLM LMV
NFHG XLNKIVHH GSVN LI FHV Z OLDVI IVHLOFGRLM.  ULI NVTZYBGVHRAV RNZTVH,
ZMBGSRMT HOLDVI GSZM Z G1 HKVVW RH RNKIZXGRXZO.  ULI VCZNKOV, LM Z
URUGBHRCPROLYZFW ORMV, RG GZPVH GSIVV NRMFGVH GL GIZMHUVI Z
LMVNVTZYBGV UROV, RU RG RH MLG XLNKIVHHVW ZMW GSRH HKVVW ZHHFNVH RWVZO
XRIXFNHGZMXVH ML LGSVI FHVI XLMGVMWRMT ULI MVGDLIP YZMWDRWGS.  GSFH,
JFVHGRLMH LU WRHP ZXXVHH, IVNLGV WRHKOZB, ZMW XFIIVMG GVOVKSLMV
XLMMVXGRLM HKVVW NZPV GIZMHNRHHRLM LU NVTZYBGVHRAV RNZTVH RNKIZXGRXZO.

YVHHVI GSVM WRHXFHHVW DZBH GL WVZO DRGS GSVHV OZITV RNZTVH, ULI VCZNKOV,
XLNKIVHHRLM ZMW WVXLNKIVHHRLM ZG GSV FHVIH VMW.  RM GSRH XLMMVXGRLM, GSV
RHHFVH LU SLD NFXS LMV RH DROORMT GL OLHV RM GSV XLNKIVHHRLM KILXVHH ZMW
DSZG RNZTV JFZORGB LMV MVVWH RM GSV URIHG KOZXV ZIV FMPMLDM.  YFG DSZG RH
PMLDM RH GSZG XLNKIVHHRLM VMGZROH HLNV OLHH LU WZGZ.  YVHHVI FITVW GSZG
NLIV HGFWRVH YV XLMWFXGVW LM RNZTV JFZORGB RM WRUUVIVMG HRGFZGRLMH, ULI
VCZNKOV, DSZG PRMW LU RNZTVH ZIV MVVWVW ULI DSZG PRMW LU WRHXRKORMVH, ZMW
DSZG PRMW LU RNZTV JFZORGB RH MVVWVW ULI Z YILDHRMT GLLO, ZM RMGVINVWRZGV
ERVDRMT GLLO, ZMW ZIXSRERMT.

YVHHVI IVNZIPVW GDL KILNRHRMT GIVMWH ULI XLNKIVHHRLM:  UILN Z GVXSMRXZO
KVIHKVXGREV, ZOTLIRGSNH GSZG FHV DSZG RH XZOOVW HFYQVXGREV IVWFMWZMXB
VNKOLB KIRMXRKOVH UILN ERHFZO KHBXSLKSBHRXH GL RWVMGRUB ZMW IVNLEV
RMULINZGRLM UILN GSV RNZTV GSZG GSV SFNZM VBV XZMMLG KVIXVREV UILN ZM
RMGVIXSZMTV ZMW RMGVILKVIZYRORGB KVIHKVXGREV, GSV QKVT R.V., QLRMG
KSLGLTIZKSRX VCKVIGH TILFK, ZM RHL HGZMWZIW XLNKIVHHRLM ZOTLIRGSNH ZOHL
LUUVI KILNRHV.  GSVHV RHHFVH LU XLNKIVHHRLM ZMW WVXLNKIVHHRLM, YVHHVI
ZITFVW, IVHVNYOVW GSLHV IZRHVW VZIORVI XLMXVIMRMT GSV WVHRTM LU WRUUVIVMG
KOZGULINH.  TZFTRMT GSV XZKZYRORGRVH LU KLGVMGRZO FHVIH XLMHGRGFGVH Z
KIRNZIB TLZO.  YVHHVI ZWELXZGVW OZBVIRMT LI HVKZIZGRMT GSV RNZTVH UILN
GSV ZKKORXZGRLMH GSZG IVGIRVEV ZMW WRHKOZB GSVN, GL ZELRW GBRMT GSVN GL
KZIGRXFOZI HLUGDZIV.

YVHHVI WVGZROVW HVEVIZO OVHHLMH OVZIMVW UILN SRH DLIP ZG YVIPVOVB DRGS
RNZTVJFVIB, VHKVXRZOOB GSV ZWEZMGZTVH ZMW WRHZWEZMGZTVH LU FHRMT
CDRMWLDH.  RM GSV OZGGVI XZGVTLIB, ULI VCZNKOV, IVGIRVEZO RH GRVW
WRIVXGOB GL LMVH WZGZ, ZM RMGLOVIZYOV HRGFZGRLM RM GSV OLMT IFM LM Z
MVGDLIPVW HBHGVN.  URMZOOB, YVHHVI WVHXIRYVW Z KILQVXG LU QRN DZOOZXV ZG
GSV HNRGSHLMRZM RMHGRGFGRLM, DSL RH NLFMGRMT RNZTVH RM Z VCGIVNVOB
IFWRNVMGZIB DZB LM GSV XLNKFHVIE ZMW TVMRV MVGDLIPH ZMW RH KIVKZIRMT GL
NLFMG GSVN LM ZNVIRXZ LM ORMV.  ZOGSLFTS GSV ZEVIZTV FHVI GZPVH LEVI
GSRIGB NRMFGVH GL WLDMOLZW GSVHV RNZTVH ZHHFNRMT Z UZRIOB UZHG NLWVN,
MVEVIGSVOVHH, RNZTVH SZEV YVVM WLDMOLZWVW 25,000 GRNVH.

YVHHVI XLMXOFWVW SRH GZOP DRGS HVEVIZO XLNNVMGH LM GSV YFHRMVHH
ZIIZMTVNVMG YVGDVVM GSV HNRGSHLMRZM ZMW XLNKFHVIE.  SV XLMGVMWVW GSZG MLG
VMLFTS RH PMLDM XLMXVIMRMT GSV EZOFV LU RNZTVH.

                                 


WRHXFHHRLM  XIVZGRMT WRTRGRAVW KSLGLTIZKSRX XLOOVXGRLMH MVZIOB
RNKLHHRYOV VCXVKG DRGS OZITV LITZMRAZGRLMH ORPV NFHVFNH  MVVW ULI HGFWB
GL WVGVINRMV JFZORGB LU RNZTVH FHVIH DROO GLOVIZGV 


WFIRMT GSV YIRVU VCXSZMTV YVGDVVM OVHP ZMW YVHHVI GSZG ULOOLDVW, HVEVIZO
XOZIRURXZGRLMH VNVITVW.

OVHP ZITFVW GSZG GSV KSLGLTIZKSVIH DVIV UZI ZSVZW LU YVHHVI:  RG RH
ZONLHG RNKLHHRYOV GL XIVZGV HFXS WRTRGRAVW KSLGLTIZKSRX XLOOVXGRLMH
VCXVKG DRGS OZITV LITZMRAZGRLMH ORPV NFHVFNH, YVXZFHV ZOO GSV
KSLGLTIZKSRX ZTVMXRVH SZEV YVVM TLRMT XIZAB ZYLFG GSRH ZMW DROO MLG HRTM
ORXVMHRMT ZTIVVNVMGH LM ZMB HLIG LU IVZHLMZYOV GVINH.  OVHP SZW SVZIW
GSZG MZGRLMZO TVLTIZKSRX, ULI VCZNKOV, SZW GIRVW GL YFB GSV IRTSG GL FHV
HLNV RNZTV RM HLNV PRMW LU VWFXZGRLMZO KILWFXGRLM ULI 100 KVI RNZTV, YFG
GSV KSLGLTIZKSVIH DROO MLG GLFXS RG.  GSVB DZMG ZXXLFMGRMT ZMW KZBNVMG
ULI VZXS FHV, DSRXS XZMMLG YV ZXXLNKORHSVW DRGSRM GSV HBHGVN.  YVHHVI
IVHKLMWVW GSZG Z XLMHLIGRFN LU KSLGLTIZKSVIH, SVZWVW YB Z ULINVI MZGRLMZO
TVLTIZKSRX KSLGLTIZKSVI, SZW HGZIGVW ZHHVNYORMT RGH LDM XLOOVXGRLM LU
VOVXGILMRX IVKILWFXGRLMH LU RNZTVH, DRGS GSV NLMVB TLRMT YZXP GL GSV
XLLKVIZGREV.

OVHP XLMGVMWVW GSZG YVHHVI DZH FMMVXVHHZIROB KVHHRNRHGRX ZYLFG NFOGRNVWRZ
RNZTVH, YVXZFHV KVLKOV ZIV ZXXFHGLNVW GL OLDJFZORGB RNZTVH, KZIGRXFOZIOB
UILN ERWVL.  YVHHVI FITVW GSV OZFMXSRMT LU Z HGFWB GL WVGVINRMV DSZG
FHVIH DLFOW GLOVIZGV, DSZG GSVB DLFOW UVVO XLNULIGZYOV DRGS, ZMW DSZG
ZYHLOFGVOB RH GSV SRTSVHG JFZORGB GSVB DLFOW VEVI MVVW.  XLMXVWRMT GSZG
SV SZW ZWLKGVW Z WRIV GLMV RM LIWVI GL ZILFHV KVLKOV ZYLFG GSV RHHFV,
YVHHVI XOLHVW LM Z HZMTFRMV MLGV YB HZBRMT GSZG SV DLFOW MLG YV RM GSRH
YFHRMVHH RU SV WRW MLG GSRMP GSZG GSRMTH XLFOW YV ZXXLNKORHSVW.

                                 


OZIHVM  RHHFVH LU HXZOZYRORGB ZMW NLWFOZIRGB  TVLNVGIRX TILDGS LU GSV
RMGVIMVG ZMW GSV ILOV KOZBVW YB OZBVIRMT  YZHRX UFMXGRLMH HFHGZRMRMT
GSRH TILDGS  Z ORYIZIBH ILOVH ZMW UFMXGRLMH RM Z MVGDLIP VMERILMNVMG 
VUUVXGH LU RNKOVNVMGZGRLM LU GSV A39.50 KILGLXLO ULI RMULINZGRLM
IVGIRVEZO LM GSV ORYIZIB HBHGVN  GSV GIZWVLUU YVGDVVM ELOFNVH LU WZGZ
ZMW RGH KLGVMGRZO FHZTV  Z HMZKHSLG LU XFIIVMG GIVMWH 


ILMZOW OZIHVM, ZHHLXRZGV WRIVXGLI ULI RMULINZGRLM GVXSMLOLTB, FMREVIHRGB
LU NZIBOZMW ZG XLOOVTV KZIP, URIHG ZWWIVHHVW GSV RHHFVH LU HXZOZYRORGB
ZMW NLWFOZIRGB.  SV MLGVW GSV WRUURXFOGB LU ZMGRXRKZGRMT GSV VUUVXGH LU
LIWVIHLUNZTMRGFWV TILDGS, IVUOVXGRMT LM GSV GDVMGB BVZIH LU VCKVIRVMXV
DRGS GSV ZIKZMVG ZMW RMGVIMVG.  IVXZOORMT GSV WZBH WVNLMHGIZGRLMH LU
XWILN ZMW LKGRXZO WRHP NZGVIRZO, SV DVMG LM GL ZHP RU GSV URVOW SZH BVG
OVZIMVW SLD GL HXZOV MVD HBHGVNH GL VMZYOV WVOREVIB ZMW WRHHVNRMZGRLM
ZXILHH OZITVHXZOV MVGDLIPH.

OZIHVM ULXFHVW LM GSV TVLNVGIRX TILDGS LU GSV RMGVIMVG UILN RGH RMXVKGRLM
XRIXZ 1969 GL GSV KIVHVMG, ZMW GSV ZWQFHGNVMGH IVJFRIVW GL IVHKLMW GL
GSZG IZKRW TILDGS.  GL ROOFHGIZGV GSV RHHFV LU HXZOZYRORGB, OZIHVM
XLMHRWVIVW XLNKFGVI MVGDLIPH ZH RMXOFWRMT GSIVV TVMVIRX XLNKLMVMGH:
XLNKFGVIH, MVGDLIP XLNNFMRXZGRLM MLWVH, ZMW XLNNFMRXZGRLM NVWRZ.  VZXS
XLNKLMVMG HXZOVH V.T., XLNKFGVIH IZMTV UILN KXH GL HFKVIXLNKFGVIH
MVGDLIP MLWVH HXZOV UILN RMGVIUZXV XZIWH RM Z KX GSILFTS HLKSRHGRXZGVW
ILFGVIH ZMW TZGVDZBH ZMW XLNNFMRXZGRLM NVWRZ IZMTV UILN 2,400YZFW
WRZOFK UZXRORGRVH GSILFTS 4.5NYKH YZXPYLMV ORMPH, ZMW VEVMGFZOOB GL
NFOGRTRTZYRGKVIHVXLMW XLNNFMRXZGRLM ORMVH, ZMW ZIXSRGVXGFIZOOB, GSV
XLNKLMVMGH ZIV LITZMRAVW GL HXZOV SRVIZIXSRXZOOB UILN OLXZO ZIVZ MVGDLIPH
GL RMGVIMZGRLMZOHXZOV MVGDLIPH.  HFXS TILDGS RH NZWV KLHHRYOV YB
YFROWRMT OZBVIH LU XLNNFMRXZGRLM KILGLXLOH, ZH YVHHVI KLRMGVW LFG.
YB OZBVIRMT YLGS KSBHRXZOOB ZMW OLTRXZOOB, Z HVMHV LU HXZOZYRORGB RH
NZRMGZRMVW UILN OLXZO ZIVZ MVGDLIPH RM LUURXVH, ZXILHH XZNKFHVH, GSILFTS
YIRWTVH, ILFGVIH, XZNKFH YZXPYLMVH, URYVILKGRX ORMPH, VGX., FK RMGL
IVTRLMZO MVGDLIPH ZMW FOGRNZGVOB RMGL MZGRLMZO ZMW RMGVIMZGRLMZO
MVGDLIPH.

OZIHVM GSVM ROOFHGIZGVW GSV TVLNVGIRX TILDGS LEVI Z GDLBVZI KVIRLW
GSILFTS HVKGVNYVI 1991LU GSV MFNYVI LU MVGDLIPH GSZG XLNKIRHV GSV
RMGVIMVG.  GSRH TILDGS SZH YVVM HFHGZRMVW OZITVOB YB GSV ZEZROZYRORGB LU
GSIVV YZHRX UFMXGRLMH:  VOVXGILMRX NZRO, UROV GIZMHUVI UGK, ZMW IVNLGV
OLTLM GVOMVG.  OZIHVM ZOHL IVERVDVW GSV TILDGS RM GSV PRMW LU GIZUURX
GSZG LXXFIH LM GSV MVGDLIP.  MVGDLIP GIZUURX IVUOVXGH GSV QLRMG XLMGIRYFGRLMH
LU Z OZITVI KLKFOZGRLM LU FHVIH ZMW RMXIVZHRMT FHV KVI FHVI.  GLWZB LMV HVVH
HVIRLFH ZKKORXZGRLMH RMELOERMT NLERMT RNZTVH ZXILHH GSV MVGDLIPZ IZIRGB
GVM BVZIH ZTL.  OZIHVM IVXZOOVW ZMW XLMXFIIVW DRGS YVHHVIH NZRM KLRMG
GSZG GSV RMGVIVHGRMT KILYOVNH LXXFI ZG GSV ZKKORXZGRLM OVEVO.

OZIHVM GSVM ROOFHGIZGVW Z NLWVO LU Z ORYIZIBH ILOVH ZMW UFMXGRLMH RM Z
MVGDLIP VMERILMNVMG.  SV MLGVW, RM KZIGRXFOZI, GSV KOZXVNVMG LU LMORMV
XZGZOLTFVH LMGL GSV MVGDLIP ZMW KZGILMH LYGZRMRMT ZXXVHH GL GSV ORYIZIB
RMXIVZHRMTOB GSILFTS OLXZO MVGDLIPH, XZNKFH MVGDLIPH, ZMW GSV RMGVIMVG.
OZIHVM HFKKLIGVW OBMXSH VZIORVI HFTTVHGRLM GSZG DV MVVW GL ZWWIVHH
UFMWZNVMGZO JFVHGRLMH LU MVGDLIPVW RMULINZGRLM RM LIWVI GL YFROW
VMERILMNVMGH GSZG HXZOV RM GSV RMULINZGRLM HVMHV ZH DVOO ZH RM GSV
KSBHRXZO HVMHV.

OZIHVM HFKKLIGVW GSV ILOV LU GSV ORYIZIB HBHGVN ZH GSV ZXXVHH KLRMG RMGL
GSV MZGRLMH VOVXGILMRX XLOOVXGRLMH.  RNKOVNVMGZGRLM LU GSV A39.50
KILGLXLO ULI RMULINZGRLM IVGIRVEZO DLFOW NZPV HFXS ZXXVHH KIZXGRXZO ZMW
UVZHRYOV.  ULI VCZNKOV, GSRH DLFOW VMZYOV KZGILMH RM NZIBOZMW GL HVZIXS
XZORULIMRZ ORYIZIRVH, LI LGSVI ORYIZIRVH ZILFMW GSV DLIOW GSZG ZIV
XLMULINZMG DRGS A39.50 RM Z NZMMVI GSZG RH UZNRORZI GL FMREVIHRGB LU
NZIBOZMW KZGILMH.  GSRH XORVMGHVIEVI NLWVO ZOHL HFKKLIGH NLERMT YVBLMW
HVXLMWZIB XLMGVMG RMGL KIRNZIB XLMGVMG.  GSV MLGRLM LU SLD LMV ORMPH
UILN HVXLMWZIB XLMGVMG GL KIRNZIB XLMGVMG, OZIHVM HZRW, IVKIVHVMGH Z
UFMWZNVMGZO KILYOVN GSZG IVJFRIVH IRTLILFH GSLFTSG.  ZUGVI MLGRMT
MFNVILFH MVGDLIP VCKVIRNVMGH RM ZXXVHHRMT UFOOGVCG NZGVIRZOH, RMXOFWRMT
KILQVXGH HFKKLIGRMT GSV LIWVIRMT LU NZGVIRZOH ZXILHH GSV MVGDLIP, OZIHVM
IVERHRGVW GSV RHHFV LU GIZMHNRGGRMT SRTSWVMHRGB, SRTSIVHLOFGRLM XLOLI
RNZTVH ZXILHH GSV MVGDLIP ZMW GSV OZITV ZNLFMGH LU YZMWDRWGS GSVB
IVJFRIV.  SV DVMG LM GL ZWWIVHH GSV YZMWDRWGS ZMW HBMXSILMRAZGRLM
KILYOVNH RMSVIVMG RM HVMWRMT UFOONLGRLM ERWVL ZXILHH GSV MVGDLIP.

OZIHVM ROOFHGIZGVW GSV GIZWVLUU YVGDVVM ELOFNVH LU WZGZ RM YBGVH LI
LIWVIH LU NZTMRGFWV ZMW GSV KLGVMGRZO FHZTV LU GSZG WZGZ.  SV WRHXFHHVW
GIZMHNRHHRLM IZGVH KZIGRXFOZIOB, GSV GRNV RG GZPVH GL NLEV EZIRLFH ULINH
LU RMULINZGRLM, ZMW DSZG LMV XLFOW WL DRGS Z MVGDLIP HFKKLIGRMT
NFOGRTRTZYRGKVIHVXLMW GIZMHNRHHRLM.  ZG GSV NLNVMG, GSV MVGDLIP
VMERILMNVMG RMXOFWVH Z XLNKLHRGV LU WZGZGIZMHNRHHRLM IVJFRIVNVMGH,
ELOFNVH ZMW ULINH, TLRMT UILN HGVZWB GL YFIHGB SRTSELOFNV ZMW UILN
EVIB HOLD GL EVIB UZHG.  GSRH ZTTIVTZGV NFHG YV XLMHRWVIVW RM GSV WVHRTM,
XLMHGIFXGRLM, ZMW LKVIZGRLM LU NFOGRTRTZYBGV MVGDLIPH.

OZIHVMH LYQVXGREV RH GL FHV GSV MVGDLIPH ZMW ORYIZIB HBHGVNH MLD YVRMT
XLMHGIFXGVW GL RMXIVZHV ZXXVHH GL IVHLFIXVH DSVIVEVI GSVB VCRHG, ZMW
GSFH, GL VELOEV GLDZIW ZM LMORMV VOVXGILMRX ERIGFZO ORYIZIB.

OZIHVM XLMXOFWVW YB LUUVIRMT Z HMZKHSLG LU XFIIVMG GIVMWH:  XLMGRMFRMT
TVLNVGIRX TILDGS RM MVGDLIP XZKZXRGB ZMW MFNYVI LU FHVIH HOLDVI
WVEVOLKNVMG LU ZKKORXZGRLMH ZMW TOZXRZO WVEVOLKNVMG ZMW ZWLKGRLM LU
HGZMWZIWH.  GSV XSZOOVMTV RH GL WVHRTM ZMW WVEVOLK VZXS MVD ZKKORXZGRLM
HBHGVN DRGS MVGDLIP ZXXVHH ZMW HXZOZYRORGB RM NRMW.

                                 


YILDMIRTT  ZXXVHH GL GSV RMGVIMVG XZMMLG YV GZPVM ULI TIZMGVW  KZXPVG
IZWRL ZMW GSV WVEVOLKNVMG LU NVOEBO RM 198081 RM GSV WRERHRLM LU ORYIZIB
ZFGLNZGRLM ZG GSV FMREVIHRGB LU XZORULIMRZ    WVHRTM XIRGVIRZ ULI KZXPVG
IZWRL  Z WVNLMHGIZGRLM KILQVXG RM HZM WRVTL ZMW UFGFIV KOZMH  HKIVZW
HKVXGIFN  UIVJFVMXRVH ZG DSRXS GSV IZWRLH DROO IFM ZMW KOZMH GL
IVRNKOVNVMG GSV DZRH HVIEVI HLUGDZIV RM GSV KFYORX WLNZRM  MVVW ULI ZM
RMUIZHGIFXGFIV LU IZWRLH GSZG WL MLG NLEV ZILFMW 


VWDRM YILDMIRTT, VCVXFGREV WRIVXGLI, NVNVC IVHVZIXS RMHGRGFGV, URIHG
KLOOVW GSV ZFWRVMXV RM LIWVI GL HVVP LFG IVTFOZI FHVIH LU GSV RMGVIMVG ZH
DVOO ZH GSLHV KOZMMRMT GL FHV RG HLNV GRNV RM GSV UFGFIV.  DRGS MVZIOB
VEVIBYLWB RM GSV ILLN UZOORMT RMGL LMV XZGVTLIB LI GSV LGSVI, YILDMIRTT
NZWV Z KLRMG IV ZXXVHH, MZNVOB GSZG MFNVILFH RMWRERWFZOH, VHKVXRZOOB GSLHV
DSL FHV GSV RMGVIMVG VEVIB WZB, GZPV ULI TIZMGVW GSVRI ZXXVHH GL RG, GSV
HKVVWH DRGS DSRXS GSVB ZIV XLMMVXGVW, ZMW SLD DVOO RG ZOO DLIPH.
SLDVEVI, ZH YILDMIRTT WRHXLEVIVW YVGDVVM 1987 ZMW 1989 RM ZFHGIZORZ,
RU LMV DZMGH ZXXVHH GL GSV RMGVIMVG YFG XZMMLG ZUULIW RG LI SZH HLNV
KSBHRXZO YLFMWZIB GSZG KIVEVMGH SVI LI SRN UILN TZRMRMT ZXXVHH, RG XZM
YV VCGIVNVOB UIFHGIZGRMT.  SV HFTTVHGVW GSZG YVXZFHV LU VXLMLNRXH ZMW
KSBHRXZO YZIIRVIH DV DVIV YVTRMMRMT GL XIVZGV Z DLIOW LU SZEVH ZMW SZEVMLGH
RM GSV KILXVHH LU HXSLOZIOB XLNNFMRXZGRLM, VEVM RM GSV FMRGVW HGZGVH.

YILDMIRTT WVGZROVW GSV WVEVOLKNVMG LU NVOEBO RM ZXZWVNRX BVZI 198081 RM
GSV WRERHRLM LU ORYIZIB ZFGLNZGRLM ZG GSV FMREVIHRGB LU XZORULIMRZ, RM
LIWVI GL FMWVIHXLIV GSV RHHFV LU ZXXVHH GL GSV HBHGVN, DSRXS ZG GSV
LFGHVG DZH VCGIVNVOB ORNRGVW.  RM HSLIG, GSV KILQVXG MVVWVW GL YFROW Z
MVGDLIP, DSRXS ZG GSZG GRNV VMGZROVW FHV LU HZGVOORGV GVXSMLOLTB, GSZG RH,
KFGGRMT VZIGS HGZGRLMH LM XZNKFH ZMW ZOHL ZXJFRIRMT HLNV GVIIVHGIRZO ORMPH
UILN GSV HGZGV LU XZORULIMRZH NRXILDZEV HBHGVN.  GSV RMHGZOOZGRLM LU
HZGVOORGV ORMPH, SLDVEVI, WRW MLG HLOEV GSV KILYOVN DSRXS ZXGFZOOB
ULINVW KZIG LU Z OZITVI KILYOVN RMELOERMT KLORGRXH ZMW URMZMXRZO IVHLFIXVH.
ULI DSROV GSV KILQVXG GVZN XLFOW TVG Z HRTMZO LMGL Z XZNKFH, RG SZW ML NVZMH
LU WRHGIRYFGRMT GSV HRTMZO GSILFTSLFG GSV XZNKFH.  GSV HLOFGRLM RMELOEVW
ZWLKGRMT Z IVXVMG WVEVOLKNVMG RM DRIVOVHH XLNNFMRXZGRLM XZOOVW KZXPVG IZWRL,
DSRXS XLNYRMVW GSV YZHRX MLGRLM LU KZXPVGHDRGXSRMT DRGS IZWRL.  GSV KILQVXG
FHVW GSRH GVXSMLOLTB GL TVG GSV HRTMZO UILN Z KLRMG LM XZNKFH DSVIV RG
XZNV WLDM, ZM VZIGS HGZGRLM ULI VCZNKOV, RMGL GSV ORYIZIRVH, YVXZFHV RG
ULFMW GSZG DRIRMT GSV ORYIZIRVH, VHKVXRZOOB GSV LOWVI NZIYOV YFROWRMTH,
DLFOW XLHG 2,0005,000 KVI GVINRMZO.

YILDMIRTT MLGVW GSZG, GVM BVZIH ZTL, GSV KILQVXG SZW MVRGSVI GSV KFYORX
KLORXB MLI GSV GVXSMLOLTB GSZG DLFOW SZEV ZOOLDVW RG GL FHV KZXPVG IZWRL
RM ZMB NVZMRMTUFO DZB.  HRMXV GSVM NFXS SZW XSZMTVW.  SV KILXVVWVW GL
WVGZRO IVHVZIXS ZMW WVEVOLKNVMG LU GSV GVXSMLOLTB, SLD RG RH YVRMT
WVKOLBVW RM XZORULIMRZ, ZMW DSZG WRIVXGRLM SV GSLFTSG RG DLFOW GZPV.
GSV WVHRTM XIRGVIRZ ZIV GL KILWFXV Z SRTSHKVVW, LMVGRNV, OLDXLHG,
SRTSJFZORGB, HVXFIV, ORXVMHVUIVV WVERXV KZXPVG IZWRL GSZG LMV XZM
KOFT RM ZMW KOZB GLWZB, ULITVG ZYLFG RG, ZMW SZEV ZXXVHH GL GSV RMGVIMVG.
YB SRTS HKVVW, YILDMIRTT NVZMG 1 NVTZYBGV ZMW 1.5 NVTZYBGVH.  GSLHV FMRGH
SZEV YVVM YFROG, SV XLMGRMFVW, ZMW ZIV RM GSV KILXVHH LU YVRMT
GBKVXVIGRURVW YB ZM RMWVKVMWVMG FMWVIDIRGRMT OZYLIZGLIB HL GSZG GSVB XZM
YV GBKVORXVMHVW YB GSV UVWVIZO XLNNFMRXZGRLMH XLNNRHHRLM.  ZH RH GSV
XZHV DRGS XRGRAVMH YZMW, LMV DROO YV ZYOV GL KFIXSZHV Z FMRG ZMW MLG SZEV
GL DLIIB ZYLFG ZKKOBRMT ULI Z ORXVMHV.

GSV YZHRX RWVZ, YILDMIRTT VOZYLIZGVW, RH GL GZPV SRTSHKVVW IZWRL WZGZ
GIZMHNRHHRLM ZMW XIVZGV Z YZXPYLMV MVGDLIP GSZG ZG XVIGZRM HGIZGVTRX
KLRMGH RM GSV MVGDLIP DROO "TZGVDZB" RMGL Z NVWRFNHKVVW KZXPVG IZWRL
R.V., LMV GSZG IFMH ZG 38.4 PROLYBGVH, HL GSZG KVISZKH YB 19941995
KVLKOV, ORPV GSLHV RM GSV ZFWRVMXV ULI GSV KIRXV LU Z EXI XLFOW KFIXSZHV
Z NVWRFNHKVVW IZWRL ULI GSV LUURXV LI SLNV, SZEV UFOO MVGDLIP XLMMVXGRERGB
GL GSV RMGVIMVG, ZMW KZIGZPV LU ZOO RGH HVIERXVH, DRGS ML MVVW ULI ZM UXX
ORXVMHV ZMW ML IVTFOZI YROO UILN GSV OLXZO XLNNLM XZIIRVI.  YILDMIRTT
KIVHVMGVW HVEVIZO WVGZROH LU Z WVNLMHGIZGRLM KILQVXG XFIIVMGOB GZPRMT
KOZXV RM HZM WRVTL ZMW WVHXIRYVW KOZMH, KVMWRMT UFMWRMT, GL RMHGZOO Z
UFOOYLIV MVGDLIP RM GSV HZM UIZMXRHXL ZIVZ.  GSRH MVGDLIP DROO SZEV 600
MLWVH IFMMRMT ZG YZXPYLMV HKVVWH, ZMW 100 LU GSVHV MLWVH DROO YV ORYIZIRVH,
DSRXS RM GFIM DROO YV GSV TZGVDZB KLIGH GL GSV 38.4 PROLYBGV IZWRLH GSZG
DROO TREV XLEVIZTV ULI GSV MVRTSYLISLLWH HFIILFMWRMT GSV ORYIZIRVH.

YILDMIRTT MVCG VCKOZRMVW KZIG 15.247, Z MVD IFOV DRGSRM GRGOV 47 LU GSV
XLWV LU UVWVIZO IVTFOZGRLMH VMZXGVW YB GSV UXX RM 1985.  GSRH IFOV
XSZOOVMTVW GSV RMWFHGIB, DSRXS SZH LMOB MLD IRHVM GL GSV LXXZHRLM, GL
YFROW Z IZWRL GSZG DLFOW IFM ZG ML NLIV GSZM LMV DZGG LU LFGKFG KLDVI ZMW
FHV Z UZRIOB VCLGRX NVGSLW LU NLWFOZGRMT GSV IZWRL DZEV XZOOVW HKIVZW
HKVXGIFN.  HKIVZW HKVXGIFN RM UZXG KVINRGH GSV YFROWRMT LU MVGDLIPH HL
GSZG MFNVILFH WZGZ XLNNFMRXZGRLMH XZM LXXFI HRNFOGZMVLFHOB, DRGSLFG
RMGVIUVIRMT DRGS VZXS LGSVI, DRGSRM GSV HZNV DRWV IZWRL XSZMMVO.

YILDMIRTT VCKOZRMVW GSZG GSV UIVJFVMXRVH ZG DSRXS GSV IZWRLH DLFOW IFM
ZIV EVIB HSLIG DZEV HRTMZOH.  GSVB ZIV DVOO ZYLEV HGZMWZIW NRXILDZEV ZMW
IZWZI.  DRGS Z IZWRL DZEV GSZG HNZOO, LMV DZGG YVXLNVH Z GIVNVMWLFH KFMXS
KVI YRG ZMW GSFH NZPVH GIZMHNRHHRLM ZG IVZHLMZYOV HKVVW KLHHRYOV.  RM
LIWVI GL NRMRNRAV GSV KLGVMGRZO ULI XLMTVHGRLM, GSV KILQVXG RH
FMWVIGZPRMT GL IVRNKOVNVMG HLUGDZIV DSRXS SZH YVVM ZEZROZYOV RM GSV
MVGDLIPRMT YFHRMVHH ZMW RH GZPVM ULI TIZMGVW MLD, ULI VCZNKOV, GXKRK,
ILFGRMT ZOTLIRGSNH, YIRWTVH, ZMW TZGVDZBH.  RM ZWWRGRLM, GSV KILQVXG
KOZMH GL GZPV GSV DZRH HVIEVI HLUGDZIV RM GSV KFYORX WLNZRM ZMW
IVRNKOVNVMG RG HL GSZG LMV XZM SZEV Z DZRH HVIEVI LM Z NZX RMHGVZW LU Z
FMRC NZXSRMV.  GSV NVNVC IVHVZIXS RMHGRGFGV YVORVEVH GSZG ORYIZIRVH, RM
KZIGRXFOZI, DROO DZMG GL FHV GSV DZRH HVIEVIH DRGS KZXPVG IZWRL.  GSRH
KILQVXG, DSRXS SZH Z GVZN LU ZYLFG GDVOEV KVLKOV, DROO IFM GSILFTS 1993
ZMW DROO RMXOFWV GSV 100 ORYIZIRVH ZOIVZWB NVMGRLMVW ZH DVOO ZH LGSVI
KILUVHHRLMZOH HFXS ZH GSLHV RM GSV NVWRXZO KILUVHHRLM, VMTRMVVIRMT, ZMW
OZD.  GSFH, GSV MVVW RH GL XIVZGV ZM RMUIZHGIFXGFIV LU IZWRLH GSZG WL MLG
NLEV ZILFMW, DSRXS, YILDMIRTT SLKVH, DROO HLOEV Z KILYOVN MLG LMOB ULI
ORYIZIRVH YFG ULI RMWRERWFZOH DSL, YB ZMW OZITV GLWZB, WL MLG SZEV ZXXVHH
GL GSV RMGVIMVG UILN GSVRI SLNVH ZMW LUURXVH.

                                 


WRHXFHHRLM  KILQVXG LKVIZGRMT UIVJFVMXRVH 


WFIRMT Z YIRVU WRHXFHHRLM KVIRLW, DSRXS ZOHL XLMXOFWVW GSV WZBH
KILXVVWRMTH, YILDMIRTT HGZGVW GSZG GSV KILQVXG DZH LKVIZGRMT RM ULFI
UIVJFVMXRVH.  GSV HOLD HKVVW RH LKVIZGRMT ZG 435 NVTZSVIGA, ZMW RG DLFOW
OZGVI TL FK GL 920 NVTZSVIGA.  DRGS GSV SRTSHKVVW UIVJFVMXB, GSV
LMVNVTZYBGV IZWRLH DROO IFM ZG 2.4 TRTZYRGH, ZMW 1.5 DROO IFM ZG 5.7.
ZG 5.7, IZRM XZM YV Z UZXGLI, YFG RG DLFOW SZEV GL YV GILKRXZO IZRM,
FMORPV DSZG UZOOH RM NLHG KZIGH LU GSV FMRGVW HGZGVH.

                                 

HVHHRLM RE.  RNZTV XZKGFIV, GVCG XZKGFIV, LEVIERVD LU GVCG ZMW
             RNZTV HGLIZTV ULINZGH

DROORZN SLLGLM, ERXV KIVHRWVMG LU LKVIZGRLMH, RMVG, NLWVIZGVW GSRH HVHHRLM.


PVMMVB  UZXGLIH RMUOFVMXRMT WVEVOLKNVMG LU XCK  ZWEZMGZTVH LU FHRMT
WRTRGZO GVXSMLOLTB EVIHFH KSLGLXLKB ZMW NRXILURON  Z KIRNZIB TLZO LU
XCK KFYORHSRMT XSZOOVMTVH  XSZIZXGVIRHGRXH LU XLKRVH KIRMGVW  JFZORGB
LU HZNKOVH ZXSRVEVW RM RNZTV XZKGFIV  HVEVIZO UZXGLIH GL YV XLMHRWVIVW
RM XSLLHRMT HXZMMRMT  VNKSZHRH LU XCK LM GRNVOB ZMW XLHGVUUVXGREV
KILWFXGRLM LU YOZXPZMWDSRGV KIRMGVW UZXHRNROVH  IVHFOGH LU KILWFXRMT
NRXILURON UILN WRTRGZO UROVH  ZWEZMGZTVH LU XIVZGRMT NRXILURON  WVGZROH
XLMXVIMRMT KILWFXGRLM  XLHGH  ILOV LU WRTRGZO GVXSMLOLTB RM ORYIZIB
KIVHVIEZGRLM 


ZMMV PVMMVB, ZHHLXRZGV WRIVXGLI, WVKZIGNVMG LU KIVHVIEZGRLM ZMW
XLMHVIEZGRLM, XLIMVOO FMREVIHRGB, LKVMVW SVI GZOP YB LYHVIERMT GSZG GSV
XLIMVOO CVILC KILQVXG XCK SZH YVVM TFRWVW YB GSV ZHHFNKGRLM GSZG GSV
ZYRORGB GL KILWFXV KIRMGVW UZXHRNROVH LI GL IVKOZXV KZKVI DRGS KZKVI
DLFOW YV RNKLIGZMG, ZG OVZHG ULI GSV KIVHVMG TVMVIZGRLM LU FHVIH ZMW
VJFRKNVMG.  HSV WVHXIRYVW GSIVV UZXGLIH GSZG RMUOFVMXVW WVEVOLKNVMG LU
GSV KILQVXG:  1 YVXZFHV GSV KILQVXG SZH VNKSZHRAVW GSV KIVHVIEZGRLM LU
WVGVIRLIZGRMT YIRGGOV YLLPH, GSV JFZORGB LU DSZG DZH KILWFXVW SZW GL YV
HFUURXRVMGOB SRTS GL IVGFIM Z KZKVI IVKOZXVNVMG GL GSV HSVOU.  XCK DZH
LMOB RMGVIVHGVW RM FHRMT:  2 Z HBHGVN GSZG DZH XLHGVUUVXGREV, DSRXS
NVZMG GSZG RG SZW GL YV XLHGXLNKVGRGREV DRGS GSV KILXVHHVH XFIIVMGOB
ZEZROZYOV, KIRMXRKZOOB KSLGLXLKB ZMW NRXILURON, ZMW 3 MVD LI XFIIVMGOB
ZEZROZYOV KILWFXG SZIWDZIV ZMW HLUGDZIV.

PVMMVB WVHXIRYVW GSV ZWEZMGZTVH GSZG FHRMT WRTRGZO GVXSMLOLTB LUUVIH LEVI
YLGS KSLGLXLKB ZMW NRXILURON:  1 GSV KLGVMGRZO VCRHGH GL XIVZGV Z SRTSVI
JFZORGB IVKILWFXGRLM LU Z WVGVIRLIZGRMT LIRTRMZO GSZM XLMEVMGRLMZO
ORTSGOVMH GVXSMLOLTB.  2 YVXZFHV Z WRTRGZO RNZTV RH ZM VMXLWVW
IVKIVHVMGZGRLM, RG XZM YV IVKILWFXVW ZTZRM ZMW ZTZRM DRGS ML IVHFOGRMT
OLHH LU JFZORGB, ZH LKKLHVW GL GSV HRGFZGRLM DRGS ORTSGOVMH KILXVHHVH,
RM DSRXS GSVIV RH WRHXVIMRYOV WRUUVIVMXV YVGDVVM Z HVXLMW ZMW Z
HFYHVJFVMG TVMVIZGRLM LU ZM RNZTV.  3 Z WRTRGZO RNZTV XZM YV NZMRKFOZGVW
RM Z MFNYVI LU DZBH GL RNKILEV RNZTV XZKGFIV ULI VCZNKOV, CVILC SZH
WVEVOLKVW Z DRMWLDRMT ZKKORXZGRLM GSZG VMZYOVH LMV GL XZKGFIV Z KZTV
XLMGZRMRMT YLGS GVCG ZMW ROOFHGIZGRLMH RM Z NZMMVI GSZG LKGRNRAVH GSV
IVKILWFXGRLM LU YLGS.  DRGS ORTSGOVMH GVXSMLOLTB, LMV NFHG XSLLHV DSRXS
GL LKGRNRAV, GVCG LI GSV ROOFHGIZGRLM RM KIVHVIEZGRLM NRXILURONRMT, GSV
XFIIVMG KIZXGRXV RH GL HSLLG ZM ROOFHGIZGVW KZTV GDRXV, LMXV GL SRTSORTSG
GSV GVCG ZMW GSV HVXLMW GRNV GL KILERWV GSV YVHG XZKGFIV ULI GSV
ROOFHGIZGRLM.  4 Z WRTRGZO RNZTV XZM ZOHL YV VWRGVW, WVMHRGB OVEVOH
ZWQFHGVW GL IVNLEV FMWVIORMRMT ZMW HGZRMH, ZMW GL RMXIVZHV OVTRYRORGB ULI
UZRMG WLXFNVMGH.  5 LMHXIVVM RMHKVXGRLM XZM GZPV KOZXV ZG GSV GRNV LU
RMRGRZO HVGFK ZMW ZWQFHGNVMGH NZWV KIRLI GL HXZMMRMT, UZXGLIH GSZG
HFYHGZMGRZOOB IVWFXV GSV MFNYVI LU IVGZPVH IVJFRIVW RM JFZORGB XLMGILO.

Z KIRNZIB TLZO LU XCK SZH YVVM GL VEZOFZGV GSV KZKVI LFGKFG KIRMGVW LM
GSV CVILC WLXFGVXS, Z SRTSHKVVW KIRMGVI GSZG KILWFXVH 600WKR KZTVH UILN
HXZMMVW RNZTVH ZG Z IZGV LU 135 KZTVH Z NRMFGV.  PVMMVB IVXLFMGVW HVEVIZO
KFYORHSRMT XSZOOVMTVH GL IVKIVHVMG UZRGSUFO ZMW OVTRYOV IVKILWFXGRLMH LU
GSV LIRTRMZOH GSZG GSV 600WKR XLKB ULI GSV NLHG KZIG HFXXVHHUFOOB
XZKGFIVW.  ULI VCZNKOV, NZMB LU GSV WVGVIRLIZGRMT ELOFNVH RM GSV KILQVXG
DVIV SVZEROB ROOFHGIZGVW DRGS URMV ORMV WIZDRMTH LI SZOUGLMVH LI XZNV RM
OZMTFZTVH HFXS ZH QZKZMVHV, RM DSRXS GSV YFROWFK LU XSZIZXGVIH XLNKIRHVW
LU EZIBRMT HGILPVH RH WRUURXFOG GL IVKILWFXV ZG OLDVI IVHLOFGRLMH Z
HFIKIRHRMT MFNYVI LU GSVN XZNV DRGS ZMMLGZGRLMH ZMW NZGSVNZGRXZO
ULINFOZH, DSRXS RG DZH XIRGRXZO GL YV ZYOV GL WFKORXZGV VCZXGOB.

PVMMVB MLGVW GSZG 1 GSV XLKRVH ZIV YVRMT KIRMGVW LM KZKVI GSZG NVVGH GSV
ZMHR HGZMWZIWH ULI KVIULINZMXV, 2 GSV WLXFGVXS KIRMGVI NVVGH GSV NZXSRMV
ZMW GLMVI IVJFRIVNVMGH ULI KILKVI ZWSVHRLM LU KIRMG GL KZTV, ZH WVHXIRYVW
YB GSV MZGRLMZO ZIXSREVH, ZMW GSFH 3 KZKVI KILWFXG RH XLMHRWVIVW GL YV
GSV ZIXSREZO VJFREZOVMG LU KIVHVIEZGRLM KSLGLXLKB.

PVMMVB GSVM WRHXFHHVW HVEVIZO HZNKOVH LU GSV JFZORGB ZXSRVEVW RM GSV
KILQVXG GSZG SZW YVVM WRHGIRYFGVW RM Z SZMWLFG, ULI VCZNKOV, Z XLKB LU Z
KIRMGLMWVNZMW EVIHRLM LU GSV 1911 IVVW OVXGFIV LM GSV HGVZN GFIYRMV,
DSRXS XLMGZRMH SZOUGLMVH, ORMV WIZDRMTH, ZMW ROOFHGIZGRLMH VNYVWWVW RM
GVCG GSV URIHG ULFI OLLHV KZTVH RM GSV ELOFNV XLNKZIVW GSV XZKGFIV
XZKZYRORGRVH LU HXZMMRMT GL KSLGLXLKB ULI Z HGZMWZIW GVHG GZITVG, GSV
RVVV HGZMWZIW 167Z 1987 GVHG XSZIG.  RM ZOO RMHGZMXVH HXZMMRMT KILEVW
HFKVIRLI GL KSLGLXLKB, GSLFTS LMOB HORTSGOB NLIV HL RM LMV.

XLMXVWRMT GSV HRNKORHGRX MZGFIV LU SVI IVERVD LU GSV JFZORGB LU HXZMMRMT
GL KSLGLXLKB, PVMMVB WVHXIRYVW RG ZH LMV IVKIVHVMGZGRLM LU GSV PRMWH LU
HVGGRMTH GSZG XLFOW YV FHVW DRGS HXZMMRMT XZKZYRORGRVH LM GSV VJFRKNVMG
XCK FHVH.  PVMMVB ZOHL KLRMGVW LFG GSZG XCK RMEVHGRTZGVW GSV JFZORGB
ZXSRVEVW DRGS YRMZIB HXZMMRMT LMOB, ZMW MLGVW GSV TIVZG KILNRHV RM TIZB
HXZOV ZMW XLOLI HXZMMRMT, DSLHV ZWEZMGZTVH ZMW WRHZWEZMGZTVH MVVW GL YV
VCZNRMVW.  HSV ZITFVW UFIGSVI GSZG HXZMMRMT IVHLOFGRLMH ZMW UROV ULINZGH
XZM IVKIVHVMG Z XLNKOVC GIZWVLUU YVGDVVM GSV GRNV RG GZPVH GL XZKGFIV
NZGVIRZO, UROV HRAV, URWVORGB GL GSV LIRTRMZO, ZMW LMHXIVVM WRHKOZB ZMW
KIRMGRMT ZMW VJFRKNVMG ZEZROZYRORGB.  ZOO GSVHV UZXGLIH NFHG YV GZPVM
RMGL XLMHRWVIZGRLM.

XCK KOZXVW KIRNZIB VNKSZHRH LM GSV KILWFXGRLM RM Z GRNVOB ZMW
XLHGVUUVXGREV NZMMVI LU KIRMGVW UZXHRNROVH GSZG XLMHRHGVW OZITVOB LU
YOZXPZMWDSRGV GVCG.  DRGS YRMZIB HXZMMRMT, OZITV UROVH NZB YV
XLNKIVHHVW VUURXRVMGOB ZMW RM Z OLHHOVHH NZMMVI R.V., ML WZGZ RH OLHG RM
GSV KILXVHH LU XLNKIVHHRMT ZMW WVXLNKIVHHRMT ZM RNZTVGSV VCZXG
YRGIVKIVHVMGZGRLM RH NZRMGZRMVW FHRMT TILFK 4 XXRGG R.V., GSV UIVMXS
ZXILMBN ULI RMGVIMZGRLMZO XLMHFOGZGREV XLNNRGGVV ULI GVOVTIZKS ZMW
