Their painful steps oer the burnt soil. And now
Advanced in view they standa horrid front
Of dreadful length and dazzling arms, in guise
Of warriors old, with ordered spear and shield,
Awaiting what command their mighty Chief
Had to impose. He through the armed files
Darts his experienced eye, and soon traverse
The whole battalion viewstheir order due,
Their visages and stature as of gods
Their number last he sums. And now his heart
Distends with pride, and, hardening in his strength,
Glories: for never, since created Man,
Met such embodied force as, named with these,
Could merit more than that small infantry
Warred on by cranesthough all the giant brood
Of Phlegra with th heroic race were joined
That fought at Thebes and Ilium, on each side
Mixed with auxiliar gods and what resounds
In fable or romance of Uthers son,
Begirt with British and Armoric knights
And all who since, baptized or infidel,
Jousted in Aspramont, or Montalban,
Damasco, or Marocco, or Trebisond,
Or whom Biserta sent from Afric shore
When Charlemain with all his peerage fell
By Fontarabbia. Thus far these beyond
Compare of mortal prowess, yet observed
Their dread Commander. He, above the rest
In shape and gesture proudly eminent,
Stood like a tower. His form had yet not lost
All her original brightness, nor appeared
Less than Archangel ruined, and th excess
Of glory obscured: as when the sun newrisen
Looks through the horizontal misty air
Shorn of his beams, or, from behind the moon,
In dim eclipse, disastrous twilight sheds
On half the nations, and with fear of change
Perplexes monarchs. Darkened so, yet shone
Above them all th Archangel: but his face
Deep scars of thunder had intrenched, and care
Sat on his faded cheek, but under brows
Of dauntless courage, and considerate pride
Waiting revenge. Cruel his eye, but cast
Signs of remorse and passion, to behold
The fellows of his crime, the followers rather
Far other once beheld in bliss, condemned
For ever now to have their lot in pain
Millions of Spirits for his fault amerced
Of Heaven, and from eteranl splendours flung
For his revoltyet faithful how they stood,
Their glory withered as, when heavens fire
Hath scathed the forest oaks or mountain pines,
With singed top their stately growth, though bare,
Stands on the blasted heath. He now prepared
To speak whereat their doubled ranks they bend
From wing to wing, and half enclose him round
With all his peers: attention held them mute.
Thrice he assayed, and thrice, in spite of scorn,
Tears, such as Angels weep, burst forth: at last
Words interwove with sighs found out their way:
  "O myriads of immortal Spirits! O Powers
Matchless, but with th Almighth!and that strife
Was not inglorious, though th event was dire,
As this place testifies, and this dire change,
Hateful to utter. But what power of mind,
Forseeing or presaging, from the depth
Of knowledge past or present, could have feared
How such united force of gods, how such
As stood like these, could ever know repulse?
For who can yet believe, though after loss,
That all these puissant legions, whose exile
Hath emptied Heaven, shall fail to reascend,
Selfraised, and repossess their native seat?
For me, be witness all the host of Heaven,
If counsels different, or danger shunned
By me, have lost our hopes. But he who reigns
Monarch in Heaven till then as one secure
Sat on his throne, upheld by old repute,
Consent or custom, and his regal state
Put forth at full, but still his strength concealed
Which tempted our attempt, and wrought our fall.
Henceforth his might we know, and know our own,
So as not either to provoke, or dread
New war provoked: our better part remains
To work in close design, by fraud or guile,
What force effected not that he no less
At length from us may find, who overcomes
By force hath overcome but half his foe.
Space may produce new Worlds whereof so rife
There went a fame in Heaven that he ere long
Intended to create, and therein plant
A generation whom his choice regard
Should favour equal to the Sons of Heaven.
Thither, if but to pry, shall be perhaps
Our first eruptionthither, or elsewhere
For this infernal pit shall never hold
Celestial Spirits in bondage, nor th Abyss
Long under darkness cover. But these thoughts
Full counsel must mature. Peace is despaired
For who can think submission? War, then, war
Open or understood, must be resolved."
  He spake and, to confirm his words, outflew
Millions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs
Of mighty Cherubim the sudden blaze
Far round illumined Hell. Highly they raged
Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped arms
Clashed on their sounding shields the din of war,
Hurling defiance toward the vault of Heaven.
  There stood a hill not far, whose grisly top
Belched fire and rolling smoke the rest entire
Shone with a glossy scurfundoubted sign
That in his womb was hid metallic ore,
The work of sulphur. Thither, winged with speed,
A numerous brigade hastened: as when bands
Of pioneers, with spade and pickaxe armed,
Forerun the royal camp, to trench a field,
Or cast a rampart. Mammon led them on
Mammon, the least erected Spirit that fell
From Heaven for even in Heaven his looks and thoughts
Were always downward bent, admiring more
The riches of heavens pavement, trodden gold,
Than aught divine or holy else enjoyed
In vision beatific. By him first
Men also, and by his suggestion taught,
Ransacked the centre, and with impious hands
Rifled the bowels of their mother Earth
For treasures better hid. Soon had his crew
Opened into the hill a spacious wound,
And digged out ribs of gold. Let none admire
That riches grow in Hell that soil may best
Deserve the precious bane. And here let those
Who boast in mortal things, and wondering tell
Of Babel, and the works of Memphian kings,
Learn how their greatest monuments of fame
And strength, and art, are easily outdone
By Spirits reprobate, and in an hour
What in an age they, with incessant toil
And hands innumerable, scarce perform.
Nigh on the plain, in many cells prepared,
That underneath had veins of liquid fire
Sluiced from the lake, a second multitude
With wondrous art founded the massy ore,
Severing each kind, and scummed the bulliondross.
A third as soon had formed within the ground
A various mould, and from the boiling cells
By strange conveyance filled each hollow nook
As in an organ, from one blast of wind,
To many a row of pipes the soundboard breathes.
Anon out of the earth a fabric huge
Rose like an exhalation, with the sound
Of dulcet symphonies and voices sweet
Built like a temple, where pilasters round
Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid
With golden architrave nor did there want
Cornice or frieze, with bossy sculptures graven
The roof was fretted gold. Not Babylon
Nor great Alcairo such magnificence
Equalled in all their glories, to enshrine
Belus or Serapis their gods, or seat
Their kings, when Egypt with Assyria strove
In wealth and luxury. Th ascending pile
Stood fixed her stately height, and straight the doors,
Opening their brazen folds, discover, wide
Within, her ample spaces oer the smooth
And level pavement: from the arched roof,
Pendent by subtle magic, many a row
Of starry lamps and blazing cressets, fed
With naptha and asphaltus, yielded light
As from a sky. The hasty multitude
Admiring entered and the work some praise,
And some the architect. His hand was known
In Heaven by many a towered structure high,
Where sceptred Angels held their residence,
And sat as Princes, whom the supreme King
Exalted to such power, and gave to rule,
Each in his Hierarchy, the Orders bright.
Nor was his name unheard or unadored
In ancient Greece and in Ausonian land
Men called him Mulciber and how he fell
From Heaven they fabled, thrown by angry Jove
Sheer oer the crystal battlements: from morn
To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
A summers day, and with the setting sun
Dropt from the zenith, like a falling star,
On Lemnos, th Aegaean isle. Thus they relate,
Erring for he with this rebellious rout
Fell long before nor aught aviled him now
To have built in Heaven high towers nor did he scape
By all his engines, but was headlong sent,
With his industrious crew, to build in Hell.
  Meanwhile the winged Heralds, by command
Of sovereign power, with awful ceremony
And trumpets sound, throughout the host proclaim
A solemn council forthwith to be held
At Pandemonium, the high capital
Of Satan and his peers. Their summons called
From every band and squared regiment
By place or choice the worthiest: they anon
With hundreds and with thousands trooping came
Attended. All access was thronged the gates
And porches wide, but chief the spacious hall
Though like a covered field, where champions bold
Wont ride in armed, and at the Soldans chair
Defied the best of Paynim chivalry
To mortal combat, or career with lance,
Thick swarmed, both on the ground and in the air,
Brushed with the hiss of rustling wings. As bees
In springtime, when the Sun with Taurus rides.
Pour forth their populous youth about the hive
In clusters they among fresh dews and flowers
Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed plank,
The suburb of their strawbuilt citadel,
New rubbed with balm, expatiate, and confer
Their stateaffairs: so thick the airy crowd
Swarmed and were straitened till, the signal given,
Behold a wonder! They but now who seemed
In bigness to surpass Earths giant sons,
Now less than smallest dwarfs, in narrow room
Throng numberlesslike that pygmean race
Beyond the Indian mount or faery elves,
Whose midnight revels, by a forestside
Or fountain, some belated peasant sees,
Or dreams he sees, while overhead the Moon
Sits arbitress, and nearer to the Earth
Wheels her pale course: they, on their mirth and dance
Intent, with jocund music charm his ear
At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds.
Thus incorporeal Spirits to smallest forms
Reduced their shapes immense, and were at large,
Though without number still, amidst the hall
Of that infernal court. But far within,
And in their own dimensions like themselves,
The great Seraphic Lords and Cherubim
In close recess and secret conclave sat,
A thousand demigods on golden seats,
Frequent and full. After short silence then,
And summons read, the great consult began.



Book II


High on a throne of royal state, which far
Outshone the wealth or Ormus and of Ind,
Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand
Showers on her kings barbaric pearl and gold,
Satan exalted sat, by merit raised
To that bad eminence and, from despair
Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires
Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue
Vain war with Heaven and, by success untaught,
His proud imaginations thus displayed:
  "Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heaven!
For, since no deep within her gulf can hold
Immortal vigour, though oppressed and fallen,
I give not Heaven for lost: from this descent
Celestial Virtues rising will appear
More glorious and more dread than from no fall,
And trust themselves to fear no second fate!
Me though just right, and the fixed laws of Heaven,
Did first create your leadernext, free choice
With what besides in council or in fight
Hath been achieved of merityet this loss,
Thus far at least recovered, hath much more
Established in a safe, unenvied throne,
Yielded with full consent. The happier state
In Heaven, which follows dignity, might draw
Envy from each inferior but who here
Will envy whom the highest place exposes
Foremost to stand against the Thunderers aim
Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share
Of endless pain? Where there is, then, no good
For which to strive, no strife can grow up there
From faction: for none sure will claim in Hell
Precedence none whose portion is so small
Of present pain that with ambitious mind
Will covet more! With this advantage, then,
To union, and firm faith, and firm accord,
More than can be in Heaven, we now return
To claim our just inheritance of old,
Surer to prosper than prosperity
Could have assured us and by what best way,
Whether of open war or covert guile,
We now debate. Who can advise may speak."
  He ceased and next him Moloch, sceptred king,
Stood upthe strongest and the fiercest Spirit
That fought in Heaven, now fiercer by despair.
His trust was with th Eternal to be deemed
Equal in strength, and rather than be less
Cared not to be at all with that care lost
Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worse,
He recked not, and these words thereafter spake:
  "My sentence is for open war. Of wiles,
More unexpert, I boast not: them let those
Contrive who need, or when they need not now.
For, while they sit contriving, shall the rest
Millions that stand in arms, and longing wait
The signal to ascendsit lingering here,
Heavens fugitives, and for their dwellingplace
Accept this dark opprobrious den of shame,
The prison of his ryranny who reigns
By our delay? No! let us rather choose,
Armed with Hellflames and fury, all at once
Oer Heavens high towers to force resistless way,
Turning our tortures into horrid arms
Against the Torturer when, to meet the noise
Of his almighty engine, he shall hear
Infernal thunder, and, for lightning, see
Black fire and horror shot with equal rage
Among his Angels, and his throne itself
Mixed with Tartarean sulphur and strange fire,
His own invented torments. But perhaps
The way seems difficult, and steep to scale
With upright wing against a higher foe!
Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench
Of that forgetful lake benumb not still,
That in our porper motion we ascend
Up to our native seat descent and fall
To us is adverse. Who but felt of late,
When the fierce foe hung on our broken rear
Insulting, and pursued us through the Deep,
With what compulsion and laborious flight
We sunk thus low? Th ascent is easy, then
Th event is feared! Should we again provoke
Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find
To our destruction, if there be in Hell
Fear to be worse destroyed! What can be worse
Than to dwell here, driven out from bliss, condemned
In this abhorred deep to utter woe!
Where pain of unextinguishable fire
Must exercise us without hope of end
The vassals of his anger, when the scourge
Inexorably, and the torturing hour,
Calls us to penance? More destroyed than thus,
We should be quite abolished, and expire.
What fear we then? what doubt we to incense
His utmost ire? which, to the height enraged,
Will either quite consume us, and reduce
To nothing this essentialhappier far
Than miserable to have eternal being!
Or, if our substance be indeed divine,
And cannot cease to be, we are at worst
On this side nothing and by proof we feel
Our power sufficient to disturb his Heaven,
And with perpetual inroads to alarm,
Though inaccessible, his fatal throne:
Which, if not victory, is yet revenge."
  He ended frowning, and his look denounced
Desperate revenge, and battle dangerous
To less than gods. On th other side up rose
Belial, in act more graceful and humane.
A fairer person lost not Heaven he seemed
For dignity composed, and high exploit.
But all was false and hollow though his tongue
Dropped manna, and could make the worse appear
The better reason, to perplex and dash
Maturest counsels: for his thoughts were low
 To vice industrious, but to nobler deeds
Timorous and slothful. Yet he pleased the ear,
And with persuasive accent thus began:
  "I should be much for open war, O Peers,
As not behind in hate, if what was urged
Main reason to persuade immediate war
Did not dissuade me most, and seem to cast
Ominous conjecture on the whole success
When he who most excels in fact of arms,
In what he counsels and in what excels
Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair
And utter dissolution, as the scope
Of all his aim, after some dire revenge.
First, what revenge? The towers of Heaven are filled
With armed watch, that render all access
Impregnable: oft on the bodering Deep
Encamp their legions, or with obscure wing
Scout far and wide into the realm of Night,
Scorning surprise. Or, could we break our way
By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise
With blackest insurrection to confound
Heavens purest light, yet our great Enemy,
All incorruptible, would on his throne
Sit unpolluted, and th ethereal mould,
Incapable of stain, would soon expel
Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire,
Victorious. Thus repulsed, our final hope
Is flat despair: we must exasperate
Th Almighty Victor to spend all his rage
And that must end us that must be our cure
To be no more. Sad cure! for who would lose,
Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
Those thoughts that wander through eternity,
To perish rather, swallowed up and lost
In the wide womb of uncreated Night,
Devoid of sense and motion? And who knows,
Let this be good, whether our angry Foe
Can give it, or will ever? How he can
Is doubtful that he never will is sure.
Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire,
Belike through impotence or unaware,
To give his enemies their wish, and end
Them in his anger whom his anger saves
To punish endless? Wherefore cease we, then?
Say they who counsel war we are decreed,
Reserved, and destined to eternal woe
Whatever doing, what can we suffer more,
What can we suffer worse? Is this, then, worst
Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in arms?
What when we fled amain, pursued and struck
With Heavens afflicting thunder, and besought
The Deep to shelter us? This Hell then seemed
A refuge from those wounds. Or when we lay
Chained on the burning lake? That sure was worse.
What if the breath that kindled those grim fires,
Awaked, should blow them into sevenfold rage,
And plunge us in the flames or from above
Should intermitted vengeance arm again
His red right hand to plague us? What if all
Her stores were opened, and this firmament
Of Hell should spout her cataracts of fire,
Impendent horrors, threatening hideous fall
One day upon our heads while we perhaps,
Designing or exhorting glorious war,
Caught in a fiery tempest, shall be hurled,
Each on his rock transfixed, the sport and prey
Or racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk
Under yon boiling ocean, wrapt in chains,
There to converse with everlasting groans,
Unrespited, unpitied, unreprieved,
Ages of hopeless end? This would be worse.
War, therefore, open or concealed, alike
My voice dissuades for what can force or guile
With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye
Views all things at one view? He from Heavens height
All these our motions vain sees and derides,
Not more almighty to resist our might
Than wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles.
Shall we, then, live thus vilethe race of Heaven
Thus trampled, thus expelled, to suffer here
Chains and these torments? Better these than worse,
By my advice since fate inevitable
Subdues us, and omnipotent decree,
The Victors will. To suffer, as to do,
Our strength is equal nor the law unjust
That so ordains. This was at first resolved,
If we were wise, against so great a foe
Contending, and so doubtful what might fall.
I laugh when those who at the spear are bold
And venturous, if that fail them, shrink, and fear
What yet they know must followto endure
Exile, or igominy, or bonds, or pain,
The sentence of their Conqueror. This is now
Our doom which if we can sustain and bear,
Our Supreme Foe in time may much remit
His anger, and perhaps, thus far removed,
Not mind us not offending, satisfied
With what is punished whence these raging fires
Will slacken, if his breath stir not their flames.
Our purer essence then will overcome
Their noxious vapour or, inured, not feel
Or, changed at length, and to the place conformed
In temper and in nature, will receive
Familiar the fierce heat and, void of pain,
This horror will grow mild, this darkness light
Besides what hope the neverending flight
Of future days may bring, what chance, what change
Worth waitingsince our present lot appears
For happy though but ill, for ill not worst,
If we procure not to ourselves more woe."
  Thus Belial, with words clothed in reasons garb,
Counselled ignoble ease and peaceful sloth,
Not peace and after him thus Mammon spake:
  "Either to disenthrone the King of Heaven
We war, if war be best, or to regain
Our own right lost. Him to unthrone we then
May hope, when everlasting Fate shall yield
To fickle Chance, and Chaos judge the strife.
The former, vain to hope, argues as vain
The latter for what place can be for us
Within Heavens bound, unless Heavens Lord supreme
We overpower? Suppose he should relent
And publish grace to all, on promise made
Of new subjection with what eyes could we
Stand in his presence humble, and receive
Strict laws imposed, to celebrate his throne
With warbled hyms, and to his Godhead sing
Forced hallelujahs, while he lordly sits
Our envied sovereign, and his altar breathes
Ambrosial odours and ambrosial flowers,
Our servile offerings? This must be our task
In Heaven, this our delight. How wearisome
Eternity so spent in worship paid
To whom we hate! Let us not then pursue,
By force impossible, by leave obtained
Unacceptable, though in Heaven, our state
Of splendid vassalage but rather seek
Our own good from ourselves, and from our own
Live to ourselves, though in this vast recess,
Free and to none accountable, preferring
Hard liberty before the easy yoke
Of servile pomp. Our greatness will appear
Then most conspicuous when great things of small,
Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse,
We can create, and in what place soeer
Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain
Through labour and endurance. This deep world
Of darkness do we dread? How oft amidst
Thick clouds and dark doth Heavens allruling Sire
Choose to reside, his glory unobscured,
And with the majesty of darkness round
Covers his throne, from whence deep thunders roar.
Mustering their rage, and Heaven resembles Hell!
As he our darkness, cannot we his light
Imitate when we please? This desert soil
Wants not her hidden lustre, gems and gold
Nor want we skill or art from whence to raise
Magnificence and what can Heaven show more?
Our torments also may, in length of time,
Become our elements, these piercing fires
As soft as now severe, our temper changed
Into their temper which must needs remove
The sensible of pain. All things invite
To peaceful counsels, and the settled state
Of order, how in safety best we may
Compose our present evils, with regard
Of what we are and where, dismissing quite
All thoughts of war. Ye have what I advise."
  He scarce had finished, when such murmur filled
Th assembly as when hollow rocks retain
The sound of blustering winds, which all night long
Had roused the sea, now with hoarse cadence lull
Seafaring men oerwatched, whose bark by chance
Or pinnace, anchors in a craggy bay
After the tempest. Such applause was heard
As Mammon ended, and his sentence pleased,
Advising peace: for such another field
They dreaded worse than Hell so much the fear
Of thunder and the sword of Michael
Wrought still within them and no less desire
To found this nether empire, which might rise,
By policy and long process of time,
In emulation opposite to Heaven.
Which when Beelzebub perceivedthan whom,
Satan except, none higher satwith grave
Aspect he rose, and in his rising seemed
A pillar of state. Deep on his front engraven
Deliberation sat, and public care
And princely counsel in his face yet shone,
Majestic, though in ruin. Sage he stood
With Atlantean shoulders, fit to bear
The weight of mightiest monarchies his look
Drew audience and attention still as night
Or summers noontide air, while thus he spake:
  "Thrones and Imperial Powers, Offspring of Heaven,
Ethereal Virtues! or these titles now
Must we renounce, and, changing style, be called
Princes of Hell? for so the popular vote
Inclineshere to continue, and build up here
A growing empire doubtless! while we dream,
And know not that the King of Heaven hath doomed
This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat
Beyond his potent arm, to live exempt
From Heavens high jurisdiction, in new league
Banded against his throne, but to remain
In strictest bondage, though thus far removed,
Under th inevitable curb, reserved
His captive multitude. For he, to be sure,
In height or depth, still first and last will reign
Sole king, and of his kingdom lose no part
By our revolt, but over Hell extend
His empire, and with iron sceptre rule
Us here, as with his golden those in Heaven.
What sit we then projecting peace and war?
War hath determined us and foiled with loss
Irreparable terms of peace yet none
Vouchsafed or sought for what peace will be given
To us enslaved, but custody severe,
And stripes and arbitrary punishment
Inflicted? and what peace can we return,
But, to our power, hostility and hate,
Untamed reluctance, and revenge, though slow,
Yet ever plotting how the Conqueror least
May reap his conquest, and may least rejoice
In doing what we most in suffering feel?
Nor will occasion want, nor shall we need
With dangerous expedition to invade
Heaven, whose high walls fear no assault or siege,
Or ambush from the Deep. What if we find
Some easier enterprise? There is a place
If ancient and prophetic fame in Heaven
Err notanother World, the happy seat
Of some new race, called Man, about this time
To be created like to us, though less
In power and excellence, but favoured more
Of him who rules above so was his will
Pronounced among the Gods, and by an oath
That shook Heavens whole circumference confirmed.
Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn
What creatures there inhabit, of what mould
Or substance, how endued, and what their power
And where their weakness: how attempted best,
By force of subtlety. Though Heaven be shut,
And Heavens high Arbitrator sit secure
In his own strength, this place may lie exposed,
The utmost border of his kingdom, left
To their defence who hold it: here, perhaps,
Some advantageous act may be achieved
By sudden onseteither with Hellfire
To waste his whole creation, or possess
All as our own, and drive, as we were driven,
The puny habitants or, if not drive,
Seduce them to our party, that their God
May prove their foe, and with repenting hand
Abolish his own works. This would surpass
Common revenge, and interrupt his joy
In our confusion, and our joy upraise
In his disturbance when his darling sons,
Hurled headlong to partake with us, shall curse
Their frail original, and faded bliss
Faded so soon! Advise if this be worth
Attempting, or to sit in darkness here
Hatching vain empires." Thus beelzebub
Pleaded his devilish counselfirst devised
By Satan, and in part proposed: for whence,
But from the author of all ill, could spring
So deep a malice, to confound the race
Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell
To mingle and involve, done all to spite
The great Creator? But their spite still serves
His glory to augment. The bold design
Pleased highly those infernal States, and joy
Sparkled in all their eyes: with full assent
They vote: whereat his speech he thus renews:
"Well have ye judged, well ended long debate,
Synod of Gods, and, like to what ye are,
Great things resolved, which from the lowest deep
Will once more lift us up, in spite of fate,
Nearer our ancient seatperhaps in view
Of those bright confines, whence, with neighbouring arms,
And opportune excursion, we may chance
Reenter Heaven or else in some mild zone
Dwell, not unvisited of Heavens fair light,
Secure, and at the brightening orient beam
Purge off this gloom: the soft delicious air,
To heal the scar of these corrosive fires,
Shall breathe her balm. But, first, whom shall we send
In search of this new World? whom shall we find
Sufficient? who shall tempt with wandering feet
The dark, unbottomed, infinite Abyss,
And through the palpable obscure find out
His uncouth way, or spread his airy flight,
Upborne with indefatigable wings
Over the vast abrupt, ere he arrive
The happy Isle? What strength, what art, can then
Suffice, or what evasion bear him safe,
Through the strict senteries and stations thick
Of Angels watching round? Here he had need
All circumspection: and we now no less
Choice in our suffrage for on whom we send
The weight of all, and our last hope, relies."
  This said, he sat and expectation held
His look suspense, awaiting who appeared
To second, or oppose, or undertake
The perilous attempt. But all sat mute,
Pondering the danger with deep thoughts and each
In others countenance read his own dismay,
Astonished. None among the choice and prime
Of those Heavenwarring champions could be found
So hardy as to proffer or accept,
Alone, the dreadful voyage till, at last,
Satan, whom now transcendent glory raised
Above his fellows, with monarchal pride
Conscious of highest worth, unmoved thus spake:
  "O Progeny of Heaven! Empyreal Thrones!
With reason hath deep silence and demur
Seized us, though undismayed. Long is the way
And hard, that out of Hell leads up to light.
Our prison strong, this huge convex of fire,
Outrageous to devour, immures us round
Ninefold and gates of burning adamant,
Barred over us, prohibit all egress.
These passed, if any pass, the void profound
Of unessential Night receives him next,
Widegaping, and with utter loss of being
Threatens him, plunged in that abortive gulf.
If thence he scape, into whatever world,
Or unknown region, what remains him less
Than unknown dangers, and as hard escape?
But I should ill become this throne, O Peers,
And this imperial sovereignty, adorned
With splendour, armed with power, if aught proposed
And judged of public moment in the shape
Of difficulty or danger, could deter
Me from attempting. Wherefore do I assume
These royalties, and not refuse to reign,
Refusing to accept as great a share
Of hazard as of honour, due alike
To him who reigns, and so much to him due
Of hazard more as he above the rest
High honoured sits? Go, therefore, mighty Powers,
Terror of Heaven, though fallen intend at home,
While here shall be our home, what best may ease
The present misery, and render Hell
More tolerable if there be cure or charm
To respite, or deceive, or slack the pain
Of this ill mansion: intermit no watch
Against a wakeful foe, while I abroad
Through all the coasts of dark destruction seek
Deliverance for us all. This enterprise
None shall partake with me." Thus saying, rose
The Monarch, and prevented all reply
Prudent lest, from his resolution raised,
Others among the chief might offer now,
Certain to be refused, what erst they feared,
And, so refused, might in opinion stand
His rivals, winning cheap the high repute
Which he through hazard huge must earn. But they
Dreaded not more th adventure than his voice
Forbidding and at once with him they rose.
Their rising all at once was as the sound
Of thunder heard remote. Towards him they bend
With awful reverence prone, and as a God
Extol him equal to the Highest in Heaven.
Nor failed they to express how much they praised
That for the general safety he despised
His own: for neither do the Spirits damned
Lose all their virtue lest bad men should boast
Their specious deeds on earth, which glory excites,
Or close ambition varnished oer with zeal.
  Thus they their doubtful consultations dark
Ended, rejoicing in their matchless Chief:
As, when from mountaintops the dusky clouds
Ascending, while the north wind sleeps, oerspread
Heavens cheerful face, the louring element
Scowls oer the darkened landscape snow or shower,
If chance the radiant sun, with farewell sweet,
Extend his evening beam, the fields revive,
The birds their notes renew, and bleating herds
Attest their joy, that hill and valley rings.
O shame to men! Devil with devil damned
Firm concord holds men only disagree
Of creatures rational, though under hope
Of heavenly grace, and, God proclaiming peace,
Yet live in hatred, enmity, and strife
Among themselves, and levy cruel wars
Wasting the earth, each other to destroy:
As if which might induce us to accord
Man had not hellish foes enow besides,
That day and night for his destruction wait!
  The Stygian council thus dissolved and forth
In order came the grand infernal Peers:
Midst came their mighty Paramount, and seemed
Alone th antagonist of Heaven, nor less
Than Hells dread Emperor, with pomp supreme,
And godlike imitated state: him round
A globe of fiery Seraphim enclosed
With bright emblazonry, and horrent arms.
Then of their session ended they bid cry
With trumpets regal sound the great result:
Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim
Put to their mouths the sounding alchemy,
By heralds voice explained the hollow Abyss
Heard far adn wide, and all the host of Hell
With deafening shout returned them loud acclaim.
Thence more at ease their minds, and somewhat raised
By false presumptuous hope, the ranged Powers
Disband and, wandering, each his several way
Pursues, as inclination or sad choice
Leads him perplexed, where he may likeliest find
Truce to his restless thoughts, and entertain
The irksome hours, till his great Chief return.
Part on the plain, or in the air sublime,
Upon the wing or in swift race contend,
As at th Olympian games or Pythian fields
Part curb their fiery steeds, or shun the goal
With rapid wheels, or fronted brigades form:
As when, to warn proud cities, war appears
Waged in the troubled sky, and armies rush
To battle in the clouds before each van
Prick forth the airy knights, and couch their spears,
Till thickest legions close with feats of arms
From either end of heaven the welkin burns.
Others, with vast Typhoean rage, more fell,
Rend up both rocks and hills, and ride the air
In whirlwind Hell scarce holds the wild uproar:
As when Alcides, from Oechalia crowned
With conquest, felt th envenomed robe, and tore
Through pain up by the roots Thessalian pines,
And Lichas from the top of Oeta threw
Into th Euboic sea. Others, more mild,
Retreated in a silent valley, sing
With notes angelical to many a harp
Their own heroic deeds, and hapless fall
By doom of battle, and complain that Fate
Free Virtue should enthrall to Force or Chance.
Their song was partial but the harmony
What could it less when Spirits immortal sing?
Suspended Hell, and took with ravishment
The thronging audience. In discourse more sweet
For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Sense
Others apart sat on a hill retired,
In thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will, and Fate
Fixed fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute,
And found no end, in wandering mazes lost.
Of good and evil much they argued then,
Of happiness and final misery,
Passion and apathy, and glory and shame:
Vain wisdom all, and false philosophy!
Yet, with a pleasing sorcery, could charm
Pain for a while or anguish, and excite
Fallacious hope, or arm th obdured breast
With stubborn patience as with triple steel.
Another part, in squadrons and gross bands,
On bold adventure to discover wide
That dismal world, if any clime perhaps
Might yield them easier habitation, bend
Four ways their flying march, along the banks
Of four infernal rivers, that disgorge
Into the burning lake their baleful streams
Abhorred Styx, the flood of deadly hate
Sad Acheron of sorrow, black and deep
Cocytus, named of lamentation loud
Heard on the rueful stream fierce Phlegeton,
Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage.
Far off from these, a slow and silent stream,
Lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls
Her watery labyrinth, whereof who drinks
Forthwith his former state and being forgets
Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain.
Beyond this flood a frozen continent
Lies dark and wild, beat with perpetual storms
Of whirlwind and dire hail, which on firm land
Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin seems
Of ancient pile all else deep snow and ice,
A gulf profound as that Serbonian bog
Betwixt Damiata and Mount Casius old,
Where armies whole have sunk: the parching air
Burns frore, and cold performs th effect of fire.
Thither, by harpyfooted Furies haled,
At certain revolutions all the damned
Are brought and feel by turns the bitter change
Of fierce extremes, extremes by change more fierce,
From beds of raging fire to starve in ice
Their soft ethereal warmth, and there to pine
Immovable, infixed, and frozen round
Periods of time,thence hurried back to fire.
They ferry over this Lethean sound
Both to and fro, their sorrow to augment,
And wish and struggle, as they pass, to reach
The tempting stream, with one small drop to lose
In sweet forgetfulness all pain and woe,
All in one moment, and so near the brink
But Fate withstands, and, to oppose th attempt,
Medusa with Gorgonian terror guards
The ford, and of itself the water flies
All taste of living wight, as once it fled
The lip of Tantalus. Thus roving on
In confused march forlorn, th adventurous bands,
With shuddering horror pale, and eyes aghast,
Viewed first their lamentable lot, and found
No rest. Through many a dark and dreary vale
They passed, and many a region dolorous,
Oer many a frozen, many a fiery alp,
Rocks, caves, lakes, fens, bogs, dens, and shades of death
A universe of death, which God by curse
Created evil, for evil only good
Where all life dies, death lives, and Nature breeds,
Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things,
Obominable, inutterable, and worse
Than fables yet have feigned or fear conceived,
Gorgons, and Hydras, and Chimeras dire.
  Meanwhile the Adversary of God and Man,
Satan, with thoughts inflamed of highest design,
Puts on swift wings, and toward the gates of Hell
Explores his solitary flight: sometimes
He scours the right hand coast, sometimes the left
Now shaves with level wing the deep, then soars
Up to the fiery concave towering high.
As when far off at sea a fleet descried
Hangs in the clouds, by equinoctial winds
Close sailing from Bengala, or the isles
Of Ternate and Tidore, whence merchants bring
Their spicy drugs they on the trading flood,
Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape,
Ply stemming nightly toward the pole: so seemed
Far off the flying Fiend. At last appear
Hellbounds, high reaching to the horrid roof,
And thrice threefold the gates three folds were brass,
Three iron, three of adamantine rock,
Impenetrable, impaled with circling fire,
Yet unconsumed. Before the gates there sat
On either side a formidable Shape.
The one seemed woman to the waist, and fair,
But ended foul in many a scaly fold,
Voluminous and vasta serpent armed
With mortal sting. About her middle round
A cry of Hellhounds neverceasing barked
With wide Cerberean mouths full loud, and rung
A hideous peal yet, when they list, would creep,
If aught disturbed their noise, into her womb,
And kennel there yet there still barked and howled
Within unseen. Far less abhorred than these
Vexed Scylla, bathing in the sea that parts
Calabria from the hoarse Trinacrian shore
Nor uglier follow the nighthag, when, called
In secret, riding through the air she comes,
Lured with the smell of infant blood, to dance
With Lapland witches, while the labouring moon
Eclipses at their charms. The other Shape
If shape it might be called that shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joint, or limb
Or substance might be called that shadow seemed,
For each seemed eitherblack it stood as Night,
Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell,
And shook a dreadful dart: what seemed his head
The likeness of a kingly crown had on.
Satan was now at hand, and from his seat
The monster moving onward came as fast
With horrid strides Hell trembled as he strode.
Th undaunted Fiend what this might be admired
Admired, not feared God and his Son except,
Created thing naught valued he nor shunned,
And with disdainful look thus first began:
  "Whence and what art thou, execrable Shape,
That darst, though grim and terrible, advance
Thy miscreated front athwart my way
To yonder gates? Through them I mean to pass,
That be assured, without leave asked of thee.
Retire or taste thy folly, and learn by proof,
Hellborn, not to contend with Spirits of Heaven."
  To whom the Goblin, full of wrath, replied:
"Art thou that traitor Angel? art thou he,
Who first broke peace in Heaven and faith, till then
Unbroken, and in proud rebellious arms
Drew after him the third part of Heavens sons,
Conjured against the Highestfor which both thou
And they, outcast from God, are here condemned
To waste eternal days in woe and pain?
And reckonst thou thyself with Spirits of Heaven
Helldoomed, and breathst defiance here and scorn,
Where I reign king, and, to enrage thee more,
Thy king and lord? Back to thy punishment,
False fugitive and to thy speed add wings,
Lest with a whip of scorpions I pursue
Thy lingering, or with one stroke of this dart
Strange horror seize thee, and pangs unfelt before."
  So spake the grisly Terror, and in shape,
So speaking and so threatening, grew tenfold,
More dreadful and deform. On th other side,
Incensed with indignation, Satan stood
Unterrified, and like a comet burned,
That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
In th arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
Shakes pestilence and war. Each at the head
Levelled his deadly aim their fatal hands
No second stroke intend and such a frown
Each cast at th other as when two black clouds,
With heavens artillery fraught, came rattling on
Over the Caspian,then stand front to front
Hovering a space, till winds the signal blow
To join their dark encounter in midair.
So frowned the mighty combatants that Hell
Grew darker at their frown so matched they stood
For never but once more was wither like
To meet so great a foe. And now great deeds
Had been achieved, whereof all Hell had rung,
Had not the snaky Sorceress, that sat
Fast by Hellgate and kept the fatal key,
Risen, and with hideous outcry rushed between.
  "O father, what intends thy hand," she cried,
"Against thy only son? What fury, O son,
Possesses thee to bend that mortal dart
Against thy fathers head? And knowst for whom?
For him who sits above, and laughs the while
At thee, ordained his drudge to execute
Whateer his wrath, which he calls justice, bids
His wrath, which one day will destroy ye both!"
  She spake, and at her words the hellish Pest
Forbore: then these to her Satan returned:
  "So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange
Thou interposest, that my sudden hand,
Prevented, spares to tell thee yet by deeds
What it intends, till first I know of thee
What thing thou art, thus doubleformed, and why,
In this infernal vale first met, thou callst
Me father, and that phantasm callst my son.
I know thee not, nor ever saw till now
Sight more detestable than him and thee."
  T whom thus the Portress of Hellgate replied:
"Hast thou forgot me, then and do I seem
Now in thine eye so foul?once deemed so fair
In Heaven, when at th assembly, and in sight
Of all the Seraphim with thee combined
In bold conspiracy against Heavens King,
All on a sudden miserable pain
Surprised thee, dim thine eyes and dizzy swum
In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast
Threw forth, till on the left side opening wide,
Likest to thee in shape and countenance bright,
Then shining heavenly fair, a goddess armed,
Out of thy head I sprung. Amazement seized
All th host of Heaven back they recoiled afraid
At first, and called me Sin, and for a sign
Portentous held me but, familiar grown,
I pleased, and with attractive graces won
The most aversethee chiefly, who, full oft
Thyself in me thy perfect image viewing,
Becamst enamoured and such joy thou tookst
With me in secret that my womb conceived
A growing burden. Meanwhile war arose,
And fields were fought in Heaven: wherein remained
For what could else? to our Almighty Foe
Clear victory to our part loss and rout
Through all the Empyrean. Down they fell,
Driven headlong from the pitch of Heaven, down
Into this Deep and in the general fall
I also: at which time this powerful key
Into my hands was given, with charge to keep
These gates for ever shut, which none can pass
Without my opening. Pensive here I sat
Alone but long I sat not, till my womb,
Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown,
Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes.
At last this odious offspring whom thou seest,
Thine own begotten, breaking violent way,
Tore through my entrails, that, with fear and pain
Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew
Transformed: but he my inbred enemy
Forth issued, brandishing his fatal dart,
Made to destroy. I fled, and cried out Death!
Hell trembled at the hideous name, and sighed
From all her caves, and back resounded Death!
I fled but he pursued though more, it seems,
Inflamed with lust than rage, and, swifter far,
Me overtook, his mother, all dismayed,
And, in embraces forcible and foul
Engendering with me, of that rape begot
These yelling monsters, that with ceaseless cry
Surround me, as thou sawsthourly conceived
And hourly born, with sorrow infinite
To me for, when they list, into the womb
That bred them they return, and howl, and gnaw
My bowels, their repast then, bursting forth
Afresh, with conscious terrors vex me round,
That rest or intermission none I find.
Before mine eyes in opposition sits
Grim Death, my son and foe, who set them on,
And me, his parent, would full soon devour
For want of other prey, but that he knows
His end with mine involved, and knows that I
Should prove a bitter morsel, and his bane,
Whenever that shall be: so Fate pronounced.
But thou, O father, I forewarn thee, shun
His deadly arrow neither vainly hope
To be invulnerable in those bright arms,
Through tempered heavenly for that mortal dint,
Save he who reigns above, none can resist."
  She finished and the subtle Fiend his lore
Soon learned, now milder, and thus answered smooth:
  "Dear daughtersince thou claimst me for thy sire,
And my fair son here showst me, the dear pledge
Of dalliance had with thee in Heaven, and joys
Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change
Befallen us unforeseen, unthoughtofknow,
I come no enemy, but to set free
From out this dark and dismal house of pain
Both him and thee, and all the heavenly host
Of Spirits that, in our just pretences armed,
Fell with us from on high. From them I go
This uncouth errand sole, and one for all
Myself expose, with lonely steps to tread
Th unfounded Deep, and through the void immense
To search, with wandering quest, a place foretold
Should beand, by concurring signs, ere now
Created vast and rounda place of bliss
In the purlieus of Heaven and therein placed
A race of upstart creatures, to supply
Perhaps our vacant room, though more removed,
Lest Heaven, surcharged with potent multitude,
Might hap to move new broils. Be this, or aught
Than this more secret, now designed, I haste
To know and, this once known, shall soon return,
And bring ye to the place where thou and Death
Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen
Wing silently the buxom air, embalmed
With odours. There ye shall be fed and filled
Immeasurably all things shall be your prey."
  He ceased for both seemed highly pleased, and Death
Grinned horrible a ghastly smile, to hear
His famine should be filled, and blessed his maw
Destined to that good hour. No less rejoiced
His mother bad, and thus bespake her sire:
  "The key of this infernal Pit, by due
And by command of Heavens allpowerful King,
I keep, by him forbidden to unlock
These adamantine gates against all force
Death ready stands to interpose his dart,
Fearless to be oermatched by living might.
But what owe I to his commands above,
Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down
Into this gloom of Tartarus profound,
To sit in hateful office here confined,
Inhabitant of Heaven and heavenly born
Here in perpetual agony and pain,
With terrors and with clamours compassed round
Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed?
Thou art my father, thou my author, thou
My being gavst me whom should I obey
But thee? whom follow? Thou wilt bring me soon
To that new world of light and bliss, among
The gods who live at ease, where I shall reign
At thy right hand voluptuous, as beseems
Thy daughter and thy darling, without end."
  Thus saying, from her side the fatal key,
Sad instrument of all our woe, she took
And, towards the gate rolling her bestial train,
Forthwith the huge portcullis high updrew,
Which, but herself, not all the Stygian Powers
Could once have moved then in the keyhole turns
Th intricate wards, and every bolt and bar
Of massy iron or solid rock with ease
Unfastens. On a sudden open fly,
With impetuous recoil and jarring sound,
Th infernal doors, and on their hinges grate
Harsh thunder, that the lowest bottom shook
Of Erebus. She opened but to shut
Excelled her power: the gates wide open stood,
That with extended wings a bannered host,
Under spread ensigns marching, mibht pass through
With horse and chariots ranked in loose array
So wide they stood, and like a furnacemouth
Cast forth redounding smoke and ruddy flame.
Before their eyes in sudden view appear
The secrets of the hoary Deepa dark
Illimitable ocean, without bound,
Without dimension where length, breadth, and height,
And time, and place, are lost where eldest Night
And Chaos, ancestors of Nature, hold
Eternal anarchy, amidst the noise
Of endless wars, and by confusion stand.
For Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry, four champions fierce,
Strive here for mastery, and to battle bring
Their embryon atoms: they around the flag
Of each his faction, in their several clans,
Lightarmed or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift, or slow,
Swarm populous, unnumbered as the sands
Of Barca or Cyrenes torrid soil,
Levied to side with warring winds, and poise
Their lighter wings. To whom these most adhere
He rules a moment: Chaos umpire sits,
And by decision more embroils the fray
By which he reigns: next him, high arbiter,
Chance governs all. Into this wild Abyss,
The womb of Nature, and perhaps her grave,
Of neither sea, nor shore, nor air, nor fire,
But all these in their pregnant causes mixed
Confusedly, and which thus must ever fight,
Unless th Almighty Maker them ordain
His dark materials to create more worlds
Into this wild Abyss the wary Fiend
Stood on the brink of Hell and looked a while,
Pondering his voyage for no narrow frith
He had to cross. Nor was his ear less pealed
With noises loud and ruinous to compare
Great things with small than when Bellona storms
With all her battering engines, bent to rase
Some capital city or less than if this frame
Of Heaven were falling, and these elements
In mutiny had from her axle torn
The steadfast Earth. At last his sailbroad vans
He spread for flight, and, in the surging smoke
Uplifted, spurns the ground thence many a league,
As in a cloudy chair, ascending rides
Audacious but, that seat soon failing, meets
A vast vacuity. All unawares,
Fluttering his pennons vain, plumbdown he drops
Ten thousand fathom deep, and to this hour
Down had been falling, had not, by ill chance,
The strong rebuff of some tumultuous cloud,
Instinct with fire and nitre, hurried him
As many miles aloft. That fury stayed
Quenched in a boggy Syrtis, neither sea,
Nor good dry landnigh foundered, on he fares,
Treading the crude consistence, half on foot,
Half flying behoves him now both oar and sail.
As when a gryphon through the wilderness
With winged course, oer hill or moory dale,
Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stealth
Had from his wakeful custody purloined
The guarded gold so eagerly the Fiend
Oer bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
With head, hands, wings, or feet, pursues his way,
And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies.
At length a universal hubbub wild
Of stunning sounds, and voices all confused,
Borne through the hollow dark, assaults his ear
With loudest vehemence. Thither he plies
Undaunted, to meet there whatever Power
Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyss
Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask
Which way the nearest coast of darkness lies
Bordering on light when straight behold the throne
Of Chaos, and his dark pavilion spread
Wide on the wasteful Deep! With him enthroned
Sat sablevested Night, eldest of things,
The consort of his reign and by them stood
Orcus and Ades, and the dreaded name
Of Demogorgon Rumour next, and Chance,
And Tumult, and Confusion, all embroiled,
And Discord with a thousand various mouths.
  T whom Satan, turning boldly, thus:"Ye Powers
And Spirtis of this nethermost Abyss,
Chaos and ancient Night, I come no spy
With purpose to explore or to disturb
The secrets of your realm but, by constraint
Wandering this darksome desert, as my way
Lies through your spacious empire up to light,
Alone and without guide, half lost, I seek,
What readiest path leads where your gloomy bounds
Confine with Heaven or, if some other place,
From your dominion won, th Ethereal King
Possesses lately, thither to arrive
I travel this profound. Direct my course:
Directed, no mean recompense it brings
To your behoof, if I that region lost,
All usurpation thence expelled, reduce
To her original darkness and your sway
Which is my present journey, and once more
Erect the standard there of ancient Night.
Yours be th advantage all, mine the revenge!"
  Thus Satan and him thus the Anarch old,
With faltering speech and visage incomposed,
Answered:  "I know thee, stranger, who thou art  
That mighty leading Angel, who of late
Made head against Heavens King, though overthrown.
I saw and heard for such a numerous host
Fled not in silence through the frighted Deep,
With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout,
Confusion worse confounded and Heavengates
Poured out by millions her victorious bands,
Pursuing. I upon my frontiers here
Keep residence if all I can will serve
That little which is left so to defend,
Encroached on still through our intestine broils
Weakening the sceptre of old Night: first, Hell,
Your dungeon, stretching far and wide beneath
Now lately Heaven and Earth, another world
Hung oer my realm, linked in a golden chain
To that side Heaven from whence your legions fell!
If that way be your walk, you have not far
So much the nearer danger. Go, and speed
Havoc, and spoil, and ruin, are my gain."
  He ceased and Satan stayed not to reply,
But, glad that now his sea should find a shore,
With fresh alacrity and force renewed
Springs upward, like a pyramid of fire,
Into the wild expanse, and through the shock
Of fighting elements, on all sides round
Environed, wins his way harder beset
And more endangered than when Argo passed
Through Bosporus betwixt the justling rocks,
Or when Ulysses on the larboard shunned
Charybdis, and by th other whirlpool steered.
So he with difficulty and labour hard
Moved on, with difficulty and labour he
But, he once passed, soon after, when Man fell,
Strange alteration! Sin and Death amain,
Following his track such was the will of Heaven
Paved after him a broad and beaten way
Over the dark Abyss, whose boiling gulf
Tamely endured a bridge of wondrous length,
From Hell continued, reaching th utmost orb
Of this frail World by which the Spirits perverse
With easy intercourse pass to and fro
To tempt or punish mortals, except whom
God and good Angels guard by special grace.
  But now at last the sacred influence
Of light appears, and from the walls of Heaven
Shoots far into the bosom of dim Night
A glimmering dawn. Here Nature first begins
Her farthest verge, and Chaos to retire,
As from her outmost works, a broken foe,
With tumult less and with less hostile din
That Satan with less toil, and now with ease,
Wafts on the calmer wave by dubious light,
And, like a weatherbeaten vessel, holds
Gladly the port, though shrouds and tackle torn
Or in the emptier waste, resembling air,
Weighs his spread wings, at leisure to behold
Far off th empyreal Heaven, extended wide
In circuit, undetermined square or round,
With opal towers and battlements adorned
Of living sapphire, once his native seat
And, fast by, hanging in a golden chain,
This pendent World, in bigness as a star
Of smallest magnitude close by the moon.
Thither, full fraught with mischievous revenge,
Accursed, and in a cursed hour, he hies.



Book III


Hail, holy Light, offspring of Heaven firstborn,
Or of the Eternal coeternal beam
May I express thee unblamd?  since God is light,
And never but in unapproached light
Dwelt from eternity, dwelt then in thee
Bright effluence of bright essence increate.
Or hear"st thou rather pure ethereal stream,
Whose fountain who shall tell?  before the sun,
Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice
Of God, as with a mantle, didst invest  
The rising world of waters dark and deep,
Won from the void and formless infinite.
Thee I revisit now with bolder wing,
Escapd the Stygian pool, though long detaind
In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight
Through utter and through middle darkness borne,
With other notes than to the Orphean lyre
I sung of Chaos and eternal Night
Taught by the heavenly Muse to venture down
The dark descent, and up to reascend,
Though hard and rare:  Thee I revisit safe,
And feel thy sovran vital lamp but thou
Revisitst not these eyes, that roll in vain
To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn
So  thick a drop serene hath quenchd their orbs,
Or dim suffusion veild.  Yet not the more
Cease I to wander, where the Muses haunt,
Clear spring, or shady grove, or sunny hill,
Smit with the love of sacred song but chief
Thee, Sion, and the flowery brooks beneath,
That wash thy hallowd feet, and warbling flow,
Nightly I visit:  nor sometimes forget
So were I equalld with them in renown,
Thy sovran command, that Man should find grace
Blind Thamyris, and blind Maeonides,
And Tiresias, and Phineus, prophets old:
Then feed on thoughts, that voluntary move
Harmonious numbers as the wakeful bird
Sings darkling, and in shadiest covert hid
Tunes her nocturnal note.  Thus with the year
Seasons return but not to me returns
Day, or the sweet approach of even or morn,
Or sight of vernal bloom, or summers rose,
Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine
But cloud instead, and everduring dark
Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men
Cut off, and for the book of knowledge fair
Presented with a universal blank
Of natures works to me expungd and rasd,
And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out.
So much the rather thou, celestial Light,
Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers
Irradiate there plant eyes, all mist from thence
Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell
Of things invisible to mortal sight.
Now had the Almighty Father from above,
From the pure empyrean where he sits
High thrond above all highth, bent down his eye
His own works and their works at once to view:
About him all the Sanctities of Heaven
Stood thick as stars, and from his sight receivd
Beatitude past utterance on his right
The radiant image of his glory sat,
His only son on earth he first beheld
Our two first parents, yet the only two
Of mankind in the happy garden placd
Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love,
Uninterrupted joy, unrivalld love,
In blissful solitude he then surveyd
Hell and the gulf between, and Satan there
Coasting the wall of Heaven on this side Night
In the dun air sublime, and ready now
To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet,
On the bare outside of this world, that seemd
Firm land imbosomd, without firmament,
Uncertain which, in ocean or in air.
Him God beholding from his prospect high,
Wherein past, present, future, he beholds,
Thus to his only Son foreseeing spake.
Only begotten Son, seest thou what rage
Transports our Adversary?  whom no bounds
Prescribd no bars of Hell, nor all the chains
Heapd on him there, nor yet the main abyss
Wide interrupt, can hold so bent he seems
On desperate revenge, that shall redound
Upon his own rebellious head.  And now,
Through all restraint broke loose, he wings his way
Not far off Heaven, in the precincts of light,
Directly towards the new created world,
And man there placd, with purpose to assay
If him by force he can destroy, or, worse,
By some false guile pervert and shall pervert
For man will hearken to his glozing lies,
And easily transgress the sole command,
Sole pledge of his obedience:  So will fall
He and his faithless progeny:  Whose fault?
Whose but his own?  ingrate, he had of me
All he could have I made him just and right,
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
Such I created all the ethereal Powers
And Spirits, both them who stood, and them who faild
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have given sincere
Of true allegiance, constant faith or love,
Where only what they needs must do appeard,
Not what they would?  what praise could they receive?
What pleasure I from such obedience paid,
When will and reason reason also is choice
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoild,
Made passive both, had servd necessity,
Not me?  they therefore, as to right belong d,
So were created, nor can justly accuse
Their Maker, or their making, or their fate,
As if predestination overruld
Their will disposd by absolute decree
Or high foreknowledge they themselves decreed
Their own revolt, not I if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.
So without least impulse or shadow of fate,
Or aught by me immutably foreseen,
They trespass, authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge, and what they choose for so
I formd them free: and free they must remain,
Till they enthrall themselves I else must change
Their nature, and revoke the high decree
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordaind
THeir freedom: they themselves ordaind their fall.
The first sort by their own suggestion fell,
Selftempted, selfdepravd:  Man falls, deceivd
By the other first:  Man therefore shall find grace,
The other none:  In mercy and justice both,
Through Heaven and Earth, so shall my glory excel
But Mercy, first and last, shall brightest shine.
Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance filld
All Heaven, and in the blessed Spirits elect
Sense of new joy ineffable diffusd.
Beyond compare the Son of God was seen
Most glorious in him all his Father shone
Substantially expressd and in his face
Divine compassion visibly appeard,
Love without end, and without measure grace,
Which uttering, thus he to his Father spake.
O Father, gracious was that word which closd
Thy sovran command, that Man should find grace
, that Man should find grace
For which both Heaven and earth shall high extol
Thy praises, with the innumerable sound
Of hymns and sacred songs, wherewith thy throne
Encompassd shall resound thee ever blest.
For should Man finally be lost, should Man,
Thy creature late so lovd, thy youngest son,
Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joind
With his own folly?  that be from thee far,
That far be from thee, Father, who art judge
Of all things made, and judgest only right.
Or shall the Adversary thus obtain
His end, and frustrate thine?  shall he fulfill
His malice, and thy goodness bring to nought,
Or proud return, though to his heavier doom,
Yet with revenge accomplishd, and to Hell
Draw after him the whole race of mankind,
By him corrupted?  or wilt thou thyself
Abolish thy creation, and unmake
For him, what for thy glory thou hast made?
So should thy goodness and thy greatness both
Be questiond and blasphemd without defence.
To whom the great Creator thus replied.
O son, in whom my soul hath chief delight,
Son of my bosom, Son who art alone.
My word, my wisdom, and effectual might,
All hast thou spoken as my thoughts are, all
As my eternal purpose hath decreed
Man shall not quite be lost, but savd who will
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me
Freely vouchsafd once more I will renew
His lapsed powers, though forfeit and enthralld
By sin to foul exorbitant desires
Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand
On even ground against his mortal foe
By me upheld, that he may know how frail
His fallen condition is, and to me owe
All his deliverance, and to none but me.
Some I have chosen of peculiar grace,
Elect above the rest so is my will:
The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warnd
Their sinful state, and to appease betimes
The incensed Deity, while offerd grace
Invites for I will clear their senses dark,
What may suffice, and soften stony hearts
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
To prayer, repentance, and obedience due,
Though but endeavourd with sincere intent,
Mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut.
And I will place within them as a guide,
My umpire Conscience whom if they will hear,
Light after light, well usd, they shall attain,
And to the end, persisting, safe arrive.
This my long sufferance, and my day of grace,
They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste
But hard be hardend, blind be blinded more,
That they may stumble on, and deeper fall
And none but such from mercy I exclude.
But yet all is not done Man disobeying,
Disloyal, breaks his fealty, and sins
Against the high supremacy of Heaven,
Affecting Godhead, and, so losing all,
To expiate his treason hath nought left,
But to destruction sacred and devote,
He, with his whole posterity, must die,
Die he or justice must unless for him
Some other able, and as willing, pay
The rigid satisfaction, death for death.
Say, heavenly Powers, where shall we find such love?
Which of you will be mortal, to redeem
Mans mortal crime, and just the unjust to save?
Dwells in all Heaven charity so dear?
And silence was in Heaven:  on Mans behalf
He askd, but all the heavenly quire stood mute,
Patron or intercessour none appeard,
Much less that durst upon his own head draw
The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set.
And now without redemption all mankind
Must have been lost, adjudgd to Death and Hell
By doom severe, had not the Son of God,
In whom the fulness dwells of love divine,
His dearest mediation thus renewd.
Father, thy word is past, Man shall find grace
And shall grace not find means, that finds her way,
The speediest of thy winged messengers,
To visit all thy creatures, and to all
Comes unprevented, unimplord, unsought?
Happy for Man, so coming he her aid
Can never seek, once dead in sins, and lost
Atonement for himself, or offering meet,
Indebted and undone, hath none to bring
Behold me then:  me for him, life for life
I offer: on me let thine anger fall
Account me Man I for his sake will leave
 Thy bosom, and this glory next to thee
 Freely put off, and for him lastly die
 Well pleased on me let Death wreak all his rage.
 Under his gloomy power I shall not long
 Lie vanquished. Thou hast given me to possess
 Life in myself for ever by thee I live
 Though now to Death I yield, and am his due,
 All that of me can die, yet, that debt paid,
  thou wilt not leave me in the loathsome grave
 His prey, nor suffer my unspotted soul
 For ever with corruption there to dwell
 But I shall rise victorious, and subdue
 My vanquisher, spoiled of his vaunted spoil.
 Death his deaths wound shall then receive, and stoop
 Inglorious, of his mortal sting disarmed
 I through the ample air in triumph high
 Shall lead Hell captive maugre Hell, and show
The powers of darkness bound. Thou, at the sight
 Pleased, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile,
 While, by thee raised, I ruin all my foes
 Death last, and with his carcase glut the grave
 Then, with the multitude of my redeemed,
 Shall enter Heaven, long absent, and return,
 Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud
 Of anger shall remain, but peace assured
 And reconcilement: wrath shall be no more
 Thenceforth, but in thy presence joy entire.
 His words here ended but his meek aspect
 Silent yet spake, and breathed immortal love
 To mortal men, above which only shone
 Filial obedience: as a sacrifice
 Glad to be offered, he attends the will
 Of his great Father. Admiration seized
 All Heaven, what this might mean, and whither tend,
 Wondering but soon th Almighty thus replied.
 O thou in Heaven and Earth the only peace
 Found out for mankind under wrath, O thou
 My sole complacence! Well thou knowst how dear
 To me are all my works nor Man the least,
 Though last created, that for him I spare
 Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save,
 By losing thee a while, the whole race lost.

     00021053
 Thou, therefore, whom thou only canst redeem,
 Their nature also to thy nature join
 And be thyself Man among men on Earth,
 Made flesh, when time shall be, of virgin seed,
 By wondrous birth be thou in Adams room
The head of all mankind, though Adams son.
As in him perish all men, so in thee,
As from a second root, shall be restored
As many as are restored, without thee none.
His crime makes guilty all his sons thy merit,
Imputed, shall absolve them who renounce
Their own both righteous and unrighteous deeds,
And live in thee transplanted, and from thee
Receive new life.  So Man, as is most just,
Shall satisfy for Man, be judged and die,
And dying rise, and rising with him raise
His brethren, ransomed with his own dear life.
So heavenly love shall outdo hellish hate,
Giving to death, and dying to redeem,
So dearly to redeem what hellish hate
So easily destroyed, and still destroys
In those who, when they may, accept not grace.
Nor shalt thou, by descending to assume
Mans nature, lessen or degrade thine own.
Because thou hast, though throned in highest bliss
Equal to God, and equally enjoying
Godlike fruition, quitted all, to save
A world from utter loss, and hast been found
By merit more than birthright Son of God,
Found worthiest to be so by being good,
Far more than great or high because in thee
Love hath abounded more than glory abounds
Therefore thy humiliation shall exalt
With thee thy manhood also to this throne:
Here shalt thou sit incarnate, here shalt reign
Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man,
Anointed universal King all power
I give thee reign for ever, and assume
Thy merits under thee, as head supreme,
Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions, I reduce:
All knees to thee shall bow, of them that bide
In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell.
When thou, attended gloriously from Heaven,
Shalt in the sky appear, and from thee send
The summoning ArchAngels to proclaim
Thy dread tribunal forthwith from all winds,
The living, and forthwith the cited dead
Of all past ages, to the general doom
Shall hasten such a peal shall rouse their sleep.
Then, all thy saints assembled, thou shalt judge
Bad Men and Angels they, arraigned, shall sink
Beneath thy sentence Hell, her numbers full,
Thenceforth shall be for ever shut.  Mean while
The world shall burn, and from her ashes spring
New Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell,
And, after all their tribulations long,
See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds,
With joy and peace triumphing, and fair truth.
Then thou thy regal scepter shalt lay by,
For regal scepter then no more shall need,
God shall be all in all.  But, all ye Gods,
Adore him, who to compass all this dies
Adore the Son, and honour him as me.
No sooner had the Almighty ceased, but all
The multitude of Angels, with a shout
Loud as from numbers without number, sweet
As from blest voices, uttering joy, Heaven rung
With jubilee, and loud Hosannas filled
The eternal regions:  Lowly reverent
Towards either throne they bow, and to the ground
With solemn adoration down they cast
Their crowns inwove with amarant and gold
Immortal amarant, a flower which once
In Paradise, fast by the tree of life,
Began to bloom but soon for mans offence
To Heaven removed, where first it grew, there grows,
And flowers aloft shading the fount of life,
And where the river of bliss through midst of Heaven
Rolls oer Elysian flowers her amber stream
With these that never fade the Spirits elect
Bind their resplendent locks inwreathed with beams
Now in loose garlands thick thrown off, the bright
Pavement, that like a sea of jasper shone,
Impurpled with celestial roses smiled.
Then, crowned again, their golden harps they took,
Harps ever tuned, that glittering by their side
Like quivers hung, and with preamble sweet
Of charming symphony they introduce
Their sacred song, and waken raptures high
No voice exempt, no voice but well could join
Melodious part, such concord is in Heaven.
Thee, Father, first they sung Omnipotent,
Immutable, Immortal, Infinite,
Eternal King the Author of all being,
Fonntain of light, thyself invisible
Amidst the glorious brightness where thou sitst
Throned inaccessible, but when thou shadest
The full blaze of thy beams, and, through a cloud
Drawn round about thee like a radiant shrine,
Dark with excessive bright thy skirts appear,
Yet dazzle Heaven, that brightest Seraphim
Approach not, but with both wings veil their eyes.
Thee next they sang of all creation first,
Begotten Son, Divine Similitude,
In whose conspicuous countenance, without cloud
Made visible, the Almighty Father shines,
Whom else no creature can behold on thee
Impressed the effulgence of his glory abides,
Transfused on thee his ample Spirit rests.
He Heaven of Heavens and all the Powers therein
By thee created and by thee threw down
The aspiring Dominations:  Thou that day
Thy Fathers dreadful thunder didst not spare,
Nor stop thy flaming chariotwheels, that shook
Heavens everlasting frame, while oer the necks
Thou drovest of warring Angels disarrayed.
Back from pursuit thy Powers with loud acclaim
Thee only extolled, Son of thy Fathers might,
To execute fierce vengeance on his foes,
Not so on Man:  Him through their malice fallen,
Father of mercy and grace, thou didst not doom
So strictly, but much more to pity incline:
No sooner did thy dear and only Son
Perceive thee purposed not to doom frail Man
So strictly, but much more to pity inclined,
He to appease thy wrath, and end the strife
Of mercy and justice in thy face discerned,
Regardless of the bliss wherein he sat
Second to thee, offered himself to die
For Mans offence.  O unexampled love,
Love no where to be found less than Divine!
Hail, Son of God, Saviour of Men!  Thy name
Shall be the copious matter of my song
Henceforth, and never shall my heart thy praise
Forget, nor from thy Fathers praise disjoin.
Thus they in Heaven, above the starry sphere,
Their happy hours in joy and hymning spent.
Mean while upon the firm opacous globe
Of this round world, whose first convex divides
The luminous inferiour orbs, enclosed
From Chaos, and the inroad of Darkness old,
Satan alighted walks:  A globe far off
It seemed, now seems a boundless continent
Dark, waste, and wild, under the frown of Night
Starless exposed, and everthreatening storms
Of Chaos blustering round, inclement sky
Save on that side which from the wall of Heaven,
Though distant far, some small reflection gains
Of glimmering air less vexed with tempest loud:
Here walked the Fiend at large in spacious field.
As when a vultur on Imaus bred,
Whose snowy ridge the roving Tartar bounds,
Dislodging from a region scarce of prey
To gorge the flesh of lambs or yeanling kids,
On hills where flocks are fed, flies toward the springs
Of Ganges or Hydaspes, Indian streams
But in his way lights on the barren plains
Of Sericana, where Chineses drive
With sails and wind their cany waggons light:
So, on this windy sea of land, the Fiend
Walked up and down alone, bent on his prey
Alone, for other creature in this place,
Living or lifeless, to be found was none
None yet, but store hereafter from the earth
Up hither like aereal vapours flew
Of all things transitory and vain, when sin
With vanity had filled the works of men:
Both all things vain, and all who in vain things
Built their fond hopes of glory or lasting fame,
Or happiness in this or the other life
All who have their reward on earth, the fruits
Of painful superstition and blind zeal,
Nought seeking but the praise of men, here find
Fit retribution, empty as their deeds
All the unaccomplished works of Natures hand,
Abortive, monstrous, or unkindly mixed,
Dissolved on earth, fleet hither, and in vain,
Till final dissolution, wander here
Not in the neighbouring moon as some have dreamed
Those argent fields more likely habitants,
Translated Saints, or middle Spirits hold
Betwixt the angelical and human kind.
Hither of illjoined sons and daughters born
First from the ancient world those giants came
With many a vain exploit, though then renowned:
The builders next of Babel on the plain
Of Sennaar, and still with vain design,
New Babels, had they wherewithal, would build:
Others came single he, who, to be deemed
A God, leaped fondly into Aetna flames,
Empedocles and he, who, to enjoy
Platos Elysium, leaped into the sea,
Cleombrotus and many more too long,
Embryos, and idiots, eremites, and friars
White, black, and gray, with all their trumpery.
Here pilgrims roam, that strayed so far to seek
In Golgotha him dead, who lives in Heaven
And they, who to be sure of Paradise,
Dying, put on the weeds of Dominick,
Or in Franciscan think to pass disguised
They pass the planets seven, and pass the fixed,
And that crystalling sphere whose balance weighs
The trepidation talked, and that first moved
And now Saint Peter at Heavens wicket seems
To wait them with his keys, and now at foot
Of Heavens ascent they lift their feet, when lo
A violent cross wind from either coast
Blows them transverse, ten thousand leagues awry
Into the devious air:  Then might ye see
Cowls, hoods, and habits, with their wearers, tost
And fluttered into rags then reliques, beads,
Indulgences, dispenses, pardons, bulls,
The sport of winds:  All these, upwhirled aloft,
Fly oer the backside of the world far off
Into a Limbo large and broad, since called
The Paradise of Fools, to few unknown
Long after now unpeopled, and untrod.
All this dark globe the Fiend found as he passed,
And long he wandered, till at last a gleam
Of dawning light turned thitherward in haste
His travelled steps: far distant he descries
Ascending by degrees magnificent
Up to the wall of Heaven a structure high
At top whereof, but far more rich, appeared
The work as of a kingly palacegate,
With frontispiece of diamond and gold
Embellished thick with sparkling orient gems
The portal shone, inimitable on earth
By model, or by shading pencil, drawn.
These stairs were such as whereon Jacob saw
Angels ascending and descending, bands
Of guardians bright, when he from Esau fled
To PadanAram, in the field of Luz
Dreaming by night under the open sky
And waking cried,  This is the gate of Heaven.
Each stair mysteriously was meant, nor stood
There always, but drawn up to Heaven sometimes
Viewless and underneath a bright sea flowed
Of jasper, or of liquid pearl, whereon
Who after came from earth, failing arrived
Wafted by Angels, or flew oer the lake
Rapt in a chariot drawn by fiery steeds.
The stairs were then let down, whether to dare
The Fiend by easy ascent, or aggravate
His sad exclusion from the doors of bliss:
Direct against which opened from beneath,
Just oer the blissful seat of Paradise,
A passage down to the Earth, a passage wide,
Wider by far than that of aftertimes
Over mount Sion, and, though that were large,
Over the Promised Land to God so dear
By which, to visit oft those happy tribes,
On high behests his angels to and fro
Passed frequent, and his eye with choice regard
From Paneas, the fount of Jordans flood,
To Beersaba, where the Holy Land
Borders on Egypt and the Arabian shore
So wide the opening seemed, where bounds were set
To darkness, such as bound the ocean wave.
Satan from hence, now on the lower stair,
That scaled by steps of gold to Heavengate,
Looks down with wonder at the sudden view
Of all this world at once.  As when a scout,
Through dark?nd desart ways with?oeril gone
All?might,?t?kast by break of cheerful dawn
Obtains the brow of some highclimbing hill,
Which to his eye discovers unaware
The goodly prospect of some foreign land
First seen, or some renowned metropolis
With glistering spires and pinnacles adorned,
Which now the rising sun gilds with his beams:
Such wonder seised, though after Heaven seen,
The Spirit malign, but much more envy seised,
At sight of all this world beheld so fair.
Round he surveys and well might, where he stood
So high above the circling canopy
Of nights extended shade, from eastern point
Of Libra to the fleecy star that bears
Andromeda far off Atlantick seas
Beyond the horizon then from pole to pole
He views in breadth, and without longer pause
Down right into the worlds first region throws
His flight precipitant, and winds with ease
Through the pure marble air his oblique way
Amongst innumerable stars, that shone
Stars distant, but nigh hand seemed other worlds
Or other worlds they seemed, or happy isles,
Like those Hesperian gardens famed of old,
Fortunate fields, and groves, and flowery vales,
Thrice happy isles but who dwelt happy there
He staid not to inquire:  Above them all
The golden sun, in splendour likest Heaven,
Allured his eye thither his course he bends
Through the calm firmament, but up or down,
By center, or eccentrick, hard to tell,
Or longitude, where the great luminary
Aloof the vulgar constellations thick,
That from his lordly eye keep distance due,
Dispenses light from far they, as they move
Their starry dance in numbers that compute
Days, months, and years, towards his allcheering lamp
Turn swift their various motions, or are turned
By his magnetick beam, that gently warms
The universe, and to each inward part
With gentle penetration, though unseen,
Shoots invisible virtue even to the deep
So wonderously was set his station bright.
There lands the Fiend, a spot like which perhaps
Astronomer in the suns lucent orb
Through his glazed optick tube yet never saw.
The place he found beyond expression bright,
Compared with aught on earth, metal or stone
Not all parts like, but all alike informed
With radiant light, as glowing iron with fire
If metal, part seemed gold, part silver clear
If stone, carbuncle most or chrysolite,
Ruby or topaz, to the twelve that shone
In Aarons breastplate, and a stone besides
Imagined rather oft than elsewhere seen,
That stone, or like to that which here below
Philosophers in vain so long have sought,
In vain, though by their powerful art they bind
Volatile Hermes, and call up unbound
In various shapes old Proteus from the sea,
Drained through a limbeck to his native form.
What wonder then if fields and regions here
Breathe forth Elixir pure, and rivers run
Potable gold, when with one virtuous touch
The archchemick sun, so far from us remote,
Produces, with terrestrial humour mixed,
Here in the dark so many precious things
Of colour glorious, and effect so rare?
Here matter new to gaze the Devil met
Undazzled far and wide his eye commands
For sight no obstacle found here, nor shade,
But all sunshine, as when his beams at noon
Culminate from the equator, as they now
Shot upward still direct, whence no way round
Shadow from body opaque can fall and the air,
No where so clear, sharpened his visual ray
To objects distant far, whereby he soon
Saw within ken a glorious Angel stand,
The same whom John saw also in the sun:
His back was turned, but not his brightness hid
Of beaming sunny rays a golden tiar
Circled his head, nor less his locks behind
Illustrious on his shoulders fledge with wings
Lay waving round on some great charge employed
He seemed, or fixed in cogitation deep.
Glad was the Spirit impure, as now in hope
To find who might direct his wandering flight
To Paradise, the happy seat of Man,
His journeys end and our beginning woe.
But first he casts to change his proper shape,
Which else might work him danger or delay:
And now a stripling Cherub he appears,
Not of the prime, yet such as in his face
Youth smiled celestial, and to every limb
Suitable grace diffused, so well he feigned:
Under a coronet his flowing hair
In curls on either cheek played wings he wore
Of many a coloured plume, sprinkled with gold
His habit fit for speed succinct, and held
Before his decent steps a silver wand.
He drew not nigh unheard the Angel bright,
Ere he drew nigh, his radiant visage turned,
Admonished by his ear, and straight was known
The ArchAngel Uriel, one of the seven
Who in Gods presence, nearest to his throne,
Stand ready at command, and are his eyes
That run through all the Heavens, or down to the Earth
Bear his swift errands over moist and dry,
Oer sea and land: him Satan thus accosts.
Uriel, for thou of those seven Spirits that stand
In sight of Gods high throne, gloriously bright,
The first art wont his great authentick will
Interpreter through highest Heaven to bring,
Where all his sons thy embassy attend
And here art likeliest by supreme decree
Like honour to obtain, and as his eye
To visit oft this new creation round
Unspeakable desire to see, and know
All these his wonderous works, but chiefly Man,
His chief delight and favour, him for whom
All these his works so wonderous he ordained,
Hath brought me from the quires of Cherubim
Alone thus wandering.  Brightest Seraph, tell
In which of all these shining orbs hath Man
His fixed seat, or fixed seat hath none,
But all these shining orbs his choice to dwell
That I may find him, and with secret gaze
Or open admiration him behold,
On whom the great Creator hath bestowed
Worlds, and on whom hath all these graces poured
That both in him and all things, as is meet,
The universal Maker we may praise
Who justly hath driven out his rebel foes
To deepest Hell, and, to repair that loss,
Created this new happy race of Men
To serve him better:  Wise are all his ways.
So spake the false dissembler unperceived
For neither Man nor Angel can discern
Hypocrisy, the only evil that walks
Invisible, except to God alone,
By his permissive will, through Heaven and Earth:
And oft, though wisdom wake, suspicion sleeps
At wisdoms gate, and to simplicity
Resigns her charge, while goodness thinks no ill
Where no ill seems:  Which now for once beguiled
Uriel, though regent of the sun, and held
The sharpestsighted Spirit of all in Heaven
Who to the fraudulent impostor foul,
In his uprightness, answer thus returned.
Fair Angel, thy desire, which tends to know
The works of God, thereby to glorify
The great Workmaster, leads to no excess
That reaches blame, but rather merits praise
The more it seems excess, that led thee hither
From thy empyreal mansion thus alone,
To witness with thine eyes what some perhaps,
Contented with report, hear only in Heaven:
For wonderful indeed are all his works,
Pleasant to know, and worthiest to be all
Had in remembrance always with delight
But what created mind can comprehend
Their number, or the wisdom infinite
That brought them forth, but hid their causes deep?
I saw when at his word the formless mass,
This worlds material mould, came to a heap:
Confusion heard his voice, and wild uproar
Stood ruled, stood vast infinitude confined
Till at his second bidding Darkness fled,
Light shone, and order from disorder sprung:
Swift to their several quarters hasted then
The cumbrous elements, earth, flood, air, fire
And this ethereal quintessence of Heaven
Flew upward, spirited with various forms,
That rolled orbicular, and turned to stars
Numberless, as thou seest, and how they move
Each had his place appointed, each his course
The rest in circuit walls this universe.
Look downward on that globe, whose hither side
With light from hence, though but reflected, shines
That place is Earth, the seat of Man that light
His day, which else, as the other hemisphere,
Night would invade but there the neighbouring moon
So call that opposite fair star her aid
Timely interposes, and her monthly round
Still ending, still renewing, through mid Heaven,
With borrowed light her countenance triform
Hence fills and empties to enlighten the Earth,
And in her pale dominion checks the night.
That spot, to which I point, is Paradise,
Adams abode those lofty shades, his bower.
Thy way thou canst not miss, me mine requires.
Thus said, he turned and Satan, bowing low,
As to superiour Spirits is wont in Heaven,
Where honour due and reverence none neglects,
Took leave, and toward the coast of earth beneath,
Down from the ecliptick, sped with hoped success,
Throws his steep flight in many an aery wheel
Nor staid, till on Niphates top he lights.



Book IV


O, for that warning voice, which he, who saw
The Apocalypse, heard cry in Heaven aloud,
Then when the Dragon, put to second rout,
Came furious down to be revenged on men,
Woe to the inhabitants on earth! that now,
While time was, our first parents had been warned
The coming of their secret foe, and scaped,
Haply so scaped his mortal snare:  For now
Satan, now first inflamed with rage, came down,
The tempter ere the accuser of mankind,
To wreak on innocent frail Man his loss
Of that first battle, and his flight to Hell:
Yet, not rejoicing in his speed, though bold
Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast,
Begins his dire attempt which nigh the birth
Now rolling boils in his tumultuous breast,
And like a devilish engine back recoils
Upon himself horrour and doubt distract
His troubled thoughts, and from the bottom stir
The Hell within him for within him Hell
He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell
One step, no more than from himself, can fly
By change of place:  Now conscience wakes despair,
That slumbered wakes the bitter memory
Of what he was, what is, and what must be
Worse of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue.
Sometimes towards Eden, which now in his view
Lay pleasant, his grieved look he fixes sad
Sometimes towards Heaven, and the fullblazing sun,
Which now sat high in his meridian tower:
Then, much revolving, thus in sighs began.
O thou, that, with surpassing glory crowned,
Lookest from thy sole dominion like the God
Of this new world at whose sight all the stars
Hide their diminished heads to thee I call,
But with no friendly voice, and add thy name,
Of Sun! to tell thee how I hate thy beams,
That bring to my remembrance from what state
I fell, how glorious once above thy sphere
Till pride and worse ambition threw me down
Warring in Heaven against Heavens matchless King:
Ah, wherefore! he deserved no such return
From me, whom he created what I was
In that bright eminence, and with his good
Upbraided none nor was his service hard.
What could be less than to afford him praise,
The easiest recompence, and pay him thanks,
How due! yet all his good proved ill in me,
And wrought but malice lifted up so high
I sdeined subjection, and thought one step higher
Would set me highest, and in a moment quit
The debt immense of endless gratitude,
So burdensome still paying, still to owe,
Forgetful what from him I still received,
And understood not that a grateful mind
By owing owes not, but still pays, at once
Indebted and discharged what burden then
O, had his powerful destiny ordained
Me some inferiour Angel, I had stood
Then happy no unbounded hope had raised
Ambition!  Yet why not some other Power
As great might have aspired, and me, though mean,
Drawn to his part but other Powers as great
Fell not, but stand unshaken, from within
Or from without, to all temptations armed.
Hadst thou the same free will and power to stand?
Thou hadst: whom hast thou then or what to accuse,
But Heavens free love dealt equally to all?
Be then his love accursed, since love or hate,
To me alike, it deals eternal woe.
Nay, cursed be thou since against his thy will
Chose freely what it now so justly rues.
Me miserable! which way shall I fly
Infinite wrath, and infinite despair?
Which way I fly is Hell myself am Hell
And, in the lowest deep, a lower deep
Still threatening to devour me opens wide,
To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heaven.
O, then, at last relent:  Is there no place
Left for repentance, none for pardon left?
None left but by submission and that word
Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame
Among the Spirits beneath, whom I seduced
With other promises and other vaunts
Than to submit, boasting I could subdue
The Omnipotent.  Ay me! they little know
How dearly I abide that boast so vain,
Under what torments inwardly I groan,
While they adore me on the throne of Hell.
With diadem and scepter high advanced,
The lower still I fall, only supreme
In misery:  Such joy ambition finds.
But say I could repent, and could obtain,
By act of grace, my former state how soon
Would highth recall high thoughts, how soon unsay
What feigned submission swore?  Ease would recant
Vows made in pain, as violent and void.
For never can true reconcilement grow,
Where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep:
Which would but lead me to a worse relapse
And heavier fall:  so should I purchase dear
Short intermission bought with double smart.
This knows my Punisher therefore as far
From granting he, as I from begging, peace
All hope excluded thus, behold, in stead
Mankind created, and for him this world.
So farewell, hope and with hope farewell, fear
Farewell, remorse! all good to me is lost
Evil, be thou my good by thee at least
Divided empire with Heavens King I hold,
By thee, and more than half perhaps will reign
As Man ere long, and this new world, shall know.
Thus while he spake, each passion dimmed his face
Thrice changed with pale, ire, envy, and despair
Which marred his borrowed visage, and betrayed
Him counterfeit, if any eye beheld.
For heavenly minds from such distempers foul
Are ever clear.  Whereof he soon aware,
Each perturbation smoothed with outward calm,
Artificer of fraud and was the first
That practised falsehood under saintly show,
Deep malice to conceal, couched with revenge:
Yet not enough had practised to deceive
Uriel once warned whose eye pursued him down
 The way he went, and on the Assyrian mount
 Saw him disfigured, more than could befall
 Spirit of happy sort his gestures fierce
 He marked and mad demeanour, then alone,
 As he supposed, all unobserved, unseen.
 So on he fares, and to the border comes
 Of Eden, where delicious Paradise,
 Now nearer, crowns with her enclosure green,
 As with a rural mound, the champaign head
 Of a steep wilderness, whose hairy sides
Access denied and overhead upgrew
 Insuperable height of loftiest shade,
 Cedar, and pine, and fir, and branching palm,
 A sylvan scene, and, as the ranks ascend,
 Shade above shade, a woody theatre
 Of stateliest view. Yet higher than their tops
 The verdurous wall of Paradise upsprung

    00081429
Which to our general sire gave prospect large
Into his nether empire neighbouring round.
And higher than that wall a circling row
Of goodliest trees, loaden with fairest fruit,
Blossoms and fruits at once of golden hue,
Appeared, with gay enamelled colours mixed:
On which the sun more glad impressed his beams
Than in fair evening cloud, or humid bow,
When God hath showered the earth so lovely seemed
That landskip:  And of pure now purer air
Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires
Vernal delight and joy, able to drive
All sadness but despair:  Now gentle gales,
Fanning their odoriferous wings, dispense
Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole
Those balmy spoils.  As when to them who fail
Beyond the Cape of Hope, and now are past
Mozambick, off at sea northeast winds blow
Sabean odours from the spicy shore
Of Araby the blest with such delay
Well pleased they slack their course, and many a league
Cheered with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles:
So entertained those odorous sweets the Fiend,
Who came their bane though with them better pleased
Than Asmodeus with the fishy fume
That drove him, though enamoured, from the spouse
Of Tobits son, and with a vengeance sent
From Media post to Egypt, there fast bound.
Now to the ascent of that steep savage hill
Satan had journeyed on, pensive and slow
But further way found none, so thick entwined,
As one continued brake, the undergrowth
Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplexed
All path of man or beast that passed that way.
One gate there only was, and that looked east
On the other side: which when the archfelon saw,
Due entrance he disdained and, in contempt,
At one flight bound high overleaped all bound
Of hill or highest wall, and sheer within
Lights on his feet.  As when a prowling wolf,
Whom hunger drives to seek new haunt for prey,
Watching where shepherds pen their flocks at eve
In hurdled cotes amid the field secure,
Leaps oer the fence with ease into the fold:
Or as a thief, bent to unhoard the cash
Of some rich burgher, whose substantial doors,
Crossbarred and bolted fast, fear no assault,
In at the window climbs, or oer the tiles:
So clomb this first grand thief into Gods fold
So since into his church lewd hirelings climb.
Thence up he flew, and on the tree of life,
The middle tree and highest there that grew,
Sat like a cormorant yet not true life
Thereby regained, but sat devising death
To them who lived nor on the virtue thought
Of that lifegiving plant, but only used
For prospect, what well used had been the pledge
Of immortality.  So little knows
Any, but God alone, to value right
The good before him, but perverts best things
To worst abuse, or to their meanest use.
Beneath him with new wonder now he views,
To all delight of human sense exposed,
In narrow room, Natures whole wealth, yea more,
A Heaven on Earth:  For blissful Paradise
Of God the garden was, by him in the east
Of Eden planted Eden stretched her line
From Auran eastward to the royal towers
Of great Seleucia, built by Grecian kings,
Of where the sons of Eden long before
Dwelt in Telassar:  In this pleasant soil
His far more pleasant garden God ordained
Out of the fertile ground he caused to grow
All trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste
And all amid them stood the tree of life,
High eminent, blooming ambrosial fruit
Of vegetable gold and next to life,
Our death, the tree of knowledge, grew fast by,
Knowledge of good bought dear by knowing ill.
Southward through Eden went a river large,
Nor changed his course, but through the shaggy hill
Passed underneath ingulfed for God had thrown
That mountain as his gardenmould high raised
Upon the rapid current, which, through veins
Of porous earth with kindly thirst updrawn,
Rose a fresh fountain, and with many a rill
Watered the garden thence united fell
Down the steep glade, and met the nether flood,
Which from his darksome passage now appears,
And now, divided into four main streams,
Runs diverse, wandering many a famous realm
And country, whereof here needs no account
But rather to tell how, if Art could tell,
How from that sapphire fount the crisped brooks,
Rolling on orient pearl and sands of gold,
With mazy errour under pendant shades
Ran nectar, visiting each plant, and fed
Flowers worthy of Paradise, which not nice Art
In beds and curious knots, but Nature boon
Poured forth profuse on hill, and dale, and plain,
Both where the morning sun first warmly smote
The open field, and where the unpierced shade
Imbrowned the noontide bowers:  Thus was this place
A happy rural seat of various view
Groves whose rich trees wept odorous gums and balm,
Others whose fruit, burnished with golden rind,
Hung amiable, Hesperian fables true,
If true, here only, and of delicious taste:
Betwixt them lawns, or level downs, and flocks
Grazing the tender herb, were interposed,
Or palmy hillock or the flowery lap
Of some irriguous valley spread her store,
Flowers of all hue, and without thorn the rose:
Another side, umbrageous grots and caves
Of cool recess, oer which the mantling vine
Lays forth her purple grape, and gently creeps
Luxuriant mean while murmuring waters fall
Down the slope hills, dispersed, or in a lake,
That to the fringed bank with myrtle crowned
Her crystal mirrour holds, unite their streams.
The birds their quire apply airs, vernal airs,
Breathing the smell of field and grove, attune
The trembling leaves, while universal Pan,
Knit with the Graces and the Hours in dance,
Led on the eternal Spring.  Not that fair field
Of Enna, where Proserpine gathering flowers,
Herself a fairer flower by gloomy Dis
Was gathered, which cost Ceres all that pain
To seek her through the world nor that sweet grove
Of Daphne by Orontes, and the inspired
Castalian spring, might with this Paradise
Of Eden strive nor that Nyseian isle
Girt with the river Triton, where old Cham,
Whom Gentiles Ammon call and Libyan Jove,
Hid Amalthea, and her florid son
Young Bacchus, from his stepdame Rheas eye
Nor where Abassin kings their issue guard,
Mount Amara, though this by some supposed
True Paradise under the Ethiop line
By Nilus head, enclosed with shining rock,
A whole days journey high, but wide remote
From this Assyrian garden, where the Fiend
Saw, undelighted, all delight, all kind
Of living creatures, new to sight, and strange
Two of far nobler shape, erect and tall,
Godlike erect, with native honour clad
In naked majesty seemed lords of all:
And worthy seemed for in their looks divine
The image of their glorious Maker shone,
Truth, wisdom, sanctitude severe and pure,
Severe, but in true filial freedom placed,
Whence true authority in men though both
Not equal, as their sex not equal seemed
For contemplation he and valour formed
For softness she and sweet attractive grace
He for God only, she for God in him:
His fair large front and eye sublime declared
Absolute rule and hyacinthine locks
Round from his parted forelock manly hung
Clustering, but not beneath his shoulders broad:
She, as a veil, down to the slender waist
Her unadorned golden tresses wore
Dishevelled, but in wanton ringlets waved
As the vine curls her tendrils, which implied
Subjection, but required with gentle sway,
And by her yielded, by him best received,
Yielded with coy submission, modest pride,
And sweet, reluctant, amorous delay.
Nor those mysterious parts were then concealed
Then was not guilty shame, dishonest shame
Of natures works, honour dishonourable,
Sinbred, how have ye troubled all mankind
With shows instead, mere shows of seeming pure,
And banished from mans life his happiest life,
Simplicity and spotless innocence!
So passed they naked on, nor shunned the sight
Of God or Angel for they thought no ill:
So hand in hand they passed, the loveliest pair,
That ever since in loves embraces met
Adam the goodliest man of men since born
His sons, the fairest of her daughters Eve.
Under a tuft of shade that on a green
Stood whispering soft, by a fresh ULFMGZRM HRWV
GSVB HZG GSVN WLDM ZMW, ZUGVI ML NLIV GLRO
LU GSVRI HDVVG TZIWVMRMT OZYLFI GSZM HFUURXVW
GL IVXLNNVMW XLLO AVKSBI, ZMW NZWV VZHV
NLIV VZHB, DSLOVHLNV GSRIHG ZMW ZKKVGRGV
NLIV TIZGVUFO, GL GSVRI HFKKVIUIFRGH GSVB UVOO,
MVXGZIRMV UIFRGH DSRXS GSV XLNKORZMG YLFTSH
BRVOWVW GSVN, HRWVOLMT ZH GSVB HZG IVXORMV
LM GSV HLUG WLDMB YZMP WZNZHPVW DRGS UOLDVIH:
GSV HZELFIB KFOK GSVB XSVD, ZMW RM GSV IRMW,
HGROO ZH GSVB GSRIHGVW, HXLLK GSV YIRNNRMT HGIVZN
MLI TVMGOV KFIKLHV, MLI VMWVZIRMT HNROVH
DZMGVW, MLI BLFGSUFO WZOORZMXV, ZH YVHVVNH
UZRI XLFKOV, ORMPVW RM SZKKB MFKGRZO OVZTFV,
ZOLMV ZH GSVB.  ZYLFG GSVN UIRHPRMT KOZBVW
ZOO YVZHGH LU GSV VZIGS, HRMXV DROW, ZMW LU ZOO XSZHV
RM DLLW LI DROWVIMVHH, ULIVHG LI WVM
HKLIGRMT GSV ORLM IZNKVW, ZMW RM SRH KZD
WZMWOVW GSV PRW YVZIH, GRTVIH, LFMXVH, KZIWH,
TZNYLOOVW YVULIV GSVN GSV FMDRVOWB VOVKSZMG,
GL NZPV GSVN NRIGS, FHVW ZOO SRH NRTSG, ZMW DIVZGSVW
SRH?PRGSVGNILYLHXRH XOLHV GSV HVIKVMG HOB,
RMHRMFZGRMT, DLEV DRGS TLIWRZM GDRMV
SRH YIZRWVW GIZRM, ZMW LU SRH UZGZO TFROV
TZEV KILLU FMSVVWVW LGSVIH LM GSV TIZHH
XLFXSVW, ZMW MLD UROOVW DRGS KZHGFIV TZARMT HZG,
LI YVWDZIW IFNRMZGRMT ULI GSV HFM,
WVXORMVW, DZH SZHGRMT MLD DRGS KILMV XZIVVI
GL GSV LXVZM RHOVH, ZMW RM GSV ZHXVMWRMT HXZOV
LU SVZEVM GSV HGZIH GSZG FHSVI VEVMRMT ILHV:
DSVM HZGZM HGROO RM TZAV, ZH URIHG SV HGLLW,
HXZIXV GSFH ZG OVMTGS UZROVW HKVVXS IVXLEVIVW HZW.
L SVOO! DSZG WL NRMV VBVH DRGS TIRVU YVSLOW!
RMGL LFI ILLN LU YORHH GSFH SRTS ZWEZMXVW
XIVZGFIVH LU LGSVI NLFOW, VZIGSYLIM KVISZKH,
MLG HKRIRGH, BVG GL SVZEVMOB HKRIRGH YIRTSG
ORGGOV RMUVIRLFI DSLN NB GSLFTSGH KFIHFV
DRGS DLMWVI, ZMW XLFOW OLEV, HL OREVOB HSRMVH
RM GSVN WRERMV IVHVNYOZMXV, ZMW HFXS TIZXV
GSV SZMW GSZG ULINVW GSVN LM GSVRI HSZKV SZGS KLFIVW.
ZS! TVMGOV KZRI, BV ORGGOV GSRMP SLD MRTS
BLFI XSZMTV ZKKILZXSVH, DSVM ZOO GSVHV WVORTSGH
DROO EZMRHS, ZMW WVOREVI BV GL DLV
NLIV DLV, GSV NLIV BLFI GZHGV RH MLD LU QLB
SZKKB, YFG ULI HL SZKKB ROO HVXFIVW
OLMT GL XLMGRMFV, ZMW GSRH SRTS HVZG BLFI SVZEVM
ROO UVMXVW ULI SVZEVM GL PVVK LFG HFXS Z ULV
ZH MLD RH VMGVIVW BVG ML KFIKLHVW ULV
GL BLF, DSLN R XLFOW KRGB GSFH ULIOLIM,
GSLFTS R FMKRGRVW:  OVZTFV DRGS BLF R HVVP,
ZMW NFGFZO ZNRGB, HL HGIZRG, HL XOLHV,
GSZG R DRGS BLF NFHG WDVOO, LI BLF DRGS NV
SVMXVULIGS NB WDVOORMT SZKOB NZB MLG KOVZHV,
ORPV GSRH UZRI KZIZWRHV, BLFI HVMHV BVG HFXS
ZXXVKG BLFI NZPVIH DLIP SV TZEV RG NV,
DSRXS R ZH UIVVOB TREV:  SVOO HSZOO FMULOW,
GL VMGVIGZRM BLF GDL, SVI DRWVHG TZGVH,
ZMW HVMW ULIGS ZOO SVI PRMTH GSVIV DROO YV ILLN,
MLG ORPV GSVHV MZIILD ORNRGH, GL IVXVREV
BLFI MFNVILFH LUUHKIRMT RU ML YVGGVI KOZXV,
GSZMP SRN DSL KFGH NV OLGS GL GSRH IVEVMTV
LM BLF DSL DILMT NV MLG ULI SRN DSL DILMTVW.
ZMW HSLFOW R ZG BLFI SZINOVHH RMMLXVMXV
NVOG, ZH R WL, BVG KFYORXP IVZHLM QFHG,
SLMLFI ZMW VNKRIV DRGS IVEVMTV VMOZITVW,
YB XLMJFVIRMT GSRH MVD DLIOW, XLNKVOH NV MLD
GL WL DSZG VOHV, GSLFTS WZNMVW, R HSLFOW ZYSLI.
HL HKZPV GSV URVMW, ZMW DRGS MVXVHHRGB,
GSV GBIZMGH KOVZ, VCXFHVW SRH WVERORHS WVVWH.
GSVM UILN SRH OLUGB HGZMW LM GSZG SRTS GIVV
WLDM SV ZORTSGH ZNLMT GSV HKLIGUFO SVIW
LU GSLHV ULFIULLGVW PRMWH, SRNHVOU MLD LMV,
MLD LGSVI, ZH GSVRI HSZKV HVIEVW YVHG SRH VMW
MVZIVI GL ERVD SRH KIVB, ZMW, FMVHKRVW,
GL NZIP DSZG LU GSVRI HGZGV SV NLIV NRTSG OVZIM,
YB DLIW LI ZXGRLM NZIPVW. ZYLFG GSVN ILFMW
Z ORLM MLD SV HGZOPH DRGS URVIB TOZIV
GSVM ZH Z GRTVI, DSL YB XSZMXV SZGS HKRVW
RM HLNV KFIORVF GDL TVMGOV UZDMH ZG KOZB,
HGIZRTSG XLFXSVH XOLHV, GSVM, IRHRMT, XSZMTVH LUG
SRH XLFXSZMG DZGXS, ZH LMV DSL XSLHV SRH TILFMW,
DSVMXV IFHSRMT, SV NRTSG HFIVHG HVRAV GSVN YLGS,
TIRKVW RM VZXS KZD: DSVM, ZWZN URIHG LU NVM
GL URIHG LU DLNVM VEV GSFH NLERMT HKVVXS,
GFIMVW SRN, ZOO VZI GL SVZI MVD FGGVIZMXV UOLD.
HLOV KZIGMVI, ZMW HLOV KZIG, LU ZOO GSVHV QLBH,
WVZIVI GSBHVOU GSZM ZOO MVVWH NFHG GSV KLDVI
GSZG NZWV FH, ZMW ULI FH GSRH ZNKOV DLIOW,
YV RMURMRGVOB TLLW, ZMW LU SRH TLLW
ZH ORYVIZO ZMW UIVV ZH RMURMRGV
GSZG IZRHVW FH UILN GSV WFHG, ZMW KOZXVW FH SVIV
RM ZOO GSRH SZKKRMVHH, DSL ZG SRH SZMW
SZEV MLGSRMT NVIRGVW, MLI XZM KVIULIN
ZFTSG DSVIVLU SV SZGS MVVW SV DSL IVJFRIVH
UILN FH ML LGSVI HVIERXV GSZM GL PVVK
GSRH LMV, GSRH VZHB XSZITV, LU ZOO GSV GIVVH
RM KZIZWRHV GSZG YVZI WVORXRLFH UIFRG
HL EZIRLFH, MLG GL GZHGV GSZG LMOB GIVV
LU PMLDOVWTV, KOZMGVW YB GSV GIVV LU ORUV
HL MVZI TILDH WVZGS GL ORUV, DSZGVVI WVZGS RH,
HLNV WIVZWUFO GSRMT ML WLFYG ULI DVOO GSLF PMLDVHG
TLW SZGS KILMLFMXVW RG WVZGS GL GZHGV GSZG GIVV,
GSV LMOB HRTM LU LFI LYVWRVMXV OVUG,
ZNLMT HL NZMB HRTMH LU KLDVI ZMW IFOV
XLMUVIIVW FKLM FH, ZMW WLNRMRLM TREVM
LEVI ZOO LGSVI XIVZGFIVH GSZG KLHHVHH
VZIGS, ZRI, ZMW HVZ.  GSVM OVG FH MLG GSRMP SZIW
LMV VZHB KILSRYRGRLM, DSL VMQLB
UIVV OVZEV HL OZITV GL ZOO GSRMTH VOHV, ZMW XSLRXV
FMORNRGVW LU NZMRULOW WVORTSGH:
YFG OVG FH VEVI KIZRHV SRN, ZMW VCGLO
SRH YLFMGB, ULOOLDRMT LFI WVORTSGUFO GZHP,
GL KIFMV GSVHV TILDRMT KOZMGH, ZMW GVMW GSVHV UOLDVIH,
DSRXS DVIV RG GLROHLNV, BVG DRGS GSVV DVIV HDVVG.
GL DSLN GSFH VEV IVKORVW.  L GSLF ULI DSLN
ZMW UILN DSLN R DZH ULINVW, UOVHS LU GSB UOVHS,
ZMW DRGSLFG DSLN ZN GL ML VMW, NB TFRWV
ZMW SVZW! DSZG GSLF SZHG HZRW RH QFHG ZMW IRTSG.
ULI DV GL SRN RMWVVW ZOO KIZRHVH LDV,
ZMW WZROB GSZMPH R XSRVUOB, DSL VMQLB
HL UZI GSV SZKKRVI OLG, VMQLBRMT GSVV
KIVVNRMVMG YB HL NFXS LWWH, DSROV GSLF
ORPV XLMHLIG GL GSBHVOU XZMHG ML DSVIV URMW.
GSZG WZB R LUG IVNVNYVI, DSVM UILN HOVVK
R URIHG ZDZPVW, ZMW ULFMW NBHVOU IVKLHVW
FMWVI Z HSZWV LM UOLDVIH, NFXS DLMWVIRMT DSVIV
ZMW DSZG R DZH, DSVMXV GSRGSVI YILFTSG, ZMW SLD.
MLG WRHGZMG UZI UILN GSVMXV Z NFINFIRMT HLFMW
LU DZGVIH RHHFVW UILN Z XZEV, ZMW HKIVZW
RMGL Z ORJFRW KOZRM, GSVM HGLLW FMNLEVW
KFIV ZH GSV VCKZMHV LU SVZEVM R GSRGSVI DVMG
DRGS FMVCKVIRVMXVW GSLFTSG, ZMW OZRW NV WLDM
LM GSV TIVVM YZMP, GL OLLP RMGL GSV XOVZI
HNLLGS OZPV, GSZG GL NV HVVNVW ZMLGSVI HPB.
ZH R YVMG WLDM GL OLLP, QFHG LKKLHRGV
Z HSZKV DRGSRM GSV DZGVIB TOVZN ZKKVZIVW,
YVMWRMT GL OLLP LM NV:  R HGZIGVW YZXP,
RG HGZIGVW YZXP YFG KOVZHVW R HLLM IVGFIMVW,
KOVZHVW RG IVGFIMVW ZH HLLM DRGS ZMHDVIRMT OLLPH
LU HBNKZGSB ZMW OLEV:  GSVIV R SZW URCVW
NRMV VBVH GROO MLD, ZMW KRMVW DRGS EZRM WVHRIV,
SZW MLG Z ELRXV GSFH DZIMVW NV  DSZG GSLF HVVHG,
DSZG GSVIV GSLF HVVHG, UZRI XIVZGFIV, RH GSBHVOU
DRGS GSVV RG XZNV ZMW TLVH: YFG ULOOLD NV,
ZMW R DROO YIRMT GSVV DSVIV ML HSZWLD HGZBH
GSB XLNRMT, ZMW GSB HLUG VNYIZXVH, SV
DSLHV RNZTV GSLF ZIG SRN GSLF HSZOG VMQLB
RMHVKZIZYOB GSRMV, GL SRN HSZOG YVZI
NFOGRGFWVH ORPV GSBHVOU, ZMW GSVMXV YV XZOOVW
NLGSVI LU SFNZM IZXV.  DSZG XLFOW R WL,
YFG ULOOLD HGIZRTSG, RMERHRYOB GSFH OVW?
GROO R VHKRVW GSVV, UZRI RMWVVW ZMW GZOO,
FMWVI Z KOZGZMV BVG NVGSLFTSG OVHH UZRI,
OVHH DRMMRMT HLUG, OVHH ZNRZYOB NROW,
GSZM GSZG HNLLGS DZGVIB RNZTV:  YZXP R GFIMVW
GSLF ULOOLDRMT XIBVWHG ZOLFW, IVGFIM, UZRI VEV
DSLN UOBVHG GSLF?  DSLN GSLF UOBVHG, LU SRN GSLF ZIG,
SRH UOVHS, SRH YLMV GL TREV GSVV YVRMT R OVMG
LFG LU NB HRWV GL GSVV, MVZIVHG NB SVZIG,
HFYHGZMGRZO ORUV, GL SZEV GSVV YB NB HRWV
SVMXVULIGS ZM RMWRERWFZO HLOZXV WVZI
KZIG LU NB HLFO R HVVP GSVV, ZMW GSVV XOZRN
NB LGSVI SZOU:  DRGS GSZG GSB TVMGOV SZMW
HVRHVW NRMV:  R BRVOWVWZMW UILN GSZG GRNV HVV
SLD YVZFGB RH VCXVOOVW YB NZMOB TIZXV,
ZMW DRHWLN, DSRXS ZOLMV RH GIFOB UZRI.
HL HKZPV LFI TVMVIZO NLGSVI, ZMW DRGS VBVH
LU XLMQFTZO ZGGIZXGRLM FMIVKILEVW,
ZMW NVVP HFIIVMWVI, SZOUVNYIZXRMT OVZMVW
LM LFI URIHG UZGSVI SZOU SVI HDVOORMT YIVZHG
MZPVW NVG SRH, FMWVI GSV UOLDRMT TLOW
LU SVI OLLHV GIVHHVH SRW: SV RM WVORTSG
YLGS LU SVI YVZFGB, ZMW HFYNRHHREV XSZINH,
HNROVW DRGS HFKVIRLFI OLEV, ZH QFKRGVI
LM QFML HNROVH, DSVM SV RNKIVTMH GSV XOLFWH
GSZG HSVW NZBUOLDVIH ZMW KIVHHVW SVI NZGILM ORK
DRGS PRHHVH KFIV:  ZHRWV GSV WVERO GFIMVW
ULI VMEB BVG DRGS QVZOLFH OVVI NZORTM
VBVW GSVN ZHPZMXV, ZMW GL SRNHVOU GSFH KOZRMVW.
HRTSG SZGVUFO, HRTSG GLINVMGRMT! GSFH GSVHV GDL,
RNKZIZWRHVW RM LMV ZMLGSVIH ZINH,
GSV SZKKRVI VWVM, HSZOO VMQLB GSVRI UROO
LU YORHH LM YORHH DSROV R GL SVOO ZN GSIFHG,
DSVIV MVRGSVI QLB MLI OLEV, YFG URVIXV WVHRIV,
ZNLMT LFI LGSVI GLINVMGH MLG GSV OVZHG,
HGROO FMUFOUROOVW DRGS KZRM LU OLMTRMT KRMVH.
BVG OVG NV MLG ULITVG DSZG R SZEV TZRMVW
UILN GSVRI LDM NLFGSH:  ZOO RH MLG GSVRIH, RG HVVNH
LMV UZGZO GIVV GSVIV HGZMWH, LU PMLDOVWTV XZOOVW,
ULIYRWWVM GSVN GL GZHGV:  PMLDOVWTV ULIYRWWVM
HFHKRXRLFH, IVZHLMOVHH.  DSB HSLFOW GSVRI OLIW
VMEB GSVN GSZG?  XZM RG YV HRM GL PMLD?
XZM RG YV WVZGS?  ZMW WL GSVB LMOB HGZMW
YB RTMLIZMXV?  RH GSZG GSVRI SZKKB HGZGV,
GSV KILLU LU GSVRI LYVWRVMXV ZMW GSVRI UZRGS?
L UZRI ULFMWZGRLM OZRW DSVIVLM GL YFROW
GSVRI IFRM! SVMXV R DROO VCXRGV GSVRI NRMWH
DRGS NLIV WVHRIV GL PMLD, ZMW GL IVQVXG
VMERLFH XLNNZMWH, RMEVMGVW DRGS WVHRTM
GL PVVK GSVN OLD, DSLN PMLDOVWTV NRTSG VCZOG
VJFZO DRGS TLWH: ZHKRIRMT GL YV HFXS,
GSVB GZHGV ZMW WRV:  DSZG ORPVORVI XZM VMHFV
YFG URIHG DRGS MZIILD HVZIXS R NFHG DZOP ILFMW
GSRH TZIWVM, ZMW ML XLIMVI OVZEV FMHKRVW
Z XSZMXV YFG XSZMXV NZB OVZW DSVIV R NZB NVVG
HLNV DZMWVIRMT HKRIRG LU SVZEVM YB ULFMGZRM HRWV,
LI RM GSRXP HSZWV IVGRIVW, UILN SRN GL WIZD
DSZG UFIGSVI DLFOW YV OVZIMVW.  OREV DSROV BV NZB,
BVG SZKKB KZRI VMQLB, GROO R IVGFIM,
HSLIG KOVZHFIVH, ULI OLMT DLVH ZIV GL HFXXVVW!
HL HZBRMT, SRH KILFW HGVK SV HXLIMUFO GFIMVW,
YFG DRGS HOB XRIXFNHKVXGRLM, ZMW YVTZM
GSILFTS DLLW, GSILFTS DZHGV, LVI SROO, LVI WZOV, SRH ILZN
NVZM DSROV RM FGNLHG OLMTRGFWV, DSVIV SVZEVM
DRGS VZIGS ZMW LXVZM NVVGH, GSV HVGGRMT HFM
HOLDOB WVHXVMWVW, ZMW DRGS IRTSG ZHKVXG
ZTZRMHG GSV VZHGVIM TZGV LU KZIZWRHV
OVEVOOVW SRH VEVMRMT IZBH:  RG DZH Z ILXP
LU ZOZYZHGVI, KROVW FK GL GSV XOLFWH,
XLMHKRXFLFH UZI, DRMWRMT DRGS LMV ZHXVMG
ZXXVHHRYOV UILN VZIGS, LMV VMGIZMXV SRTS
GSV IVHG DZH XIZTTB XORUU, GSZG LEVISFMT
HGROO ZH RG ILHV, RNKLHHRYOV GL XORNY.
YVGDRCG GSVHV ILXPB KROOZIH TZYIRVO HZG,
XSRVU LU GSV ZMTVORXP TFZIWH, ZDZRGRMT MRTSG
ZYLFG SRN VCVIXRHVW SVILRXP TZNVH
GSV FMZINVW BLFGS LU SVZEVM, YFG MRTS ZG SZMW
XVOVHGRZO ZINLFIB, HSRVOWH, SVONH, ZMW HKVZIH,
SFMT SRTS DRGS WRZNLMW UOZNRMT, ZMW DRGS TLOW.
GSRGSVI XZNV FIRVO, TORWRMT GSILFTS GSV VEVM
LM Z HFMYVZN, HDRUG ZH Z HSLLGRMT HGZI
RM ZFGFNM GSDZIGH GSV MRTSG, DSVM EZKLFIH URIVW
RNKIVHH GSV ZRI, ZMW HSLDH GSV NZIRMVI
UILN DSZG KLRMG LU SRH XLNKZHH GL YVDZIV
RNKVGFLFH DRMWH:  SV GSFH YVTZM RM SZHGV.
TZYIRVO, GL GSVV GSB XLFIHV YB OLG SZGS TREVM
XSZITV ZMW HGIRXG DZGXS, GSZG GL GSRH SZKKB KOZXV
ML VERO GSRMT ZKKILZXS LI VMGVI RM.
GSRH WZB ZG SRTSGS LU MLLM XZNV GL NB HKSVIV
Z HKRIRG, AVZOLFH, ZH SV HVVNVW, GL PMLD
NLIV LU GSV ZONRTSGBH DLIPH, ZMW XSRVUOB NZM,
TLWH OZGVHG RNZTV:  R WVHXIRYVW SRH DZB
YVMG ZOO LM HKVVW, ZMW NZIPVW SRH ZVIB TZRG
YFG RM GSV NLFMG GSZG ORVH UILN VWVM MLIGS,
DSVIV SV URIHG ORTSGVW, HLLM WRHXVIMVW SRH OLLPH
ZORVM UILN SVZEVM, DRGS KZHHRLMH ULFO LYHXFIVW:
NRMV VBV KFIHFVW SRN HGROO, YFG FMWVI HSZWV
OLHG HRTSG LU SRN:  LMV LU GSV YZMRHSVW XIVD,
R UVZI, SZGS EVMGFIVW UILN GSV WVVK, GL IZRHV
MVD GILFYOVH SRN GSB XZIV NFHG YV GL URMW.
GL DSLN GSV DRMTVW DZIIRLFI GSFH IVGFIMVW.
FIRVO, ML DLMWVI RU GSB KVIUVXG HRTSG,
ZNRW GSV HFMH YIRTSG XRIXOV DSVIV GSLF HRGHG,
HVV UZI ZMW DRWV:  RM ZG GSRH TZGV MLMV KZHH
GSV ERTROZMXV SVIV KOZXVW, YFG HFXS ZH XLNV
DVOO PMLDM UILN SVZEVM ZMW HRMXV NVIRWRZM SLFI
ML XIVZGFIV GSVMXV:  RU HKRIRG LU LGSVI HLIG,
HL NRMWVW, SZEV LVIOVZKVW GSVHV VZIGSOB YLFMWH
LM KFIKLHV, SZIW GSLF PMLDVHG RG GL VCXOFWV
HKRIRGFZO HFYHGZMXV DRGS XLIKLIVZO YZI.
YFG RU DRGSRM GSV XRIXFRG LU GSVHV DZOPH,
RM DSZGHLVEVI HSZKV SV OFIP, LU DSLN
GSLF GVOOVHG, YB NLIILD WZDMRMT R HSZOO PMLD.
HL KILNRHVW SV ZMW FIRVO GL SRH XSZITV
IVGFIMVW LM GSZG YIRTSG YVZN, DSLHV KLRMG MLD IZRHVW
YLIV SRN HOLKV WLDMDZIW GL GSV HFM MLD UZOOVM
YVMVZGS GSV ZALIVH DSVGSVI GSV KIRNV LIY,
RMXIVWRYOV SLD HDRUG, SZW GSRGSVI ILOOVW
WRFIMZO, LI GSRH OVHH ELOFYRO VZIGS,
YB HSLIGVI UORTSG GL GSV VZHG, SZW OVUG SRN GSVIV
ZIIZBRMT DRGS IVUOVXGVW KFIKOV ZMW TLOW
GSV XOLFWH GSZG LM SRH DVHGVIM GSILMV ZGGVMW.
MLD XZNV HGROO VEVMRMT LM, ZMW GDRORTSG TIZB
SZW RM SVI HLYVI OREVIB ZOO GSRMTH XOZW
HROVMXV ZXXLNKZMRVW ULI YVZHG ZMW YRIW,
GSVB GL GSVRI TIZHHB XLFXS, GSVHV GL GSVRI MVHGH
DVIV HOFMP, ZOO YFG GSV DZPVUFO MRTSGRMTZOV
HSV ZOO MRTSG OLMT SVI ZNLILFH WVHXZMG HFMT
HROVMXV DZH KOVZHVW:  MLD TOLDVW GSV URINZNVMG
DRGS ORERMT HZKKSRIVH:  SVHKVIFH, GSZG OVW
GSV HGZIIB SLHG, ILWV YIRTSGVHG, GROO GSV NLLM,
IRHRMT RM XOLFWVW NZQVHGB, ZG OVMTGS
ZKKZIVMG JFVVM FMEVROVW SVI KVVIOVHH ORTSG,
ZMW LVI GSV WZIP SVI HROEVI NZMGOV GSIVD.
DSVM ZWZN GSFH GL VEV.  UZRI XLMHLIG, GSV SLFI
LU MRTSG, ZMW ZOO GSRMTH MLD IVGRIVW GL IVHG,
NRMW FH LU ORPV IVKLHV HRMXV TLW SZGS HVG
OZYLFI ZMW IVHG, ZH WZB ZMW MRTSG, GL NVM
HFXXVHHREV ZMW GSV GRNVOB WVD LU HOVVK,
MLD UZOORMT DRGS HLUG HOFNYILFH DVRTSG, RMXORMVH
LFI VBVORWH:  LGSVI XIVZGFIVH ZOO WZB OLMT
ILEV RWOV, FMVNKOLBVW, ZMW OVHH MVVW IVHG
NZM SZGS SRH WZROB DLIP LU YLWB LI NRMW
ZKKLRMGVW, DSRXS WVXOZIVH SRH WRTMRGB,
ZMW GSV IVTZIW LU SVZEVM LM ZOO SRH DZBH
DSROV LGSVI ZMRNZOH FMZXGREV IZMTV,
ZMW LU GSVRI WLRMTH TLW GZPVH ML ZXXLFMG.
GLNLIILD, VIV UIVHS NLIMRMT HGIVZP GSV VZHG
DRGS URIHG ZKKILZXS LU ORTSG, DV NFHG YV IRHVM,
ZMW ZG LFI KOVZHZMG OZYLFI, GL IVULIN
BLM UOLDVIB ZIYLFIH, BLMWVI ZOOVBH TIVVM,
LFI DZOP ZG MLLM, DRGS YIZMXSVH LEVITILDM,
GSZG NLXP LFI HXZMG NZMFIRMT, ZMW IVJFRIV
NLIV SZMWH GSZM LFIH GL OLK GSVRI DZMGLM TILDGS:
GSLHV YOLHHLNH ZOHL, ZMW GSLHV WILKKRMT TFNH,
GSZG ORV YVHGILDM, FMHRTSGOB ZMW FMHNLLGS,
ZHP IRWWZMXV, RU DV NVZM GL GIVZW DRGS VZHV
NVZM DSROV, ZH MZGFIV DROOH, MRTSG YRWH FH IVHG.
GL DSLN GSFH VEV, DRGS KVIUVXG YVZFGB ZWLIMVW
NB ZFGSLI ZMW WRHKLHVI, DSZG GSLF YRWHG
FMZITFVW R LYVB:  HL TLW LIWZRMH
TLW RH GSB OZD, GSLF NRMV:  GL PMLD ML NLIV
RH DLNZMH SZKKRVHG PMLDOVWTV, ZMW SVI KIZRHV.
DRGS GSVV XLMEVIHRMT R ULITVG ZOO GRNV
ZOO HVZHLMH, ZMW GSVRI XSZMTV, ZOO KOVZHV ZORPV.
HDVVG RH GSV YIVZGS LU NLIM, SVI IRHRMT HDVVG,
DRGS XSZIN LU VZIORVHG YRIWH:  KOVZHZMG GSV HFM,
DSVM URIHG LM GSRH WVORTSGUFO OZMW SV HKIVZWH
SRH LIRVMG YVZNH, LM SVIY, GIVV, UIFRG, ZMW UOLDVI,
TORHGVIRMT DRGS WVD UIZTIZMG GSV UVIGROV VZIGS
ZUGVI HLUG HSLDVIH ZMW HDVVG GSV XLNRMT LM
LU TIZGVUFO VEVMRMT NROW GSVM HROVMG MRTSG,
DRGS GSRH SVI HLOVNM YRIW, ZMW GSRH UZRI NLLM,
ZMW GSVHV GSV TVNH LU SVZEVM, SVI HGZIIB GIZRM:
YFG MVRGSVI YIVZGS LU NLIM, DSVM HSV ZHXVMWH
DRGS XSZIN LU VZIORVHG YRIWH MLI IRHRMT HFM
LM GSRH WVORTSGUFO OZMW MLI SVIY, UIFRG, UOLDVI,
TORHGVIRMT DRGS WVD MLI UIZTIZMXV ZUGVI HSLDVIH
MLI TIZGVUFO VEVMRMT NROW MLI HROVMG MRTSG,
DRGS GSRH SVI HLOVNM YRIW, MLI DZOP YB NLLM,
LI TORGGVIRMT HGZIORTSG, DRGSLFG GSVV RH HDVVG.
YFG DSVIVULIV ZOO MRTSG OLMT HSRMV GSVHV? ULI DSLN
GSRH TOLIRLFH HRTSG, DSVM HOVVK SZGS HSFG ZOO VBVH?
GL DSLN LFI TVMVIZO ZMXVHGLI IVKORVW.
WZFTSGVI LU TLW ZMW NZM, ZXXLNKORHSVW VEV,
GSVHV SZEV GSVRI XLFIHV GL URMRHS ILFMW GSV VZIGS,
YB NLIILD VEVMRMT, ZMW UILN OZMW GL OZMW
RM LIWVI, GSLFTS GL MZGRLMH BVG FMYLIM,
NRMRHGIRMT ORTSG KIVKZIVW, GSVB HVG ZMW IRHV
OVHG GLGZO WZIPMVHH HSLFOW YB MRTSG IVTZRM
SVI LOW KLHHVHHRLM, ZMW VCGRMTFRHS ORUV
RM MZGFIV ZMW ZOO GSRMTH DSRXS GSVHV HLUG URIVH
MLG LMOB VMORTSGVM, YFG DRGS PRMWOB SVZG
LU EZIRLFH RMUOFVMXV ULNVMG ZMW DZIN,
GVNKVI LI MLFIRHS, LI RM KZIG HSVW WLDM
GSVRI HGVOOZI ERIGFV LM ZOO PRMWH GSZG TILD
LM VZIGS, NZWV SVIVYB ZKGVI GL IVXVREV
KVIUVXGRLM UILN GSV HFMH NLIV KLGVMG IZB.
GSVHV GSVM, GSLFTS FMYVSVOW RM WVVK LU MRTSG,
HSRMV MLG RM EZRM MLI GSRMP, GSLFTS NVM DVIV MLMV,
GSZG SVZEVM DLFOW DZMG HKVXGZGLIH, TLW DZMG KIZRHV:
NROORLMH LU HKRIRGFZO XIVZGFIVH DZOP GSV VZIGS
FMHVVM, YLGS DSVM DV DZPV, ZMW DSVM DV HOVVK:
ZOO GSVHV DRGS XVZHVOVHH KIZRHV SRH DLIPH YVSLOW
YLGS WZB ZMW MRTSG:  SLD LUGVM UILN GSV HGVVK
LU VXSLRMT SROO LI GSRXPVG SZEV DV SVZIW
XVOVHGRZO ELRXVH GL GSV NRWMRTSG ZRI,
HLOV, LI IVHKLMHREV VZXS GL LGSVIH MLGV,
HRMTRMT GSVRI TIVZG XIVZGLI? LUG RM YZMWH
DSROV GSVB PVVK DZGXS, LI MRTSGOB ILFMWRMT DZOP,
DRGS SVZEVMOB GLFXS LU RMHGIFNVMGZO HLFMWH
RM UFOO SZINLMRXP MFNYVI QLRMVW, GSVRI HLMTH
WRERWV GSV MRTSG, ZMW ORUG LFI GSLFTSGH GL SVZEVM.
GSFH GZOPRMT, SZMW RM SZMW ZOLMV GSVB KZHHVW
LM GL GSVRI YORHHUFO YLDVI: RG DZH Z KOZXV
XSLHVM YB GSV HLEIZM KOZMGVI, DSVM SV UIZNVW
ZOO GSRMTH GL NZMH WVORTSGUFO FHV GSV ILLU
LU GSRXPVHG XLEVIG DZH RMDLEVM HSZWV
OZFIVO ZMW NBIGOV, ZMW DSZG SRTSVI TIVD
LU URIN ZMW UIZTIZMG OVZU LM VRGSVI HRWV
ZXZMGSFH, ZMW VZXS LWLILFH YFHSB HSIFY,
UVMXVW FK GSV EVIWZMG DZOO VZXS YVZFGVLFH UOLDVI,
RIRH ZOO SFVH, ILHVH, ZMW QVHHZNRM,
IVZIVW SRTS GSVRI UOLFIRHSVW SVZWH YVGDVVM, ZMW DILFTSG
NLHZRXP FMWVIULLG GSV ERLOVG,
XILXFH, ZMW SBZXRMGS, DRGS IRXS RMOZB
YILRWVIVW GSV TILFMW, NLIV XLOLFIVW GSZM DRGS HGLMV
LU XLHGORVHG VNYOVN:  LGSVI XIVZGFIV SVIV,
YRIW, YVZHG, RMHVXG, LI DLIN, WFIHG VMGVI MLMV,
HFXS DZH GSVRI ZDV LU NZM.  RM HSZWRVI YLDVI
NLIV HZXIVW ZMW HVJFVHGVIVW, GSLFTS YFG UVRTMVW,
KZM LI HBOEZMFH MVEVI HOVKG, MLI MBNKS
MLI UZFMFH SZFMGVW.  SVIV, RM XOLHV IVXVHH,
DRGS UOLDVIH, TZIOZMWH, ZMW HDVVGHNVOORMT SVIYH,
VHKLFHVW VEV WVXPVW URIHG SVI MFKGRZO YVW
ZMW SVZEVMOB JFRIVH GSV SBNVMZVZM HFMT,
DSZG WZB GSV TVMRZO ZMTVO GL LFI HRIV
YILFTSG SVI RM MZPVW YVZFGB NLIV ZWLIMVW,
NLIV OLEVOB, GSZM KZMWLIZ, DSLN GSV TLWH
VMWLDVW DRGS ZOO GSVRI TRUGH, ZMW L! GLL ORPV
RM HZW VEVMG, DSVM GL GSV FMDRHVI HLM
LU QZKSVG YILFTSG YB SVINVH, HSV VMHMZIVW
NZMPRMW DRGS SVI UZRI OLLPH, GL YV ZEVMTVW
LM SRN DSL SZW HGLOV QLEVH ZFGSVMGRXP URIV.
GSFH, ZG GSVRI HSZWB OLWTV ZIIREVW, YLGS HGLLW,
YLGS GFIMVW, ZMW FMWVI LKVM HPB ZWLIVW
GSV TLW GSZG NZWV YLGS HPB, ZRI, VZIGS, ZMW SVZEVM,
DSRXS GSVB YVSVOW, GSV NLLMH IVHKOVMWVMG TOLYV,
ZMW HGZIIB KLOV:  GSLF ZOHL NZWVHG GSV MRTSG,
NZPVI LNMRKLGVMG, ZMW GSLF GSV WZB,
DSRXS DV, RM LFI ZKKLRMGVW DLIP VNKOLBVW,
SZEV URMRHSVW, SZKKB RM LFI NFGFZO SVOK
ZMW NFGFZO OLEV, GSV XILDM LU ZOO LFI YORHH
LIWZRMVW YB GSVV ZMW GSRH WVORXRLFH KOZXV
ULI FH GLL OZITV, DSVIV GSB ZYFMWZMXV DZMGH
KZIGZPVIH, ZMW FMXILKG UZOOH GL GSV TILFMW.
YFG GSLF SZHG KILNRHVW UILN FH GDL Z IZXV
GL UROO GSV VZIGS, DSL HSZOO DRGS FH VCGLO
GSB TLLWMVHH RMURMRGV, YLGS DSVM DV DZPV,
ZMW DSVM DV HVVP, ZH MLD, GSB TRUG LU HOVVK.
GSRH HZRW FMZMRNLFH, ZMW LGSVI IRGVH
LYHVIERMT MLMV, YFG ZWLIZGRLM KFIV
DSRXS TLW ORPVH YVHG, RMGL GSVRI RMNLHG YLDVI
SZMWVW GSVB DVMG ZMW, VZHVW GSV KFGGRMT LUU
GSVHV GILFYOVHLNV WRHTFRHVH DSRXS DV DVZI,
HGIZRTSG HRWV YB HRWV DVIV OZRW MLI GFIMVW, R DVVM,
ZWZN UILN SRH UZRI HKLFHV, MLI VEV GSV IRGVH
NBHGVIRLFH LU XLMMFYRZO OLEV IVUFHVW:
DSZGVEVI SBKLXIRGVH ZFHGVIVOB GZOP
LU KFIRGB, ZMW KOZXV, ZMW RMMLXVMXV,
WVUZNRMT ZH RNKFIV DSZG TLW WVXOZIVH
KFIV, ZMW XLNNZMWH GL HLNV, OVZEVH UIVV GL ZOO.
LFI NZPVI YRWH VMXIVZHV DSL YRWH ZYHGZRM
YFG LFI WVHGILBVI, ULV GL TLW ZMW NZM?
SZRO, DVWWVW OLEV, NBHGVIRLFH OZD, GIFV HLFIXV
LU SFNZM LUUHKIRMT, HLOV KILKIRVGB
RM KZIZWRHV LU ZOO GSRMTH XLNNLM VOHV!
YB GSVV ZWFOGVILFH OFHG DZH WIREVM UILN NVM
ZNLMT GSV YVHGRZO SVIWH GL IZMTV YB GSVV
ULFMWVW RM IVZHLM, OLBZO, QFHG, ZMW KFIV,
IVOZGRLMH WVZI, ZMW ZOO GSV XSZIRGRVH
LU UZGSVI, HLM, ZMW YILGSVI, URIHG DVIV PMLDM.
UZI YV RG, GSZG R HSLFOW DIRGV GSVV HRM LI YOZNV,
LI GSRMP GSVV FMYVURGGRMT SLORVHG KOZXV,
KVIKVGFZO ULFMGZRM LU WLNVHGRXP HDVVGH,
DSLHV YVW RH FMWVUROVW ZMW XSZHGV KILMLFMXVW,
KIVHVMG, LI KZHG, ZH HZRMGH ZMW KZGIRZIXSH FHVW.
SVIV OLEV SRH TLOWVM HSZUGH VNKOLBH, SVIV ORTSGH
SRH XLMHGZMG OZNK, ZMW DZEVH SRH KFIKOV DRMTH,
IVRTMH SVIV ZMW IVEVOH MLG RM GSV YLFTSG HNROV
LU SZIOLGH, OLEVOVHH, QLBOVHH, FMVMWVZIVW,
XZHFZO UIFRGRLM MLI RM XLFIGZNLFIH,
NRCVW WZMXV, LI DZMGLM NZHP, LI NRWMRTSG YZOO,
LI HVIVMZGV, DSRXS GSV HGZIEVW OLEVI HRMTH
GL SRH KILFW UZRI, YVHG JFRGGVW DRGS WRHWZRM.
GSVHV, OFOOVW YB MRTSGRMTZOVH, VNYIZXRMT HOVKG,
ZMW LM GSVRI MZPVW ORNYH GSV UOLDVIB ILLU
HSLDVIVW ILHVH, DSRXS GSV NLIM IVKZRIVW.  HOVVK LM,
YOVHG KZRI ZMW L!BVG SZKKRVHG, RU BV HVVP
ML SZKKRVI HGZGV, ZMW PMLD GL PMLD ML NLIV.
MLD SZW MRTSG NVZHFIVW DRGS SVI HSZWLDB XLMV
SZOU DZB FK SROO GSRH EZHG HFYOFMZI EZFOG,
ZMW UILN GSVRI RELIB KLIG GSV XSVIFYRN,
ULIGS RHHFRMT ZG GSV ZXXFHGLNVW SLFI, HGLLW ZINVW
GL GSVRI MRTSG DZGXSVH RM DZIORPV KZIZWV
DSVM TZYIRVO GL SRH MVCG RM KLDVI GSFH HKZPV.
FAARVO, SZOU GSVHV WIZD LUU, ZMW XLZHG GSV HLFGS
DRGS HGIRXGVHG DZGXS GSVHV LGSVI DSVVO GSV MLIGS
LFI XRIXFRG NVVGH UFOO DVHG.  ZH UOZNV GSVB KZIG,
SZOU DSVVORMT GL GSV HSRVOW, SZOU GL GSV HKVZI.
UILN GSVHV, GDL HGILMT ZMW HFYGOV HKRIRGH SV XZOOVW
GSZG MVZI SRN HGLLW, ZMW TZEV GSVN GSFH RM XSZITV.
RGSFIRVO ZMW AVKSLM, DRGS DRMTVW HKVVW
HVZIXS GSILFTS GSRH TZIWVM, OVZEV FMHVZIXSVW ML MLLP
YFG XSRVUOB DSVIV GSLHV GDL UZRI XIVZGFIVH OLWTV,
MLD OZRW KVISZKH ZHOVVK, HVXFIV LU SZIN.
GSRH VEVMRMT UILN GSV HFMH WVXORMV ZIIREVW,
DSL GVOOH LU HLNV RMUVIMZO HKRIRG HVVM
SRGSVIDZIW YVMG DSL XLFOW SZEV GSLFTSG? VHXZKVW
GSV YZIH LU SVOO, LM VIIZMW YZW ML WLFYG:
HFXS, DSVIV BV URMW, HVRHV UZHG, ZMW SRGSVI YIRMT.
HL HZBRMT, LM SV OVW SRH IZWRZMG UROVH,
WZAAORMT GSV NLLM GSVHV GL GSV YLDVI WRIVXG
RM HVZIXS LU DSLN GSVB HLFTSG:  SRN GSVIV GSVB ULFMW
HJFZG ORPV Z GLZW, XOLHV ZG GSV VZI LU VEV,
ZHHZBRMT YB SRH WVERORHS ZIG GL IVZXS
GSV LITZMH LU SVI UZMXB, ZMW DRGS GSVN ULITV
ROOFHRLMH, ZH SV ORHG, KSZMGZHNH ZMW WIVZNH
LI RU, RMHKRIRMT EVMLN, SV NRTSG GZRMG
GSV ZMRNZO HKRIRGH, GSZG UILN KFIV YOLLW ZIRHV
ORPV TVMGOV YIVZGSH UILN IREVIH KFIV, GSVMXV IZRHV
ZG OVZHG WRHGVNKVIVW, WRHXLMGVMGVW GSLFTSGH,
EZRM SLKVH, EZRM ZRNH, RMLIWRMZGV WVHRIVH,
YOLDM FK DRGS SRTS XLMXVRGH RMTVMWVIRMT KIRWV.
SRN GSFH RMGVMG RGSFIRVO DRGS SRH HKVZI
GLFXSVW ORTSGOB ULI ML UZOHSLLW XZM VMWFIV
GLFXS LU XVOVHGRZO GVNKVI, YFG IVGFIMH
LU ULIXV GL RGH LDM ORPVMVHH:  FK SV HGZIGH
WRHXLEVIVW ZMW HFIKIRHVW.  ZH DSVM Z HKZIP
ORTSGH LM Z SVZK LU MRGILFH KLDWVI, OZRW
URG ULI GSV GFM HLNV NZTZARMV GL HGLIV
ZTZRMHG Z IFNLFIVW DZI, GSV HNFGGB TIZRM,
DRGS HFWWVM YOZAV WRUUFHVW, RMUOZNVH GSV ZRI
HL HGZIGVW FK RM SRH LDM HSZKV GSV URVMW.
YZXP HGVKG GSLHV GDL UZRI ZMTVOH, SZOU ZNZAVW
HL HFWWVM GL YVSLOW GSV TIRHOB PRMT
BVG GSFH, FMNLEVW DRGS UVZI, ZXXLHG SRN HLLM.
DSRXS LU GSLHV IVYVO HKRIRGH ZWQFWTVW GL SVOO
XLNVHG GSLF, VHXZKVW GSB KIRHLM? ZMW, GIZMHULINVW,
DSB HZGHG GSLF ORPV ZM VMVNB RM DZRG,
SVIV DZGXSRMT ZG GSV SVZW LU GSVHV GSZG HOVVK?
PMLD BV MLG GSVM HZRW HZGZM, UROOVW DRGS HXLIM,
PMLD BV MLG NV? BV PMVD NV LMXV ML NZGV
ULI BLF, GSVIV HRGGRMT DSVIV BV WFIHG MLG HLZI:
MLG GL PMLD NV ZITFVH BLFIHVOEVH FMPMLDM,
GSV OLDVHG LU BLFI GSILMT LI, RU BV PMLD,
DSB ZHP BV, ZMW HFKVIUOFLFH YVTRM
BLFI NVHHZTV, ORPV GL VMW ZH NFXS RM EZRM?
GL DSLN GSFH AVKSLM, ZMHDVIRMT HXLIM DRGS HXLIM.
GSRMP MLG, IVELOGVW HKRIRG, GSB HSZKV GSV HZNV,
LI FMWRNRMRHSVW YIRTSGMVHH GL YV PMLDM,
ZH DSVM GSLF HGLLWVHG RM SVZEVM FKIRTSG ZMW KFIV
GSZG TOLIB GSVM, DSVM GSLF ML NLIV DZHG TLLW,
WVKZIGVW UILN GSVV ZMW GSLF IVHVNYOVHG MLD
GSB HRM ZMW KOZXV LU WLLN LYHXFIV ZMW ULFO.
YFG XLNV, ULI GSLF, YV HFIV, HSZOG TREV ZXXLFMG
GL SRN DSL HVMG FH, DSLHV XSZITV RH GL PVVK
GSRH KOZXV RMERLOZYOV, ZMW GSVHV UILN SZIN.
HL HKZPV GSV XSVIFY ZMW SRH TIZEV IVYFPV,
HVEVIV RM BLFGSUFO YVZFGB, ZWWVW TIZXV
RMERMXRYOV:  ZYZHSVW GSV WVERO HGLLW,
ZMW UVOG SLD ZDUFO TLLWMVHH RH, ZMW HZD
ERIGFV RM SVI HSZKV SLD OLEVOB HZD, ZMW KRMVW
SRH OLHH YFG XSRVUOB GL URMW SVIV LYHVIEVW
SRH OFHGIV ERHRYOB RNKZRIVW BVG HVVNVW
FMWZFMGVW.  RU R NFHG XLMGVMW, HZRW SV,
YVHG DRGS GSV YVHG, GSV HVMWVI, MLG GSV HVMG,
LI ZOO ZG LMXV NLIV TOLIB DROO YV DLM,
LI OVHH YV OLHG.  GSB UVZI, HZRW AVKSLM YLOW,
DROO HZEV FH GIRZO DSZG GSV OVZHG XZM WL
HRMTOV ZTZRMHG GSVV DRXPVW, ZMW GSVMXV DVZP.
GSV URVMW IVKORVW MLG, LEVIXLNV DRGS IZTV
YFG, ORPV Z KILFW HGVVW IVRMVW, DVMG SZFTSGB LM,
XSZNKRMT SRH RILM XFIY:  GL HGIREV LI UOB
SV SVOW RG EZRM ZDV UILN ZYLEV SZW JFVOOVW
SRH SVZIG, MLG VOHV WRHNZBVW.  MLD WIVD GSVB MRTS
GSV DVHGVIM KLRMG, DSVIV GSLHV SZOUILFMWRMT TFZIWH
QFHG NVG, ZMW XOLHRMT HGLLW RM HJFZWILM QLRMVW,
Z DZRGRMT MVCG XLNNZMW.  GL DSLN GSVRI XSRVU,
TZYIRVO, UILN GSV UILMG GSFH XZOOVW ZOLFW.
L UIRVMWH!  R SVZI GSV GIVZW LU MRNYOV UVVG
SZHGRMT GSRH DZB, ZMW MLD YB TORNKHV WRHXVIM
RGSFIRVO ZMW AVKSLM GSILFTS GSV HSZWV
ZMW DRGS GSVN XLNVH Z GSRIW LU IVTZO KLIG,
YFG UZWVW HKOVMWLFI DZM DSL YB SRH TZRG
ZMW URVIXV WVNVZMLFI HVVNH GSV KIRMXV LU SVOO,
MLG ORPVOB GL KZIG SVMXV DRGSLFG XLMGVHG
HGZMW URIN, ULI RM SRH OLLP WVURZMXV OLFIH.
SV HXZIXV SZW VMWVW, DSVM GSLHV GDL ZKKILZXSVW,
ZMW YIRVU IVOZGVW DSLN GSVB YILFTSG, DSVIV ULFMW,
SLD YFHRVW, RM DSZG ULIN ZMW KLHGFIV XLFXSVW.
GL DSLN DRGS HGVIM IVTZIW GSFH TZYIRVO HKZPV.
DSB SZHG GSLF, HZGZM, YILPV GSV YLFMWH KIVHXIRYVW
GL GSB GIZMHTIVHHRLMH, ZMW WRHGFIYVW GSV XSZITV
LU LGSVIH, DSL ZKKILEV MLG GL GIZMHTIVHH
YB GSB VCZNKOV, YFG SZEV KLDVI ZMW IRTSG
GL JFVHGRLM GSB YLOW VMGIZMXV LM GSRH KOZXV
VNKOLBVW, RG HVVNH, GL ERLOZGV HOVVK, ZMW GSLHV
DSLHV WDVOORMT TLW SZGS KOZMGVW SVIV RM YORHH!
GL DSLN GSFH HZGZM DRGS XLMGVNKGFLFH YILD.
TZYIRVO? GSLF SZWHG RM SVZEVM GSV VHGVVN LU DRHV,
ZMW HFXS R SVOW GSVV YFG GSRH JFVHGRLM ZHPVW
KFGH NV RM WLFYG.  OREVH GSVIV DSL OLEVH SRH KZRM!
DSL DLFOW MLG, URMWRMT DZB, YIVZP OLLHV UILN SVOO,
GSLFTS GSRGSVI WLLNVW!  GSLF DLFOWHG GSBHVOU, ML WLFYG
ZMW YLOWOB EVMGFIV GL DSZGVEVI KOZXV
UZIGSVHG UILN KZRM, DSVIV GSLF NRTSGHG SLKV GL XSZMTV
GLINVMG DRGS VZHV, ZMW HLLMVHG IVXLNKVMHV
WLOV DRGS WVORTSG, DSRXS RM GSRH KOZXV R HLFTSG
GL GSVV ML IVZHLM, DSL PMLDVHG LMOB TLLW,
YFG VERO SZHG MLG GIRVW: ZMW DROG LYQVXG
SRH DROO DSL YLFMWH FH!  OVG SRN HFIVI YZI
SRH RILM TZGVH, RU SV RMGVMWH LFI HGZB
RM GSZG WZIP WFIZMXV:  GSFH NFXS DSZG DZH ZHPVW.
GSV IVHG RH GIFV, GSVB ULFMW NV DSVIV GSVB HZB
YFG GSZG RNKORVH MLG ERLOVMXV LI SZIN.
GSFH SV RM HXLIM.  GSV DZIORPV ZMTVO NLEVW,
WRHWZRMUFOOB SZOU HNRORMT, GSFH IVKORVW.
L OLHH LU LMV RM SVZEVM GL QFWTV LU DRHV
HRMXV HZGZM UVOO, DSLN ULOOB LEVIGSIVD,
ZMW MLD IVGFIMH SRN UILN SRH KIRHLM HXZKVW,
TIZEVOB RM WLFYG DSVGSVI GL SLOW GSVN DRHV
LI MLG, DSL ZHP DSZG YLOWMVHH YILFTSG SRN SRGSVI
FMORXVMHVW UILN SRH YLFMWH RM SVOO KIVHXIRYVW
HL DRHV SV QFWTVH RG GL UOB UILN KZRM
SLDVEVI, ZMW GL HXZKV SRH KFMRHSNVMG!
HL QFWTV GSLF HGROO, KIVHFNKGFLFH! GROO GSV DIZGS,
DSRXS GSLF RMXFIIVHG YB UOBRMT, NVVG GSB UORTSG
HVEVMULOW, ZMW HXLFITV GSZG DRHWLN YZXP GL SVOO,
DSRXS GZFTSG GSVV BVG ML YVGGVI, GSZG ML KZRM
XZM VJFZO ZMTVI RMURMRGV KILELPVW.
YFG DSVIVULIV GSLF ZOLMV? DSVIVULIV DRGS GSVV
XZNV MLG ZOO SVOO YILPV OLLHV? LI GSLF GSZM GSVB
OVHH SZIWB GL VMWFIV?  XLFIZTVLFH XSRVU!
GSV URIHG RM UORTSG UILN KZRM! SZWHG GSLF ZOOVTVW
GL GSB WVHVIGVW SLHG GSRH XZFHV LU UORTSG,
GSLF HFIVOB SZWHG MLG XLNV HLOV UFTRGREV.
GL DSRXS GSV URVMW GSFH ZMHDVIVW, UILDMRMT HGVIM.
MLG GSZG R OVHH VMWFIV, LI HSIRMP UILN KZRM,
RMHFOGRMT ZMTVO! DVOO GSLF PMLDVHG R HGLLW
GSB URVIXVHG, DSVM RM YZGGOV GL GSB ZRW
GSV YOZHGRMT ELOORVW GSFMWVI NZWV ZOO HKVVW,
ZMW HVXLMWVW GSB VOHV MLG WIVZWVW HKVZI.
YFG HGROO GSB DLIWH ZG IZMWLN, ZH YVULIV,
ZITFV GSB RMVCKVIRVMXV DSZG YVSLEVH
UILN SZIW ZHHZBH ZMW ROO HFXXVHHVH KZHG
Z UZRGSUFO OVZWVI, MLG GL SZAZIW ZOO
GSILFTS DZBH LU WZMTVI YB SRNHVOU FMGIRVW:
R, GSVIVULIV, R ZOLMV URIHG FMWVIGLLP
GL DRMT GSV WVHLOZGV ZYBHH, ZMW HKB
GSRH MVD XIVZGVW DLIOW, DSVIVLU RM SVOO
UZNV RH MLG HROVMG, SVIV RM SLKV GL URMW
YVGGVI ZYLWV, ZMW NB ZUUORXGVW KLDVIH
GL HVGGOV SVIV LM VZIGS, LI RM NRW ZRI
GSLFTS ULI KLHHVHHRLM KFG GL GIB LMXV NLIV
DSZG GSLF ZMW GSB TZB OVTRLMH WZIV ZTZRMHG
DSLHV VZHRVI YFHRMVHH DVIV GL HVIEV GSVRI OLIW
SRTS FK RM SVZEVM, DRGS HLMTH GL SBNM SRH GSILMV,
ZMW KIZXGRHVW WRHGZMXVH GL XIRMTV, MLG URTSG,
GL DSLN GSV DZIIRLFI ZMTVO HLLM IVKORVW.
GL HZB ZMW HGIZRTSG FMHZB, KIVGVMWRMT URIHG
DRHV GL UOB KZRM, KILUVHHRMT MVCG GSV HKB,
ZITFVH ML OVZWVI YFG Z ORVZI GIZXVW,
HZGZM, ZMW XLFOWHG GSLF UZRGSUFO ZWW?  L MZNV,
L HZXIVW MZNV LU UZRGSUFOMVHH KILUZMVW!
UZRGSUFO GL DSLN? GL GSB IVYVOORLFH XIVD?
ZINB LU URVMWH, URG YLWB GL URG SVZW.
DZH GSRH BLFI WRHXRKORMV ZMW UZRGS VMTZTVW,
BLFI NRORGZIB LYVWRVMXV, GL WRHHLOEV
ZOOVTRZMXV GL GSV ZXPMLDOVWTVW KLDVI HFKIVNV?
ZMW GSLF, HOB SBKLXIRGV, DSL MLD DLFOWHG HVVN
KZGILM LU ORYVIGB, DSL NLIV GSZM GSLF
LMXV UZDMVW, ZMW XIRMTVW, ZMW HVIEROB ZWLIVW
SVZEVMH ZDUFO NLMZIXS? DSVIVULIV, YFG RM SLKV
GL WRHKLHHVHH SRN, ZMW GSBHVOU GL IVRTM?
YFG NZIP DSZG R ZIIVVW GSVV MLD, ZEZMG
UOB MVRGSVI DSVMXV GSLF UOVWHG!  RU UILN GSRH SLFI
DRGSRM GSVHV SZOOLDVW ORNRGH GSLF ZKKVZI,
YZXP GL GSV RMUVIMZO KRG R WIZT GSVV XSZRMVW,
ZMW HVZO GSVV HL, ZH SVMXVULIGS MLG GL HXLIM
GSV UZXROV TZGVH LU SVOO GLL HORTSGOB YZIIVW.
HL GSIVZGVMVW SV YFG HZGZM GL ML GSIVZGH
TZEV SVVW, YFG DZCRMT NLIV RM IZTV IVKORVW.
GSVM DSVM R ZN GSB XZKGREV GZOP LU XSZRMH,
KILFW ORNRGZIB XSVIFY! YFG VIV GSVM
UZI SVZERVI OLZW GSBHVOU VCKVXG GL UVVO
UILN NB KIVEZRORMT ZIN, GSLFTS SVZEVMH PRMT
IRWV LM GSB DRMTH, ZMW GSLF DRGS GSB XLNKVVIH,
FHW GL GSV BLPV, WIZDVHG SRH GIRFNKSZMG DSVVOH
RM KILTIVHH GSILFTS GSV ILZW LU SVZEVM HGZIKZEVW.
DSROV GSFH SV HKZPV, GSV ZMTVORXP HJFZWILM YIRTSG
GFIMVW URVIB IVW, HSZIKVMRMT RM NLLMVW SLIMH
GSVRI KSZOZMC, ZMW YVTZM GL SVN SRN ILFMW
DRGS KLIGVW HKVZIH, ZH GSRXP ZH DSVM Z URVOW
LU XVIVH IRKV ULI SZIEVHG DZERMT YVMWH
SVI YVZIWVW TILEV LU VZIH, DSRXS DZB GSV DRMW
HDZBH GSVN GSV XZIVUFO KOLDNZM WLFYGRMT HGZMWH,
OVUG LM GSV GSIVHSRMT UOLLI SRH SLKVOVHH HSVZEVH
KILEV XSZUU.  LM GSV LGSVI HRWV, HZGZM, ZOZINVW,
XLOOVXGRMT ZOO SRH NRTSG, WROZGVW HGLLW,
ORPV GVMVIRUU LI ZGOZH, FMIVNLEVW:
SRH HGZGFIV IVZXSVW GSV HPB, ZMW LM SRH XIVHG
HZG SLIILFI KOFNVW MLI DZMGVW RM SRH TIZHK
DSZG HVVNVW YLGS HKVZI ZMW HSRVOW:  MLD WIVZWUFO WVVWH
NRTSG SZEV VMHFVW, MLI LMOB KZIZWRHV
RM GSRH XLNNLGRLM, YFG GSV HGZIIB XLKV
LU SVZEVM KVISZKH, LI ZOO GSV VOVNVMGH
ZG OVZHG SZW TLMV GL DIZXP, WRHGFIYVW ZMW GLIM
DRGS ERLOVMXV LU GSRH XLMUORXG, SZW MLG HLLM
GSV VGVIMZO, GL KIVEVMG HFXS SLIIRW UIZB,
SFMT ULIGS RM SVZEVM SRH TLOWVM HXZOVH, BVG HVVM
YVGDRCG ZHGIVZ ZMW GSV HXLIKRLM HRTM,
DSVIVRM ZOO GSRMTH XIVZGVW URIHG SV DVRTSVW,
GSV KVMWFOLFH ILFMW VZIGS DRGS YZOZMXVW ZRI
RM XLFMGVIKLRHV, MLD KLMWVIH ZOO VEVMGH,
YZGGOVH ZMW IVZONH:  RM GSVHV SV KFG GDL DVRTSGH,
GSV HVJFVO VZXS LU KZIGRMT ZMW LU URTSG:
GSV OZGGVI JFRXP FK UOVD, ZMW PRXPVW GSV YVZN,
DSRXS TZYIRVO HKBRMT, GSFH YVHKZPV GSV URVMW.
HZGZM, R PMLD GSB HGIVMTGS, ZMW GSLF PMLDVHG NRMV
MVRGSVI LFI LDM, YFG TREVM:  DSZG ULOOB GSVM
GL YLZHG DSZG ZINH XZM WL? HRMXV GSRMV ML NLIV
GSZM SVZEVM KVINRGH, MLI NRMV, GSLFTS WLFYOVW MLD
GL GIZNKOV GSVV ZH NRIV:  ULI KILLU OLLP FK,
ZMW IVZW GSB OLG RM BLM XVOVHGRZO HRTM
DSVIV GSLF ZIG DVRTSVW, ZMW HSLDM SLD ORTSG, SLD DVZP,
RU GSLF IVHRHG.  GSV URVMW OLLPVW FK, ZMW PMVD
SRH NLFMGVW HXZOV ZOLUG:  MLI NLIVYFG UOVW
NFINFIRMT, ZMW DRGS SRN UOVW GSV HSZWVH LU MRTSG.



YLLP E


MLD NLIM, SVI ILHB HGVKH RM GSV VZHGVIM XORNV
ZWEZMXRMT, HLDVW GSV VZIGS DRGS LIRVMG KVZIO,
DSVM ZWZN DZPVW, HL XFHGLNVW ULI SRH HOVVK
DZH ZVIBORTSG, UILN KFIV WRTVHGRLM YIVW,
ZMW GVNKVIZGV EZKLFIH YOZMW, DSRXS GSV LMOB HLFMW
LU OVZEVH ZMW UFNRMT IROOH, ZFILIZH UZM,
ORTSGOB WRHKVIHVW, ZMW GSV HSIROO NZGRM HLMT
LU YRIWH LM VEVIB YLFTS HL NFXS GSV NLIV
SRH DLMWVI DZH GL URMW FMDZPVMVW VEV
DRGS GIVHHVH WRHXLNKLHVW, ZMW TOLDRMT XSVVP,
ZH GSILFTS FMJFRVG IVHG:  SV, LM SRH HRWV
OVZMRMT SZOU IZRHVW, DRGS OLLPH LU XLIWRZO OLEV
SFMT LEVI SVI VMZNLFIVW, ZMW YVSVOW
YVZFGB, DSRXS, DSVGSVI DZPRMT LI ZHOVVK,
HSLG ULIGS KVXFORZI TIZXVH GSVM DRGS ELRXV
NROW, ZH DSVM AVKSBIFH LM UOLIZ YIVZGSVH,
SVI SZMW HLUG GLFXSRMT, DSRHKVIVW GSFH.  ZDZPV,
NB UZRIVHG, NB VHKLFHVW, NB OZGVHG ULFMW,
SVZEVMH OZHG YVHG TRUG, NB VEVI MVD WVORTSG!
ZDZPV:  GSV NLIMRMT HSRMVH, ZMW GSV UIVHS URVOW
XZOOH FH DV OLHV GSV KIRNV, GL NZIP SLD HKIRMT
LFI GVMWVI KOZMGH, SLD YOLDH GSV XRGILM TILEV,
DSZG WILKH GSV NBIIS, ZMW DSZG GSV YZONB IVVW,
SLD MZGFIV KZRMGH SVI XLOLFIH, SLD GSV YVV
HRGH LM GSV YOLLN VCGIZXGRMT ORJFRW HDVVG.
HFXS DSRHKVIRMT DZPVW SVI, YFG DRGS HGZIGOVW VBV
LM ZWZN, DSLN VNYIZXRMT, GSFH HSV HKZPV.
L HLOV RM DSLN NB GSLFTSGH URMW ZOO IVKLHV,
NB TOLIB, NB KVIUVXGRLM! TOZW R HVV
GSB UZXV, ZMW NLIM IVGFIMVW ULI R GSRH MRTSG
HFXS MRTSG GROO GSRH R MVEVI KZHHVW SZEV WIVZNVW,
RU WIVZNVW, MLG, ZH R LUG ZN DLMG, LU GSVV,
DLIPH LU WZB KZHG, LI NLIILDH MVCG WVHRTM,
YFG LU LUUVMXV ZMW GILFYOV, DSRXS NB NRMW
PMVD MVEVI GROO GSRH RIPHLNV MRTSG:  NVGSLFTSG,
XOLHV ZG NRMV VZI LMV XZOOVW NV ULIGS GL DZOP
DRGS TVMGOV ELRXV  R GSLFTSG RG GSRMV: RG HZRW,
DSB HOVVKVHG GSLF, VEV? MLD RH GSV KOVZHZMG GRNV,
GSV XLLO, GSV HROVMG, HZEV DSVIV HROVMXV BRVOWH
GL GSV MRTSGDZIYORMT YRIW, GSZG MLD ZDZPV
GFMVH HDVVGVHG SRH OLEVOZYLFIVW HLMT MLD IVRTMH
UFOOLIYVW GSV NLLM, ZMW DRGS NLIV KOVZHRMT ORTSG
HSZWLDB HVGH LUU GSV UZXV LU GSRMTH RM EZRM,
RU MLMV IVTZIW SVZEVM DZPVH DRGS ZOO SRH VBVH,
DSLN GL YVSLOW YFG GSVV, MZGFIVH WVHRIV?
RM DSLHV HRTSG ZOO GSRMTH QLB, DRGS IZERHSNVMG
ZGGIZXGVW YB GSB YVZFGB HGROO GL TZAV.
R ILHV ZH ZG GSB XZOO, YFG ULFMW GSVV MLG
GL URMW GSVV R WRIVXGVW GSVM NB DZOP
ZMW LM, NVGSLFTSG, ZOLMV R KZHHVW GSILFTS DZBH
GSZG YILFTSG NV LM Z HFWWVM GL GSV GIVV
LU RMGVIWRXGVW PMLDOVWTV: UZRI RG HVVNVW,
NFXS UZRIVI GL NB UZMXB GSZM YB WZB:
ZMW, ZH R DLMWVIRMT OLLPVW, YVHRWV RG HGLLW
LMV HSZKVW ZMW DRMTVW ORPV LMV LU GSLHV UILN SVZEVM
YB FH LUG HVVM SRH WVDB OLXPH WRHGROOVW
ZNYILHRZ LM GSZG GIVV SV ZOHL TZAVW
ZMW L UZRI KOZMG, HZRW SV, DRGS UIFRG HFIXSZITVW,
WVRTMH MLMV GL VZHV GSB OLZW, ZMW GZHGV GSB HDVVG,
MLI TLW, MLI NZM?  RH PMLDOVWTV HL WVHKRHVW?
LI VMEB, LI DSZG IVHVIEV ULIYRWH GL GZHGV?
ULIYRW DSL DROO, MLMV HSZOO UILN NV DRGSSLOW
OLMTVI GSB LUUVIVW TLLW DSB VOHV HVG SVIV?
GSRH HZRW, SV KZFHVW MLG, YFG DRGS EVMGFILFH ZIN
SV KOFXPVW, SV GZHGVW NV WZNK SLIILFI XSROOVW
ZG HFXS YLOW DLIWH ELFXSVW DRGS Z WVVW HL YLOW:
YFG SV GSFH, LEVIQLBVW L UIFRG WRERMV,
HDVVG LU GSBHVOU, YFG NFXS NLIV HDVVG GSFH XILKG,
ULIYRWWVM SVIV, RG HVVNH, ZH LMOB URG
ULI TLWH, BVG ZYOV GL NZPV TLWH LU NVM:
ZMW DSB MLG TLWH LU NVM HRMXV TLLW, GSV NLIV
XLNNFMRXZGVW, NLIV ZYFMWZMG TILDH,
GSV ZFGSLI MLG RNKZRIVW, YFG SLMLFIVW NLIV?
SVIV, SZKKB XIVZGFIV, UZRI ZMTVORXP VEV!
KZIGZPV GSLF ZOHL SZKKB GSLFTS GSLF ZIG,
SZKKRVI GSLF NZBVHG YV, DLIGSRVI XZMHG MLG YV:
GZHGV GSRH, ZMW YV SVMXVULIGS ZNLMT GSV TLWH
GSBHVOU Z TLWWVHH, MLG GL VZIGS XLMURMVW,
YFG HLNVGRNVH RM GSV ZRI, ZH DV, HLNVGRNVH
ZHXVMW GL SVZEVM, YB NVIRG GSRMV, ZMW HVV
DSZG ORUV GSV TLWH OREV GSVIV, ZMW HFXS OREV GSLF!
HL HZBRMT, SV WIVD MRTS, ZMW GL NV SVOW,
VEVM GL NB NLFGS LU GSZG HZNV UIFRG SVOW KZIG
DSRXS SV SZW KOFXPVW GSV KOVZHZMG HZELFIB HNVOO
HL JFRXPVMVW ZKKVGRGV, GSZG R, NVGSLFTSG,
XLFOW MLG YFG GZHGV.  ULIGSDRGS FK GL GSV XOLFWH
DRGS SRN R UOVD, ZMW FMWVIMVZGS YVSVOW
GSV VZIGS LFGHGIVGXSVW RNNVMHV, Z KILHKVXG DRWV
ZMW EZIRLFH:  DLMWVIRMT ZG NB UORTSG ZMW XSZMTV
GL GSRH SRTS VCZOGZGRLM HFWWVMOB
NB TFRWV DZH TLMV, ZMW R, NVGSLFTSG, HFMP WLDM,
ZMW UVOO ZHOVVK YFG L, SLD TOZW R DZPVW
GL URMW GSRH YFG Z WIVZN!  GSFH VEV SVI MRTSG
IVOZGVW, ZMW GSFH ZWZN ZMHDVIVW HZW.
YVHG RNZTV LU NBHVOU, ZMW WVZIVI SZOU,
GSV GILFYOV LU GSB GSLFTSGH GSRH MRTSG RM HOVVK
ZUUVXGH NV VJFZOOB MLI XZM R ORPV
GSRH FMXLFGS WIVZN, LU VERO HKIFMT, R UVZI
BVG VERO DSVMXV? RM GSVV XZM SZIYLFI MLMV,
XIVZGVW KFIV.  YFG PMLD GSZG RM GSV HLFO
ZIV NZMB OVHHVI UZXFOGRVH, GSZG HVIEV
IVZHLM ZH XSRVU ZNLMT GSVHV UZMXB MVCG
SVI LUURXV SLOWH LU ZOO VCGVIMZO GSRMTH
DSRXS GSV UREV DZGXSUFO HVMHVH IVKIVHVMG,
HSV ULINH RNZTRMZGRLMH, ZVIB HSZKVH,
DSRXS IVZHLM, QLRMRMT LI WRHQLRMRMT, UIZNVH
ZOO DSZG DV ZUURIN LI DSZG WVMB, ZMW XZOO
LFI PMLDOVWTV LI LKRMRLM GSVM IVGRIVH
RMGL SVI KIREZGV XVOO, DSVM MZGFIV IVHGH.
LUG RM SVI ZYHVMXV NRNRXP UZMXB DZPVH
GL RNRGZGV SVI YFG, NRHQLRMRMT HSZKVH,
DROW DLIP KILWFXVH LUG, ZMW NLHG RM WIVZNH
ROO NZGXSRMT DLIWH ZMW WVVWH OLMT KZHG LI OZGV.
HLNV HFXS IVHVNYOZMXVH, NVGSRMPH, R URMW
LU LFI OZHG VEVMRMTH GZOP, RM GSRH GSB WIVZN,
YFG DRGS ZWWRGRLM HGIZMTV BVG YV MLG HZW.
VERO RMGL GSV NRMW LU TLW LI NZM
NZB XLNV ZMW TL, HL FMIVKILEVW, ZMW OVZEV
ML HKLG LI YOZNV YVSRMW:  DSRXS TREVH NV SLKV
GSZG DSZG RM HOVVK GSLF WRWHG ZYSLI GL WIVZN,
DZPRMT GSLF MVEVI DROO XLMHVMG GL WL.
YV MLG WRHSVZIGVMVW GSVM, MLI XOLFW GSLHV OLLPH,
GSZG DLMG GL YV NLIV XSVVIUFO ZMW HVIVMV,
GSZM DSVM UZRI NLIMRMT URIHG HNROVH LM GSV DLIOW
ZMW OVG FH GL LFI UIVHS VNKOLBNVMGH IRHV
ZNLMT GSV TILEVH, GSV ULFMGZRMH, ZMW GSV UOLDVIH
GSZG LKVM MLD GSVRI XSLRHVHG YLHLNVW HNVOOH,
IVHVIEVW UILN MRTSG, ZMW PVKG ULI GSVV RM HGLIV.
HL XSVVIVW SV SRH UZRI HKLFHV, ZMW HSV DZH XSVVIVW
YFG HROVMGOB Z TVMGOV GVZI OVG UZOO
UILN VRGSVI VBV, ZMW DRKVW GSVN DRGS SVI SZRI
GDL LGSVI KIVXRLFH WILKH GSZG IVZWB HGLLW,
VZXS RM GSVRI XIBHGZO HOFRXV, SV VIV GSVB UVOO
PRHHVW, ZH GSV TIZXRLFH HRTMH LU HDVVG IVNLIHV
ZMW KRLFH ZDV, GSZG UVZIVW GL SZEV LUUVMWVW.
HL ZOO DZH XOVZIVW, ZMW GL GSV URVOW GSVB SZHGV.
YFG URIHG, UILN FMWVI HSZWB ZIYLILFH ILLU
HLLM ZH GSVB ULIGS DVIV XLNV GL LKVM HRTSG
LU WZBHKIRMT, ZMW GSV HFM, DSL, HXZIXV FKIRHVM,
DRGS DSVVOH BVG SLEVIRMT LVI GSV LXVZMYIRN,
HSLG KZIZOOVO GL GSV VZIGS SRH WVDB IZB,
WRHXLEVIRMT RM DRWV OZMWHPRK ZOO GSV VZHG
LU KZIZWRHV ZMW VWVMH SZKKB KOZRMH,
OLDOB GSVB YLDVW ZWLIRMT, ZMW YVTZM
GSVRI LIRHLMH, VZXS NLIMRMT WFOB KZRW
RM EZIRLFH HGBOV ULI MVRGSVI EZIRLFH HGBOV
MLI SLOB IZKGFIV DZMGVW GSVB GL KIZRHV
GSVRI NZPVI, RM URG HGIZRMH KILMLFMXVW, LI HFMT
FMNVWRGZGVW HFXS KILNKG VOLJFVMXV
UOLDVW UILN GSVRI ORKH, RM KILHV LI MFNVILFH EVIHV,
NLIV GFMVZYOV GSZM MVVWVW OFGV LI SZIK
GL ZWW NLIV HDVVGMVHH ZMW GSVB GSFH YVTZM.
GSVHV ZIV GSB TOLIRLFH DLIPH, KZIVMG LU TLLW,
ZONRTSGB!  GSRMV GSRH FMREVIHZO UIZNV,
GSFH DLMWVILFH UZRI  GSBHVOU SLD DLMWVILFH GSVM!
FMHKVZPZYOV, DSL HRGHG ZYLEV GSVHV SVZEVMH
GL FH RMERHRYOV, LI WRNOB HVVM
RM GSVHV GSB OLDVHG DLIPH BVG GSVHV WVXOZIV
GSB TLLWMVHH YVBLMW GSLFTSG, ZMW KLDVI WRERMV.
HKVZP, BV DSL YVHG XZM GVOO, BV HLMH LU ORTSG,
ZMTVOH ULI BV YVSLOW SRN, ZMW DRGS HLMTH
ZMW XSLIZO HBNKSLMRVH, WZB DRGSLFG MRTSG,
XRIXOV SRH GSILMV IVQLRXRMT BV RM SVZEVM
LM VZIGS QLRM ZOO BV XIVZGFIVH GL VCGLO
SRN URIHG, SRN OZHG, SRN NRWHG, ZMW DRGSLFG VMW.
UZRIVHG LU HGZIH, OZHG RM GSV GIZRM LU MRTSG,
RU YVGGVI GSLF YVOLMT MLG GL GSV WZDM,
HFIV KOVWTV LU WZB, GSZG XILDMVHG GSV HNRORMT NLIM
DRGS GSB YIRTSG XRIXOVG, KIZRHV SRN RM GSB HKSVIV,
DSROV WZB ZIRHVH, GSZG HDVVG SLFI LU KIRNV.
GSLF HFM, LU GSRH TIVZG DLIOW YLGS VBV ZMW HLFO,
ZXPMLDOVWTV SRN GSB TIVZGVI HLFMW SRH KIZRHV
RM GSB VGVIMZO XLFIHV, YLGS DSVM GSLF XORNYVHG,
ZMW DSVM SRTS MLLM SZHG TZRMVW, ZMW DSVM GSLF UZOOVHG.
NLLM, GSZG MLD NVVGVHG GSV LIRVMG HFM, MLD UOBVHG,
DRGS GSV URCVW HGZIH, URCVW RM GSVRI LIY GSZG UORVH
ZMW BV UREV LGSVI DZMWVIRMT URIVH, GSZG NLEV
RM NBHGRXP WZMXV MLG DRGSLFG HLMT, IVHLFMW
SRH KIZRHV, DSL LFG LU WZIPMVHH XZOOVW FK ORTSG.
ZRI, ZMW BV VOVNVMGH, GSV VOWVHG YRIGS
LU MZGFIVH DLNY, GSZG RM JFZGVIMRLM IFM
KVIKVGFZO XRIXOV, NFOGRULIN ZMW NRC
ZMW MLFIRHS ZOO GSRMTH OVG BLFI XVZHVOVHH XSZMTV
EZIB GL LFI TIVZG NZPVI HGROO MVD KIZRHV.
BV NRHGH ZMW VCSZOZGRLMH, GSZG MLD IRHV
UILN SROO LI HGVZNRMT OZPV, WFHPB LI TIZB,
GROO GSV HFM KZRMG BLFI UOVVXB HPRIGH DRGS TLOW,
RM SLMLFI GL GSV DLIOWH TIVZG ZFGSLI IRHV
DSVGSVI GL WVXP DRGS XOLFWH GSV FMXLOLFIVW HPB,
LI DVG GSV GSRIHGB VZIGS DRGS UZOORMT HSLDVIH,
IRHRMT LI UZOORMT HGROO ZWEZMXV SRH KIZRHV.
SRH KIZRHV, BV DRMWH, GSZG UILN ULFI JFZIGVIH YOLD,
YIVZGSV HLUG LI OLFW ZMW, DZEV BLFI GLKH, BV KRMVH,
DRGS VEVIB KOZMG, RM HRTM LU DLIHSRK DZEV.
ULFMGZRMH, ZMW BV GSZG DZIYOV, ZH BV UOLD,
NVOLWRLFH NFINFIH, DZIYORMT GFMV SRH KIZRHV.
QLRM ELRXVH, ZOO BV ORERMT HLFOH:  BV YRIWH,
GSZG HRMTRMT FK GL SVZEVMTZGV ZHXVMW,
YVZI LM BLFI DRMTH ZMW RM BLFI MLGVH SRH KIZRHV.
BV GSZG RM DZGVIH TORWV, ZMW BV GSZG DZOP
GSV VZIGS, ZMW HGZGVOB GIVZW, LI OLDOB XIVVK
DRGMVHH RU R YV HROVMG, NLIM LI VEVM,
GL SROO, LI EZOOVB, ULFMGZRM, LI UIVHS HSZWV,
NZWV ELXZO YB NB HLMT, ZMW GZFTSG SRH KIZRHV.
SZRO, FMREVIHZO OLIW, YV YLFMGVLFH HGROO
GL TREV FH LMOB TLLW ZMW RU GSV MRTSG
SZEV TZGSVIVW ZFTSG LU VERO, LI XLMXVZOVW,
WRHKVIHV RG, ZH MLD ORTSG WRHKVOH GSV WZIP!
HL KIZBVW GSVB RMMLXVMG, ZMW GL GSVRI GSLFTSGH
URIN KVZXV IVXLEVIVW HLLM, ZMW DLMGVW XZON.
LM GL GSVRI NLIMRMTH IFIZO DLIP GSVB SZHGV,
ZNLMT HDVVG WVDH ZMW UOLDVIH DSVIV ZMB ILD
LU UIFRGGIVVH LEVIDLLWB IVZXSVW GLL UZI
GSVRI KZNKVIVW YLFTSH, ZMW MVVWVW SZMWH GL XSVXP
UIFRGOVHH VNYIZXVH: LI GSVB OVW GSV ERMV
GL DVW SVI VON HSV, HKLFHVW, ZYLFG SRN GDRMVH
SVI NZIIRZTVZYOV ZINH, ZMW DRGS SRN YIRMTH
SVI WLDVI, GSV ZWLKGVW XOFHGVIH, GL ZWLIM
SRH YZIIVM OVZEVH.  GSVN GSFH VNKOLBVW YVSVOW
DRGS KRGB SVZEVMH SRTS PRMT, ZMW GL SRN XZOOVW
IZKSZVO, GSV HLXRZYOV HKRIRG, GSZG WVRTMVW
GL GIZEVO DRGS GLYRZH, ZMW HVXFIVW
SRH NZIIRZTV DRGS GSV HVEVMGRNVHDVWWVW NZRW.
IZKSZVO, HZRW SV, GSLF SVZIVHG DSZG HGRI LM VZIGS
HZGZM, UILN SVOO HXZKVW GSILFTS GSV WZIPHLNV TFOU,
SZGS IZRHVW RM KZIZWRHV ZMW SLD WRHGFIYVW
GSRH MRTSG GSV SFNZM KZRI SLD SV WVHRTMH
RM GSVN ZG LMXV GL IFRM ZOO NZMPRMW.
TL GSVIVULIV, SZOU GSRH WZB ZH UIRVMW DRGS UIRVMW
XLMEVIHV DRGS ZWZN, RM DSZG YLDVI LI HSZWV
GSLF URMWVHG SRN UILN GSV SVZG LU MLLM IVGRIVW,
GL IVHKRGV SRH WZBOZYLFI DRGS IVKZHG,
LI DRGS IVKLHV ZMW HFXS WRHXLFIHV YIRMT LM,
ZH NZB ZWERHV SRN LU SRH SZKKB HGZGV,
SZKKRMVHH RM SRH KLDVI OVUG UIVV GL DROO,
OVUG GL SRH LDM UIVV DROO, SRH DROO GSLFTS UIVV,
BVG NFGZYOV DSVMXV DZIM SRN GL YVDZIV
SV HDVIEV MLG, GLL HVXFIV:  GVOO SRN DRGSZO
SRH WZMTVI, ZMW UILN DSLN DSZG VMVNB,
OZGV UZOOVM SRNHVOU UILN SVZEVM, RH KOLGGRMT MLD
GSV UZOO LU LGSVIH UILN ORPV HGZGV LU YORHH
YB ERLOVMXV? ML, ULI GSZG HSZOO YV DRGSHGLLW
YFG YB WVXVRG ZMW ORVH:  GSRH OVG SRN PMLD,
OVHG, DROUFOOB GIZMHTIVHHRMT, SV KIVGVMW
HFIKIRHZO, FMZWNLMRHSVW, FMULIVDZIMVW.
HL HKZPV GSV VGVIMZO UZGSVI, ZMW UFOUROOVW
ZOO QFHGRXV:  MLI WVOZBVW GSV DRMTVW HZRMG
ZUGVI SRH XSZITV IVXVREVW YFG UILN ZNLMT
GSLFHZMW XVOVHGRZO ZIWLFIH, DSVIV SV HGLLW
EVROVW DRGS SRH TLITVLFH DRMTH, FK HKIRMTRMT ORTSG,
UOVD GSILFTS GSV NRWHG LU SVZEVM GSV ZMTVORXP JFRIVH,
LM VZXS SZMW KZIGRMT, GL SRH HKVVW TZEV DZB
GSILFTS ZOO GSV VNKBIVZO ILZW GROO, ZG GSV TZGV
LU SVZEVM ZIIREVW, GSV TZGV HVOULKVMVW DRWV
LM TLOWVM SRMTVH GFIMRMT, ZH YB DLIP
WRERMV GSV HLEIZM ZIXSRGVXG SZW UIZNVW.
UILN SVMXV ML XOLFW, LI, GL LYHGIFXG SRH HRTSG,
HGZI RMGVIKLHVW, SLDVEVI HNZOO SV HVVH,
MLG FMXLMULINVW GL LGSVI HSRMRMT TOLYVH,
VZIGS, ZMW GSV TZIWVM LU TLW, DRGS XVWZIH XILDMVW
ZYLEV ZOO SROOH.  ZH DSVM YB MRTSG GSV TOZHH
LU TZOROVL, OVHH ZHHFIVW, LYHVIEVH
RNZTRMVW OZMWH ZMW IVTRLMH RM GSV NLLM:
LI KROLG, UILN ZNRWHG GSV XBXOZWVH
WVOLH LI HZNLH URIHG ZKKVZIRMT, PVMH
Z XOLFWB HKLG.  WLDM GSRGSVI KILMV RM UORTSG
SV HKVVWH, ZMW GSILFTS GSV EZHG VGSVIVZO HPB
HZROH YVGDVVM DLIOWH ZMW DLIOWH, DRGS HGVZWB DRMT
MLD LM GSV KLOZI DRMWH, GSVM DRGS JFRXP UZM
DRMMLDH GSV YFCLN ZRI GROO, DRGSRM HLZI
LU GLDVIRMT VZTOVH, GL ZOO GSV ULDOH SV HVVNH
Z KSLVMRC, TZAVW YB ZOO ZH GSZG HLOV YRIW,
DSVM, GL VMHSIRMV SRH IVORJFVH RM GSV HFMH
YIRTSG GVNKOV, GL VTBKGRZM GSVYVH SV UORVH.
ZG LMXV LM GSV VZHGVIM XORUU LU KZIZWRHV
SV ORTSGH, ZMW GL SRH KILKVI HSZKV IVGFIMH
Z HVIZKS DRMTVW:  HRC DRMTH SV DLIV, GL HSZWV
SRH ORMVZNVMGH WRERMV GSV KZRI GSZG XOZW
VZXS HSLFOWVI YILZW, XZNV NZMGORMT LVI SRH YIVZHG
DRGS IVTZO LIMZNVMG GSV NRWWOV KZRI
TRIG ORPV Z HGZIIB ALMV SRH DZRHG, ZMW ILFMW
HPRIGVW SRH OLRMH ZMW GSRTSH DRGS WLDMB TLOW
ZMW XLOLFIH WRKG RM SVZEVM GSV GSRIW SRH UVVG
HSZWLDVW UILN VRGSVI SVVO DRGS UVZGSVIVW NZRO,
HPBGRMXGFIVW TIZRM.  ORPV NZRZH HLM SV HGLLW,
ZMW HSLLP SRH KOFNVH, GSZG SVZEVMOB UIZTIZMXV UROOVW
GSV XRIXFRG DRWV.  HGIZRTSG PMVD SRN ZOO GSV YZMWH
LU ZMTVOH FMWVI DZGXS ZMW GL SRH HGZGV,
ZMW GL SRH NVHHZTV SRTS, RM SLMLFI IRHV
ULI LM HLNV NVHHZTV SRTS GSVB TFVHHVW SRN YLFMW.
GSVRI TORGGVIRMT GVMGH SV KZHHVW, ZMW MLD RH XLNV
RMGL GSV YORHHUFO URVOW, GSILFTS TILEVH LU NBIIS,
ZMW UOLDVIRMT LWLFIH, XZHHRZ, MZIW, ZMW YZON
Z DROWVIMVHH LU HDVVGH ULI MZGFIV SVIV
DZMGLMVW ZH RM SVI KIRNV, ZMW KOZBVW ZG DROO
SVI ERITRM UZMXRVH KLFIRMT ULIGS NLIV HDVVG,
DROW ZYLEV IFOV LI ZIG, VMLINLFH YORHH.
SRN GSILFTS GSV HKRXB ULIVHG LMDZIW XLNV
ZWZN WRHXVIMVW, ZH RM GSV WLLI SV HZG
LU SRH XLLO YLDVI, DSROV MLD GSV NLFMGVW HFM
HSLG WLDM WRIVXG SRH UVIERW IZBH GL DZIN
VZIGSH RMNLHG DLNY, NLIV DZINGS GSZM ZWZN MVVWH:
ZMW VEV DRGSRM, WFV ZG SVI SLFI KIVKZIVW
ULI WRMMVI HZELFIB UIFRGH, LU GZHGV GL KOVZHV
GIFV ZKKVGRGV, ZMW MLG WRHIVORHS GSRIHG
LU MVXGZILFH WIZFTSGH YVGDVVM, UILN NROPB HGIVZN,
YVIIB LI TIZKV:  GL DSLN GSFH ZWZN XZOOVW.
SZHGV SRGSVI, VEV, ZMW DLIGS GSB HRTSG YVSLOW
VZHGDZIW ZNLMT GSLHV GIVVH, DSZG TOLIRLFH HSZKV
XLNVH GSRH DZB NLERMT HVVNH ZMLGSVI NLIM
IRHVM LM NRWMLLM HLNV TIVZG YVSVHG UILN SVZEVM
GL FH KVISZKH SV YIRMTH, ZMW DROO ELFXSHZUV
GSRH WZB GL YV LFI TFVHG.  YFG TL DRGS HKVVW,
ZMW, DSZG GSB HGLIVH XLMGZRM, YIRMT ULIGS, ZMW KLFI
ZYFMWZMXV, URG GL SLMLFI ZMW IVXVREV
LFI SVZEVMOB HGIZMTVI:  DVOO DV NZB ZUULIW
LFI TREVIH GSVRI LDM TRUGH, ZMW OZITV YVHGLD
UILN OZITV YVHGLDVW, DSVIV MZGFIV NFOGRKORVH
SVI UVIGROV TILDGS, ZMW YB WRHYFIGSVMRMT TILDH
NLIV UIFRGUFO, DSRXS RMHGIFXGH FH MLG GL HKZIV.
GL DSLN GSFH VEV.  ZWZN, VZIGSH SZOOLDVW NLFOW,
LU TLW RMHKRIVW! HNZOO HGLIV DROO HVIEV, DSVIV HGLIV,
ZOO HVZHLMH, IRKV ULI FHV SZMTH LM GSV HGZOP
HZEV DSZG YB UIFTZO HGLIRMT URINMVHH TZRMH
GL MLFIRHS, ZMW HFKVIUOFLFH NLRHG XLMHFNVH:
YFG R DROO SZHGV, ZMW UILN VZXS YLFTS ZMW YIZPV,
VZXS KOZMG ZMW QFXRVHG TLFIW, DROO KOFXP HFXS XSLRXV
GL VMGVIGZRM LFI ZMTVOTFVHG, ZH SV
YVSLOWRMT HSZOO XLMUVHH, GSZG SVIV LM VZIGS
TLW SZGS WRHKVMHVW SRH YLFMGRVH ZH RM SVZEVM.
HL HZBRMT, DRGS WRHKZGXSUFO OLLPH RM SZHGV
HSV GFIMH, LM SLHKRGZYOV GSLFTSGH RMGVMG
DSZG XSLRXV GL XSLLHV ULI WVORXZXB YVHG,
DSZG LIWVI, HL XLMGIREVW ZH MLG GL NRC
GZHGVH, MLG DVOO QLRMVW, RMVOVTZMG, YFG YIRMT
GZHGV ZUGVI GZHGV FKSVOW DRGS PRMWORVHG XSZMTV
YVHGRIH SVI GSVM, ZMW UILN VZXS GVMWVI HGZOP
DSZGVEVI VZIGS, ZOOYVZIRMT NLGSVI, BRVOWH
RM RMWRZ VZHG LI DVHG, LI NRWWOV HSLIV
RM KLMGFH LI GSV KFMRXP XLZHG, LI DSVIV
ZOXRMLFH IVRTMVW, UIFRG LU ZOO PRMWH, RM XLZG
ILFTS, LI HNLLGS IRMW, LI YVZIWVW SFHP, LI HSVOO,
HSV TZGSVIH, GIRYFGV OZITV, ZMW LM GSV YLZIW
SVZKH DRGS FMHKZIRMT SZMW ULI WIRMP GSV TIZKV
HSV XIFHSVH, RMLUUVMHREV NFHG, ZMW NVZGSH
UILN NZMB Z YVIIB, ZMW UILN HDVVG PVIMVOH KIVHHVW
HSV GVNKVIH WFOXVG XIVZNH MLI GSVHV GL SLOW
DZMGH SVI URG EVHHVOH KFIV GSVM HGILDH GSV TILFMW
DRGS ILHV ZMW LWLFIH UILN GSV HSIFY FMUFNVW.
NVZM DSROV LFI KIRNRGREV TIVZG HRIV, GL NVVG
SRH TLWORPV TFVHG, DZOPH ULIGS, DRGSLFG NLIV GIZRM
ZXXLNKZMRVW GSZM DRGS SRH LDM XLNKOVGV
KVIUVXGRLMH RM SRNHVOU DZH ZOO SRH HGZGV,
NLIV HLOVNM GSZM GSV GVWRLFH KLNK GSZG DZRGH
LM KIRMXVH, DSVM GSVRI IRXS IVGRMFV OLMT
LU SLIHVH OVW, ZMW TILLNH YVHNVZIVW DRGS TLOW,
WZAAOVH GSV XILFW, ZMW HVGH GSVN ZOO ZTZKV.
MVZIVI SRH KIVHVMXV ZWZN, GSLFTS MLG ZDVW,
BVG DRGS HFYNRHH ZKKILZXS ZMW IVEVIVMXV NVVP,
ZH GL Z HFKVIRLFI MZGFIV YLDRMT OLD,
GSFH HZRW.  MZGREV LU SVZEVM, ULI LGSVI KOZXV
MLMV XZM GSZM SVZEVM HFXS TOLIRLFH HSZKV XLMGZRM
HRMXV, YB WVHXVMWRMT UILN GSV GSILMVH ZYLEV,
GSLHV SZKKB KOZXVH GSLF SZHG WVRTMVW Z DSROV
GL DZMG, ZMW SLMLFI GSVHV, ELFXSHZUV DRGS FH
GDL LMOB, DSL BVG YB HLEIZM TRUG KLHHVHH
GSRH HKZXRLFH TILFMW, RM BLMWVI HSZWB YLDVI
GL IVHG ZMW DSZG GSV TZIWVM XSLRXVHG YVZIH
GL HRG ZMW GZHGV, GROO GSRH NVIRWRZM SVZG
YV LEVI, ZMW GSV HFM NLIV XLLO WVXORMV.
DSLN GSFH GSV ZMTVORXP ERIGFV ZMHDVIVW NROW.
ZWZN, R GSVIVULIV XZNV MLI ZIG GSLF HFXS
XIVZGVW, LI HFXS KOZXV SZHG SVIV GL WDVOO,
ZH NZB MLG LUG RMERGV, GSLFTS HKRIRGH LU SVZEVM,
GL ERHRG GSVV OVZW LM GSVM DSVIV GSB YLDVI
LVIHSZWVH ULI GSVHV NRWSLFIH, GROO VEVMRMT IRHV,
R SZEV ZG DROO.  HL GL GSV HBOEZM OLWTV
GSVB XZNV, GSZG ORPV KLNLMZH ZIYLFI HNROVW,
DRGS UOLDVIVGH WVXPVW, ZMW UIZTIZMG HNVOOH YFG VEV,
FMWVXPVW HZEV DRGS SVIHVOU, NLIV OLEVOB UZRI
GSZM DLLWMBNKS, LI GSV UZRIVHG TLWWVHH UVRTMVW
LU GSIVV GSZG RM NLFMG RWZ MZPVW HGILEV,
HGLLW GL VMGVIGZRM SVI TFVHG UILN SVZEVM ML EVRO
HSV MVVWVW, ERIGFVKILLU ML GSLFTSG RMURIN
ZOGVIVW SVI XSVVP.  LM DSLN GSV ZMTVO SZRO
YVHGLDVW, GSV SLOB HZOFGZGRLM FHVW
OLMT ZUGVI GL YOVHG NZIB, HVXLMW VEV.
SZRO, NLGSVI LU NZMPRMW, DSLHV UIFRGUFO DLNY
HSZOO UROO GSV DLIOW NLIV MFNVILFH DRGS GSB HLMH,
GSZM DRGS GSVHV EZIRLFH UIFRGH GSV GIVVH LU TLW
SZEV SVZKVW GSRH GZYOV!IZRHVW LU TIZHHB GFIU
GSVRI GZYOV DZH, ZMW NLHHB HVZGH SZW ILFMW,
ZMW LM SVI ZNKOV HJFZIV UILN HRWV GL HRWV
ZOO ZFGFNM KROVW, GSLFTS HKIRMT ZMW ZFGFNM SVIV
WZMXVW SZMW RM SZMW.  Z DSROV WRHXLFIHV GSVB SLOW
ML UVZI OVHG WRMMVI XLLO DSVM GSFH YVTZM
LFI ZFGSLI.  SVZEVMOB HGIZMTVI, KOVZHV GL GZHGV
GSVHV YLFMGRVH, DSRXS LFI MLFIRHSVI, UILN DSLN
ZOO KVIUVXG TLLW, FMNVZHFIVW LFG, WVHXVMWH,
GL FH ULI ULLW ZMW ULI WVORTSG SZGS XZFHVW
GSV VZIGS GL BRVOW FMHZELFIB ULLW KVISZKH
GL HKRIRGFZO MZGFIVH LMOB GSRH R PMLD,
GSZG LMV XVOVHGRZO UZGSVI TREVH GL ZOO.
GL DSLN GSV ZMTVO.  GSVIVULIV DSZG SV TREVH
DSLHV KIZRHV YV VEVI HFMT GL NZM RM KZIG
HKRIRGFZO, NZB LU KFIVHG HKRIRGH YV ULFMW
ML RMTIZGVUFO ULLW:  ZMW ULLW ZORPV GSLHV KFIV
RMGVOORTVMGRZO HFYHGZMXVH IVJFRIV,
ZH WLGS BLFI IZGRLMZO ZMW YLGS XLMGZRM
DRGSRM GSVN VEVIB OLDVI UZXFOGB
LU HVMHV, DSVIVYB GSVB SVZI, HVV, HNVOO, GLFXS, GZHGV,
GZHGRMT XLMXLXG, WRTVHG, ZHHRNROZGV,
ZMW XLIKLIVZO GL RMXLIKLIVZO GFIM.
ULI PMLD, DSZGVEVI DZH XIVZGVW, MVVWH
GL YV HFHGZRMVW ZMW UVW:  LU VOVNVMGH
GSV TILHHVI UVVWH GSV KFIVI, VZIGS GSV HVZ,
VZIGS ZMW GSV HVZ UVVW ZRI, GSV ZRI GSLHV URIVH
VGSVIVZO, ZMW ZH OLDVHG URIHG GSV NLLM
DSVMXV RM SVI ERHZTV ILFMW GSLHV HKLGH, FMKFITVW
EZKLFIH MLG BVG RMGL SVI HFYHGZMXV GFIMVW.
MLI WLGS GSV NLLM ML MLFIRHSNVMG VCSZOV
UILN SVI NLRHG XLMGRMVMG GL SRTSVI LIYH.
GSV HFM GSZG ORTSG RNKZIGH GL ZOO, IVXVREVH
UILN ZOO SRH ZORNVMGZO IVXLNKVMXV
RM SFNRW VCSZOZGRLMH, ZMW ZG VEVM
HFKH DRGS GSV LXVZM.  GSLFTS RM SVZEVM GSV GIVVH
LU ORUV ZNYILHRZO UIFRGZTV YVZI, ZMW ERMVH
BRVOW MVXGZI GSLFTS UILN LUU GSV YLFTSH VZXS NLIM
DV YIFHS NVOORUOFLFH WVDH, ZMW URMW GSV TILFMW
XLEVIVW DRGS KVZIOB TIZRM:  BVG TLW SZGS SVIV
EZIRVW SRH YLFMGB HL DRGS MVD WVORTSGH,
ZH NZB XLNKZIV DRGS SVZEVM ZMW GL GZHGV
GSRMP MLG R HSZOO YV MRXV.  HL WLDM GSVB HZG,
ZMW GL GSVRI ERZMWH UVOO MLI HVVNRMTOB
GSV ZMTVO, MLI RM NRHG, GSV XLNNLM TOLHH
LU GSVLOLTRZMH YFG DRGS PVVM WRHKZGXS
LU IVZO SFMTVI, ZMW XLMXLXGREV SVZG
GL GIZMHFYHGZMGRZGV:  DSZG IVWLFMWH, GIZMHKRIVH
GSILFTS HKRIRGH DRGS VZHV MLI DLMWVIRU YB URIV
LU HLLGB XLZO GSV VNKRIRXP ZOXSVNRHG
XZM GFIM, LI SLOWH RG KLHHRYOV GL GFIM,
NVGZOH LU WILHHRVHG LIV GL KVIUVXG TLOW,
ZH UILN GSV NRMV.  NVZM DSROV ZG GZYOV VEV
NRMRHGVIVW MZPVW, ZMW GSVRI UOLDRMT XFKH
DRGS KOVZHZMG ORJFLFIH XILDMVW:  L RMMLXVMXV
WVHVIERMT KZIZWRHV! RU VEVI, GSVM,
GSVM SZW GSV HLMH LU TLW VCXFHV GL SZEV YVVM
VMZNLFIVW ZG GSZG HRTSG YFG RM GSLHV SVZIGH
OLEV FMORYRWRMLFH IVRTMVW, MLI QVZOLFHB
DZH FMWVIHGLLW, GSV RMQFIVW OLEVIH SVOO.
GSFH DSVM DRGS NVZGH ZMW WIRMPH GSVB SZW HFUURXVW,
MLG YFIWVMVW MZGFIV, HFWWVM NRMW ZILHV
RM ZWZN, MLG GL OVG GSV LXXZHRLM KZHH
TREVM SRN YB GSRH TIVZG XLMUVIVMXV GL PMLD
LU GSRMTH ZYLEV SRH DLIOW, ZMW LU GSVRI YVRMT
DSL WDVOO RM SVZEVM, DSLHV VCXVOOVMXV SV HZD
GIZMHXVMW SRH LDM HL UZI DSLHV IZWRZMG ULINH,
WRERMV VUUFOTVMXV, DSLHV SRTS KLDVI, HL UZI
VCXVVWVW SFNZM ZMW SRH DZIB HKVVXS
GSFH GL GSV VNKBIVZO NRMRHGVI SV UIZNVW.
RMSZYRGZMG DRGS TLW, MLD PMLD R DVOO
GSB UZELFI, RM GSRH SLMLFI WLMV GL NZM
FMWVI DSLHV OLDOB ILLU GSLF SZHG ELFXSHZUVW
GL VMGVI, ZMW GSVHV VZIGSOB UIFRGH GL GZHGV,
ULLW MLG LU ZMTVOH, BVG ZXXVKGVW HL,
ZH GSZG NLIV DROORMTOB GSLF XLFOWHG MLG HVVN
ZG SVZEVMH SRTS UVZHGH GL SZEV UVW: BVG DSZG XLNKZIV
GL DSLN GSV DRMTVW SRVIZIXS IVKORVW.
L ZWZN, LMV ZONRTSGB RH, UILN DSLN
ZOO GSRMTH KILXVVW, ZMW FK GL SRN IVGFIM,
RU MLG WVKIZEVW UILN TLLW, XIVZGVW ZOO
HFXS GL KVIUVXGRLM, LMV URIHG NZGGVI ZOO,
VMWFVW DRGS EZIRLFH ULINH, EZIRLFH WVTIVVH
LU HFYHGZMXV, ZMW, RM GSRMTH GSZG OREV, LU ORUV
YFG NLIV IVURMVW, NLIV HKRIRGLFH, ZMW KFIV,
ZH MVZIVI GL SRN KOZXVW, LI MVZIVI GVMWRMT
VZXS RM GSVRI HVEVIZO ZXGREV HKSVIVH ZHHRTMVW,
GROO YLWB FK GL HKRIRG DLIP, RM YLFMWH
KILKLIGRLMVW GL VZXS PRMW.  HL UILN GSV ILLG
HKIRMTH ORTSGVI GSV TIVVM HGZOP, UILN GSVMXV GSV OVZEVH
NLIV ZVIB, OZHG GSV YIRTSG XLMHFNNZGV UOLDVI
HKRIRGH LWLILFH YIVZGSVH: UOLDVIH ZMW GSVRI UIFRG,
NZMH MLFIRHSNVMG, YB TIZWFZO HXZOV HFYORNVW,
GL ERGZO HKRIRGH ZHKRIV, GL ZMRNZO,
GL RMGVOOVXGFZO TREV YLGS ORUV ZMW HVMHV,
UZMXB ZMW FMWVIHGZMWRMT DSVMXV GSV HLFO
IVZHLM IVXVREVH, ZMW IVZHLM RH SVI YVRMT,
WRHXFIHREV, LI RMGFRGREV WRHXLFIHV
RH LUGVHG BLFIH, GSV OZGGVI NLHG RH LFIH,
WRUUVIRMT YFG RM WVTIVV, LU PRMW GSV HZNV.
DLMWVI MLG GSVM, DSZG TLW ULI BLF HZD TLLW
RU R IVUFHV MLG, YFG XLMEVIG, ZH BLF
GL KILKVI HFYHGZMXV.  GRNV NZB XLNV, DSVM NVM
DRGS ZMTVOH NZB KZIGRXRKZGV, ZMW URMW
ML RMXLMEVMRVMG WRVG, MLI GLL ORTSG UZIV
ZMW UILN GSVHV XLIKLIZO MFGIRNVMGH KVISZKH
BLFI YLWRVH NZB ZG OZHG GFIM ZOO GL HKRIRG,
RNKILEVW YB GIZXG LU GRNV, ZMW, DRMTVW, ZHXVMW
VGSVIVZO, ZH DV LI NZB, ZG XSLRXV,
SVIV LI RM SVZEVMOB KZIZWRHVH WDVOO
RU BV YV ULFMW LYVWRVMG, ZMW IVGZRM
FMZOGVIZYOB URIN SRH OLEV VMGRIV,
DSLHV KILTVMB BLF ZIV.  NVZM DSROV VMQLB
BLFI UROO DSZG SZKKRMVHH GSRH SZKKB HGZGV
XZM XLNKIVSVMW, RMXZKZYOV LU NLIV.
GL DSLN GSV KZGIRZIXS LU NZMPRMW IVKORVW.
L UZELFIZYOV HKRIRG, KILKRGRLFH TFVHG,
DVOO SZHG GSLF GZFTSG GSV DZB GSZG NRTSG WRIVXG
LFI PMLDOVWTV, ZMW GSV HXZOV LU MZGFIV HVG
UILN XVMGVI GL XRIXFNUVIVMXV DSVIVLM,
RM XLMGVNKOZGRLM LU XIVZGVW GSRMTH,
YB HGVKH DV NZB ZHXVMW GL TLW.  YFG HZB,
DSZG NVZMG GSZG XZFGRLM QLRMVW, RU BV YV ULFMW
LYVWRVMG?  XZM DV DZMG LYVWRVMXV GSVM
GL SRN, LI KLHHRYOB SRH OLEV WVHVIG,
DSL ULINVW FH UILN GSV WFHG ZMW KOZXVW FH SVIV
UFOO GL GSV FGNLHG NVZHFIV LU DSZG YORHH
SFNZM WVHRIVH XZM HVVP LI ZKKIVSVMW?
GL DSLN GSV ZMTVO.  HLM LU SVZEVM ZMW VZIGS,
ZGGVMW!  GSZG GSLF ZIG SZKKB, LDV GL TLW
GSZG GSLF XLMGRMFVHG HFXS, LDV GL GSBHVOU,
GSZG RH, GL GSB LYVWRVMXV GSVIVRM HGZMW.
GSRH DZH GSZG XZFGRLM TREVM GSVV YV ZWERHVW.
TLW NZWV GSVV KVIUVXG, MLG RNNFGZYOV
ZMW TLLW SV NZWV GSVV, YFG GL KVIHVEVIV
SV OVUG RG RM GSB KLDVI LIWZRMVW GSB DROO
YB MZGFIV UIVV, MLG LEVIIFOVW YB UZGV
RMVCGIRXZYOV, LI HGIRXG MVXVHHRGB:
LFI ELOFMGZIB HVIERXV SV IVJFRIVH,
MLG LFI MVXVHHRGZGVW HFXS DRGS SRN
URMWH ML ZXXVKGZMXV, MLI XZM URMW ULI SLD
XZM SVZIGH, MLG UIVV, YV GIRVW DSVGSVI GSVB HVIEV
DROORMT LI ML, DSL DROO YFG DSZG GSVB NFHG
YB WVHGRMB, ZMW XZM ML LGSVI XSLLHV?
NBHVOU, ZMW ZOO GSV ZMTVORXP SLHG, GSZG HGZMW
RM HRTSG LU TLW, VMGSILMVW, LFI SZKKB HGZGV
SLOW, ZH BLF BLFIH, DSROV LFI LYVWRVMXV SLOWH
LM LGSVI HFIVGB MLMV:  UIVVOB DV HVIEV,
YVXZFHV DV UIVVOB OLEV, ZH RM LFI DROO
GL OLEV LI MLG RM GSRH DV HGZMW LI UZOO:
ZMW HLNV ZIV UZOOVM, GL WRHLYVWRVMXV UZOOVM,
ZMW HL UILN SVZEVM GL WVVKVHG SVOO L UZOO
UILN DSZG SRTS HGZGV LU YORHH, RMGL DSZG DLV!
GL DSLN LFI TIVZG KILTVMRGLI.  GSB DLIWH
ZGGVMGREV, ZMW DRGS NLIV WVORTSGVW VZI,
WRERMV RMHGIFXGVI, R SZEV SVZIW, GSZM DSVM
XSVIFYRXP HLMTH YB MRTSG UILN MVRTSYLFIRMT SROOH
ZVIVZO NFHRXP HVMW:  MLI PMVD R MLG
GL YV YLGS DROO ZMW WVVW XIVZGVW UIVV
BVG GSZG DV MVEVI HSZOO ULITVG GL OLEV
LFI NZPVI, ZMW LYVB SRN DSLHV XLNNZMW
HRMTOV RH BVG HL QFHG, NB XLMHGZMG GSLFTSGH
ZHHFIVW NV, ZMW HGROO ZHHFIV:  GSLFTS DSZG GSLF GVOOVHG
SZGS KZHHVW RM SVZEVM, HLNV WLFYG DRGSRM NV NLEV,
YFG NLIV WVHRIV GL SVZI, RU GSLF XLMHVMG,
GSV UFOO IVOZGRLM, DSRXS NFHG MVVWH YV HGIZMTV,
DLIGSB LU HZXIVW HROVMXV GL YV SVZIW
ZMW DV SZEV BVG OZITV WZB, ULI HXZIXV GSV HFM
SZGS URMRHSVW SZOU SRH QLFIMVB, ZMW HXZIXV YVTRMH
SRH LGSVI SZOU RM GSV TIVZG ALMV LU SVZEVM.
GSFH ZWZN NZWV IVJFVHG ZMW IZKSZVO,
ZUGVI HSLIG KZFHV ZHHVMGRMT, GSFH YVTZM.
SRTS NZGGVI GSLF VMQLRMVHG NV, L KIRNV LU NVM,
HZW GZHP ZMW SZIW:  ULI SLD HSZOO R IVOZGV
GL SFNZM HVMHV GSV RMERHRYOV VCKOLRGH
LU DZIIRMT HKRIRGH? SLD, DRGSLFG IVNLIHV,
GSV IFRM LU HL NZMB TOLIRLFH LMXV
ZMW KVIUVXG DSROV GSVB HGLLW? SLD OZHG FMULOW
GSV HVXIVGH LU ZMLGSVI DLIOW, KVISZKH
MLG OZDUFO GL IVEVZO? BVG ULI GSB TLLW
GSRH RH WRHKVMHVW ZMW DSZG HFINLFMGH GSV IVZXS
LU SFNZM HVMHV, R HSZOO WVORMVZGV HL,
YB ORPVMRMT HKRIRGFZO GL XLIKLIZO ULINH,
ZH NZB VCKIVHH GSVN YVHG GSLFTS DSZG RU VZIGS
YV YFG Z HSZWLD LU SVZEVM, ZMW GSRMTH GSVIVRM
VZXS GL LGSVI ORPV, NLIV GSZM LM VZIGS RH GSLFTSG?
ZH BVG GSRH DLIOW DZH MLG, ZMW XSZLH DROW
IVRTMVW DSVIV GSVHV SVZEVMH MLD ILOO, DSVIV VZIGS MLD IVHGH
FKLM SVI XVMGVI KLRHVW DSVM LM Z WZB
ULI GRNV, GSLFTS RM VGVIMRGB, ZKKORVW
GL NLGRLM, NVZHFIVH ZOO GSRMTH WFIZYOV
YB KIVHVMG, KZHG, ZMW UFGFIV, LM HFXS WZB
ZH SVZEVMH TIVZG BVZI YIRMTH ULIGS, GSV VNKBIVZO SLHG
LU ZMTVOH YB RNKVIRZO HFNNLMH XZOOVW,
RMMFNVIZYOV YVULIV GSV ZONRTSGBH GSILMV
ULIGSDRGS, UILN ZOO GSV VMWH LU SVZEVM, ZKKVZIVW
FMWVI GSVRI SRVIZIXSH RM LIWVIH YIRTSG:
GVM GSLFHZMW GSLFHZMW VMHRTMH SRTS ZWEZMXVW,
HGZMWZIWH ZMW TLMUZOLMH GDRCG EZM ZMW IVZI
HGIVZN RM GSV ZRI, ZMW ULI WRHGRMXGRLM HVIEV
LU SRVIZIXSRVH, LU LIWVIH, ZMW WVTIVVH
LI RM GSVRI TORGGVIRMT GRHHFVH YVZI RNYOZAVW
SLOB NVNLIRZOH, ZXGH LU AVZO ZMW OLEV
IVXLIWVW VNRMVMG.  GSFH DSVM RM LIYH
LU XRIXFRG RMVCKIVHHRYOV GSVB HGLLW,
LIY DRGSRM LIY, GSV UZGSVI RMURMRGV,
YB DSLN RM YORHH RNYLHLNVW HZG GSV HLM,
ZNRWHG ZH UILN Z UOZNRMT NLFMG, DSLHV GLK
YIRTSGMVHH SZW NZWV RMERHRYOV, GSFH HKZPV.
SVZI, ZOO BV ZMTVOH, KILTVMB LU ORTSG,
GSILMVH, WLNRMZGRLMH, KIRMXVWLNH, ERIGFVH, KLDVIH
SVZI NB WVXIVV, DSRXS FMIVELPVW HSZOO HGZMW.
GSRH WZB R SZEV YVTLG DSLN R WVXOZIV
NB LMOB HLM, ZMW LM GSRH SLOB SROO
SRN SZEV ZMLRMGVW, DSLN BV MLD YVSLOW
ZG NB IRTSG SZMW BLFI SVZW R SRN ZKKLRMG
ZMW YB NBHVOU SZEV HDLIM, GL SRN HSZOO YLD
ZOO PMVVH RM SVZEVM, ZMW HSZOO XLMUVHH SRN OLIW:
FMWVI SRH TIVZG ERXVTVIVMG IVRTM ZYRWV
FMRGVW, ZH LMV RMWRERWFZO HLFO,
ULI VEVI SZKKB:  SRN DSL WRHLYVBH,
NV WRHLYVBH, YIVZPH FMRLM, ZMW GSZG WZB,
XZHG LFG UILN TLW ZMW YOVHHVW ERHRLM, UZOOH
RMGL FGGVI WZIPMVHH, WVVK RMTFOUVW, SRH KOZXV
LIWZRMVW DRGSLFG IVWVNKGRLM, DRGSLFG VMW.
HL HKZPV GSV LNMRKLGVMG, ZMW DRGS SRH DLIWH
ZOO HVVNVW DVOO KOVZHVW ZOO HVVNVW, YFG DVIV MLG ZOO.
GSZG WZB, ZH LGSVI HLOVNM WZBH, GSVB HKVMG
RM HLMT ZMW WZMXV ZYLFG GSV HZXIVW SROO
NBHGRXZO WZMXV, DSRXS BLMWVI HGZIIB HKSVIV
LU KOZMVGH, ZMW LU URCVW, RM ZOO SVI DSVVOH
IVHVNYOVH MVZIVHG, NZAVH RMGIRXZGV,
VXXVMGIRXP, RMGVIELOEVW, BVG IVTFOZI
GSVM NLHG, DSVM NLHG RIIVTFOZI GSVB HVVN
ZMW RM GSVRI NLGRLMH SZINLMB WRERMV
HL HNLLGSH SVI XSZINRMT GLMVH, GSZG TLWH LDM VZI
ORHGVMH WVORTSGVW.  VEVMRMT MLD ZKKILZXSVW,
ULI DV SZEV ZOHL LFI VEVMRMT ZMW LFI NLIM,
DV LFIH ULI XSZMTV WVOVXGZYOV, MLG MVVW
ULIGSDRGS UILN WZMXV GL HDVVG IVKZHG GSVB GFIM
WVHRILFH ZOO RM XRIXOVH ZH GSVB HGLLW,
GZYOVH ZIV HVG, ZMW LM Z HFWWVM KROVW
DRGS ZMTVOH ULLW, ZMW IFYRVW MVXGZI UOLDH
RM KVZIO, RM WRZNLMW, ZMW NZHHB TLOW,
UIFRG LU WVORXRLFH ERMVH, GSV TILDGS LU SVZEVM.
LM UOLDVIH IVKLHVW, ZMW DRGS UIVHS UOLDVIVGH XILDMVW,
GSVB VZG, GSVB WIRMP, ZMW RM XLNNFMRLM HDVVG
JFZUU RNNLIGZORGB ZMW QLB, HVXFIV
LU HFIUVRG, DSVIV UFOO NVZHFIV LMOB YLFMWH
VCXVHH, YVULIV GSV ZOOYLFMGVLFH PRMT, DSL HSLDVIVW
DRGS XLKRLFH SZMW, IVQLRXRMT RM GSVRI QLB.
MLD DSVM ZNYILHRZO MRTSG DRGS XOLFWH VCSZOVW
UILN GSZG SRTS NLFMG LU TLW, DSVMXV ORTSG ZMW HSZWV
HKIRMT YLGS, GSV UZXV LU YIRTSGVHG SVZEVM SZW XSZMTVW
GL TIZGVUFO GDRORTSG, ULI MRTSG XLNVH MLG GSVIV
RM WZIPVI EVRO, ZMW ILHVZG WVDH WRHKLHVW
ZOO YFG GSV FMHOVVKRMT VBVH LU TLW GL IVHG
DRWV LEVI ZOO GSV KOZRM, ZMW DRWVI UZI
GSZM ZOO GSRH TOLYLFH VZIGS RM KOZRM LFGHKIVZW,
HFXS ZIV GSV XLFIGH LU TLW GSV ZMTVORXP GSILMT,
WRHKVIHVW RM YZMWH ZMW UROVH, GSVRI XZNK VCGVMW
YB ORERMT HGIVZNH ZNLMT GSV GIVVH LU ORUV,
KZERORLMH MFNYVIOVHH, ZMW HFWWVM IVZIVW,
XVOVHGRZO GZYVIMZXOVH, DSVIV GSVB HOVKG
UZMMVW DRGS XLLO DRMWH HZEV GSLHV, DSL, RM GSVRI XLFIHV,
NVOLWRLFH SBNMH ZYLFG GSV HLEIZM GSILMV
ZOGVIMZGV ZOO MRTSG OLMT: YFG MLG HL DZPVW
HZGZM HL XZOO SRN MLD, SRH ULINVI MZNV
RH SVZIW ML NLIV RM SVZEVM SV LU GSV URIHG,
RU MLG GSV URIHG ZIXSZMTVO, TIVZG RM KLDVI,
RM UZELFI ZMW KIVVNRMVMXV, BVG UIZFTSG
DRGS VMEB ZTZRMHG GSV HLM LU TLW, GSZG WZB
SLMLFIVW YB SRH TIVZG UZGSVI, ZMW KILXOZRNVW
NVHHRZS PRMT ZMLRMGVW, XLFOW MLG YVZI
GSILFTS KIRWV GSZG HRTSG, ZMW GSLFTSG SRNHVOU RNKZRIVW.
WVVK NZORXV GSVMXV XLMXVRERMT ZMW WRHWZRM,
HLLM ZH NRWMRTSG YILFTSG LM GSV WFHPB SLFI
UIRVMWORVHG GL HOVVK ZMW HROVMXV, SV IVHLOEVW
DRGS ZOO SRH OVTRLMH GL WRHOLWTV, ZMW OVZEV
FMDLIHSRKG, FMLYVBVW, GSV GSILMV HFKIVNV,
XLMGVNKGFLFH ZMW SRH MVCG HFYLIWRMZGV
ZDZPVMRMT, GSFH GL SRN RM HVXIVG HKZPV.
HOVVKVHG GSLF, XLNKZMRLM WVZI?  DSZG HOVVK XZM XOLHV
GSB VBVORWH? ZMW IVNVNYVIVHG DSZG WVXIVV
LU BVHGVIWZB, HL OZGV SZGS KZHHVW GSV ORKH
LU SVZEVMH ZONRTSGB.  GSLF GL NV GSB GSLFTSGH
DZHG DLMG, R NRMV GL GSVV DZH DLMG GL RNKZIG
YLGS DZPRMT DV DVIV LMV SLD GSVM XZM MLD
GSB HOVVK WRHHVMG?  MVD OZDH GSLF HVVHG RNKLHVW
MVD OZDH UILN SRN DSL IVRTMH, MVD NRMWH NZB IZRHV
RM FH DSL HVIEV, MVD XLFMHVOH GL WVYZGV
DSZG WLFYGUFO NZB VMHFV:  NLIV RM GSRH KOZXV
GL FGGVI RH MLG HZUV.  ZHHVNYOV GSLF
LU ZOO GSLHV NBIRZWH DSRXS DV OVZW GSV XSRVU
GVOO GSVN, GSZG YB XLNNZMW, VIV BVG WRN MRTSG
SVI HSZWLDB XOLFW DRGSWIZDH, R ZN GL SZHGV,
ZMW ZOO DSL FMWVI NV GSVRI YZMMVIH DZEV,
SLNVDZIW, DRGS UOBRMT NZIXS, DSVIV DV KLHHVHH
GSV JFZIGVIH LU GSV MLIGS GSVIV GL KIVKZIV
URG VMGVIGZRMNVMG GL IVXVREV LFI PRMT,
GSV TIVZG NVHHRZS, ZMW SRH MVD XLNNZMWH,
DSL HKVVWROB GSILFTS ZOO GSV SRVIZIXSRVH
RMGVMWH GL KZHH GIRFNKSZMG, ZMW TREV OZDH.
HL HKZPV GSV UZOHV ZIXSZMTVO, ZMW RMUFHVW
YZW RMUOFVMXV RMGL GSV FMDZIB YIVZHG
LU SRH ZHHLXRZGV:  SV GLTVGSVI XZOOH,
LI HVEVIZO LMV YB LMV, GSV IVTVMG KLDVIH,
FMWVI SRN IVTVMG GVOOH, ZH SV DZH GZFTSG,
GSZG GSV NLHG SRTS XLNNZMWRMT, MLD VIV MRTSG,
MLD VIV WRN MRTSG SZW WRHRMXFNYVIVW SVZEVM,
GSV TIVZG SRVIZIXSZO HGZMWZIW DZH GL NLEV
GVOOH GSV HFTTVHGVW XZFHV, ZMW XZHGH YVGDVVM
ZNYRTFLFH DLIWH ZMW QVZOLFHRVH, GL HLFMW
LI GZRMG RMGVTIRGB:  YFG ZOO LYVBVW
GSV DLMGVW HRTMZO, ZMW HFKVIRLFI ELRXV
LU GSVRI TIVZG KLGVMGZGV ULI TIVZG RMWVVW
SRH MZNV, ZMW SRTS DZH SRH WVTIVV RM SVZEVM
SRH XLFMGVMZMXV, ZH GSV NLIMRMTHGZI GSZG TFRWVH
GSV HGZIIB UOLXP, ZOOFIVW GSVN, ZMW DRGS ORVH
WIVD ZUGVI SRN GSV GSRIW KZIG LU SVZEVMH SLHG.
NVZM DSROV GSV VGVIMZO VBV, DSLHV HRTSG WRHXVIMH
ZYHGIFHVHG GSLFTSGH, UILN ULIGS SRH SLOB NLFMG,
ZMW UILN DRGSRM GSV TLOWVM OZNKH GSZG YFIM
MRTSGOB YVULIV SRN, HZD DRGSLFG GSVRI ORTSG
IVYVOORLM IRHRMT HZD RM DSLN, SLD HKIVZW
ZNLMT GSV HLMH LU NLIM, DSZG NFOGRGFWVH
DVIV YZMWVW GL LKKLHV SRH SRTS WVXIVV
ZMW, HNRORMT, GL SRH LMOB HLM GSFH HZRW.
HLM, GSLF RM DSLN NB TOLIB R YVSLOW
RM UFOO IVHKOVMWVMXV, SVRI LU ZOO NB NRTSG,
MVZIOB RG MLD XLMXVIMH FH GL YV HFIV
LU LFI LNMRKLGVMXV, ZMW DRGS DSZG ZINH
DV NVZM GL SLOW DSZG ZMXRVMGOB DV XOZRN
LU WVRGB LI VNKRIV:  HFXS Z ULV
RH IRHRMT, DSL RMGVMWH GL VIVXG SRH GSILMV
VJFZO GL LFIH, GSILFTSLFG GSV HKZXRLFH MLIGS
MLI HL XLMGVMG, SZGS RM SRH GSLFTSG GL GIB
RM YZGGOV, DSZG LFI KLDVI RH, LI LFI IRTSG.
OVG FH ZWERHV, ZMW GL GSRH SZAZIW WIZD
DRGS HKVVW DSZG ULIXV RH OVUG, ZMW ZOO VNKOLB
RM LFI WVUVMXV OVHG FMZDZIVH DV OLHV
GSRH LFI SRTS KOZXV, LFI HZMXGFZIB, LFI SROO.
GL DSLN GSV HLM DRGS XZON ZHKVXG ZMW XOVZI,
ORTSGMRMT WRERMV, RMVUUZYOV, HVIVMV,
NZWV ZMHDVI.  NRTSGB UZGSVI, GSLF GSB ULVH
QFHGOB SZHG RM WVIRHRLM, ZMW, HVXFIV,
OZFTSVHG ZG GSVRI EZRM WVHRTMH ZMW GFNFOGH EZRM,
NZGGVI GL NV LU TOLIB, DSLN GSVRI SZGV
ROOFHGIZGVH, DSVM GSVB HVV ZOO IVTZO KLDVI
TREVM NV GL JFVOO GSVRI KIRWV, ZMW RM VEVMG
PMLD DSVGSVI R YV WVCGILFH GL HFYWFV
GSB IVYVOH, LI YV ULFMW GSV DLIHG RM SVZEVM.
HL HKZPV GSV HLM YFG HZGZM, DRGS SRH KLDVIH,
UZI DZH ZWEZMXVW LM DRMTVW HKVVW ZM SLHG
RMMFNVIZYOV ZH GSV HGZIH LU MRTSG,
LI HGZIH LU NLIMRMT, WVDWILKH, DSRXS GSV HFM
RNKVZIOH LM VEVIB OVZU ZMW VEVIB UOLDVI.
IVTRLMH GSVB KZHHVW, GSV NRTSGB IVTVMXRVH
LU HVIZKSRN, ZMW KLGVMGZGVH, ZMW GSILMVH,
RM GSVRI GIRKOV WVTIVVH IVTRLMH GL DSRXS
ZOO GSB WLNRMRLM, ZWZN, RH ML NLIV
GSZM DSZG GSRH TZIWVM RH GL ZOO GSV VZIGS,
ZMW ZOO GSV HVZ, UILN LMV VMGRIV TOLYLHV
HGIVGXSVW RMGL OLMTRGFWV DSRXS SZERMT KZHHVW,
ZG OVMTGS RMGL GSV ORNRGH LU GSV MLIGS
GSVB XZNV ZMW HZGZM GL SRH ILBZO HVZG
SRTS LM Z SROO, UZI YOZARMT, ZH Z NLFMG
IZRHVW LM Z NLFMG, DRGS KBIZNRWH ZMW GLDVIH
UILN WRZNLMW JFZIIRVH SVDM, ZMW ILXPH LU TLOW
GSV KZOZXV LU TIVZG OFXRUVI, HL XZOO
GSZG HGIFXGFIV RM GSV WRZOVXG LU NVM
RMGVIKIVGVW, DSRXS MLG OLMT ZUGVI, SV
ZUUVXGRMT ZOO VJFZORGB DRGS TLW,
RM RNRGZGRLM LU GSZG NLFMG DSVIVLM
NVHHRZS DZH WVXOZIVW RM HRTSG LU SVZEVM,
GSV NLFMGZRM LU GSV XLMTIVTZGRLM XZOOVW
ULI GSRGSVI SV ZHHVNYOVW ZOO SRH GIZRM,
KIVGVMWRMT HL XLNNZMWVW GL XLMHFOG
ZYLFG GSV TIVZG IVXVKGRLM LU GSVRI PRMT,
GSRGSVI GL XLNV, ZMW DRGS XZOFNMRLFH ZIG
LU XLFMGVIUVRGVW GIFGS GSFH SVOW GSVRI VZIH.
GSILMVH, WLNRMZGRLMH, KIRMXVWLNH, ERIGFVH, KLDVIH
RU GSVHV NZTMRURXP GRGOVH BVG IVNZRM
MLG NVIVOB GRGFOZI, HRMXV YB WVXIVV
ZMLGSVI MLD SZGS GL SRNHVOU VMTILHHVW
ZOO KLDVI, ZMW FH VXORKHVW FMWVI GSV MZNV
LU PRMT ZMLRMGVW, ULI DSLN ZOO GSRH SZHGV
LU NRWMRTSGNZIXS, ZMW SFIIRVW NVVGRMT SVIV,
GSRH LMOB GL XLMHFOG SLD DV NZB YVHG,
DRGS DSZG NZB YV WVERHVW LU SLMLFIH MVD,
IVXVREV SRN XLNRMT GL IVXVREV UILN FH
PMVVGIRYFGV BVG FMKZRW, KILHGIZGRLM EROV!
GLL NFXS GL LMV! YFG WLFYOV SLD VMWFIVW,
GL LMV, ZMW GL SRH RNZTV MLD KILXOZRNVW?
YFG DSZG RU YVGGVI XLFMHVOH NRTSG VIVXG
LFI NRMWH, ZMW GVZXS FH GL XZHG LUU GSRH BLPV?
DROO BV HFYNRG BLFI MVXPH, ZMW XSLLHV GL YVMW
GSV HFKKOV PMVV?  BV DROO MLG, RU R GIFHG
GL PMLD BV IRTSG, LI RU BV PMLD BLFIHVOEVH
MZGREVH ZMW HLMH LU SVZEVM KLHHVHHVW YVULIV
YB MLMV ZMW RU MLG VJFZO ZOO, BVG UIVV,
VJFZOOB UIVV ULI LIWVIH ZMW WVTIVVH
QZI MLG DRGS ORYVIGB, YFG DVOO XLMHRHG.
DSL XZM RM IVZHLM GSVM, LI IRTSG, ZHHFNV
NLMZIXSB LEVI HFXS ZH OREV YB IRTSG
SRH VJFZOH, RU RM KLDVI ZMW HKOVMWLFI OVHH,
RM UIVVWLN VJFZO? LI XZM RMGILWFXV
OZD ZMW VWRXG LM FH, DSL DRGSLFG OZD
VII MLG? NFXS OVHH ULI GSRH GL YV LFI OLIW,
ZMW OLLP ULI ZWLIZGRLM, GL GSV ZYFHV
LU GSLHV RNKVIRZO GRGOVH, DSRXS ZHHVIG
LFI YVRMT LIWZRMVW GL TLEVIM, MLG GL HVIEV.
GSFH UZI SRH YLOW WRHXLFIHV DRGSLFG XLMGILFO
SZW ZFWRVMXV DSVM ZNLMT GSV HVIZKSRN
ZYWRVO, GSZM DSLN MLMV DRGS NLIV AVZO ZWLIVW
GSV WVRGB, ZMW WRERMV XLNNZMWH LYVBVW,
HGLLW FK, ZMW RM Z UOZNV LU AVZO HVEVIV
GSV XFIIVMG LU SRH UFIB GSFH LKKLHVW.
L ZITFNVMG YOZHKSVNLFH, UZOHV, ZMW KILFW!
DLIWH DSRXS ML VZI VEVI GL SVZI RM SVZEVM
VCKVXGVW, OVZHG LU ZOO UILN GSVV,  RMTIZGV,
RM KOZXV GSBHVOU HL SRTS ZYLEV GSB KVVIH.
XZMHG GSLF DRGS RNKRLFH LYOLJFB XLMWVNM
GSV QFHG WVXIVV LU TLW, KILMLFMXVW ZMW HDLIM,
GSZG GL SRH LMOB HLM, YB IRTSG VMWFVW
DRGS IVTZO HXVKGVI, VEVIB HLFO RM SVZEVM
HSZOO YVMW GSV PMVV, ZMW RM GSZG SLMLFI WFV
XLMUVHH SRN IRTSGUFO PRMT? FMQFHG, GSLF HZBVHG,
UOZGOB FMQFHG, GL YRMW DRGS OZDH GSV UIVV,
ZMW VJFZO LEVI VJFZOH GL OVG IVRTM,
LMV LEVI ZOO DRGS FMHFXXVVWVW KLDVI.
HSZOG GSLF TREV OZD GL TLW? HSZOG GSLF WRHKFGV
DRGS SRN GSV KLRMGH LU ORYVIGB, DSL NZWV
GSVV DSZG GSLF ZIG, ZMW ULINVW GSV KLDVIH LU SVZEVM
HFXS ZH SV KOVZHVW, ZMW XRIXFNHXIRYVW GSVRI YVRMT?
BVG, YB VCKVIRVMXV GZFTSG, DV PMLD SLD TLLW,
ZMW LU LFI TLLW ZMW LU LFI WRTMRGB
SLD KILERWVMG SV RH SLD UZI UILN GSLFTSG
GL NZPV FH OVHH, YVMG IZGSVI GL VCZOG
LFI SZKKB HGZGV, FMWVI LMV SVZW NLIV MVZI
FMRGVW.  YFG GL TIZMG RG GSVV FMQFHG,
GSZG VJFZO LEVI VJFZOH NLMZIXS IVRTM:
GSBHVOU, GSLFTS TIVZG ZMW TOLIRLFH, WLHG GSLF XLFMG,
LI ZOO ZMTVORXP MZGFIV QLRMVW RM LMV,
VJFZO GL SRN YVTLGGVM HLM? YB DSLN,
ZH YB SRH DLIW, GSV NRTSGB UZGSVI NZWV
ZOO GSRMTH, VEVM GSVV ZMW ZOO GSV HKRIRGH LU SVZEVM
YB SRN XIVZGVW RM GSVRI YIRTSG WVTIVVH,
XILDMVW GSVN DRGS TOLIB, ZMW GL GSVRI TOLIB MZNVW
GSILMVH, WLNRMZGRLMH, KIRMXVWLNH, ERIGFVH, KLDVIH,
VHHVMGRZO KLDVIH MLI YB SRH IVRTM LYHXFIVW,
YFG NLIV ROOFHGIRLFH NZWV HRMXV SV GSV SVZW
LMV LU LFI MFNYVI GSFH IVWFXVW YVXLNVH
SRH OZDH LFI OZDH ZOO SLMLFI GL SRN WLMV
IVGFIMH LFI LDM.  XVZHV GSVM GSRH RNKRLFH IZTV,
ZMW GVNKG MLG GSVHV YFG SZHGVM GL ZKKVZHV
GSV RMXVMHVW UZGSVI, ZMW GSV RMXVMHVW HLM,
DSROV KZIWLM NZB YV ULFMW RM GRNV YVHLFTSG.
HL HKZPV GSV UVIEVMG ZMTVO YFG SRH AVZO
MLMV HVXLMWVW, ZH LFG LU HVZHLM QFWTVW,
LI HRMTFOZI ZMW IZHS:  DSVIVZG IVQLRXVW
GSV ZKLHGZGV, ZMW, NLIV SZFTSGB, GSFH IVKORVW.
GSZG DV DVIV ULINVW GSVM HZBVHG GSLF? ZMW GSV DLIP
LU HVXLMWZIB SZMWH, YB GZHP GIZMHUVIIVW
UILN UZGSVI GL SRH HLM? HGIZMTV KLRMG ZMW MVD!
WLXGIRMV DSRXS DV DLFOW PMLD DSVMXV OVZIMVW: DSL HZD
DSVM GSRH XIVZGRLM DZH? IVNVNYVIVHG GSLF
GSB NZPRMT, DSROV GSV NZPVI TZEV GSVV YVRMT?
DV PMLD ML GRNV DSVM DV DVIV MLG ZH MLD
PMLD MLMV YVULIV FH, HVOUYVTLG, HVOUIZRHVW
YB LFI LDM JFRXPVMRMT KLDVI, DSVM UZGZO XLFIHV
SZW XRIXOVW SRH UFOO LIY, GSV YRIGS NZGFIV
LU GSRH LFI MZGREV SVZEVM, VGSVIVZO HLMH.
LFI KFRHHZMXV RH LFI LDM LFI LDM IRTSG SZMW
HSZOO GVZXS FH SRTSVHG WVVWH, YB KILLU GL GIB
DSL RH LFI VJFZO:  GSVM GSLF HSZOG YVSLOW
DSVGSVI YB HFKKORXZGRLM DV RMGVMW
ZWWIVHH, ZMW GL YVTRIG GSV ZONRTSGB GSILMV
YVHVVXSRMT LI YVHRVTRMT.  GSRH IVKLIG,
GSVHV GRWRMTH XZIIB GL GSV ZMLRMGVW PRMT
ZMW UOB, VIV VERO RMGVIXVKG GSB UORTSG.
SV HZRW ZMW, ZH GSV HLFMW LU DZGVIH WVVK,
SLZIHV NFINFI VXSLVW GL SRH DLIWH ZKKOZFHV
GSILFTS GSV RMURMRGV SLHG MLI OVHH ULI GSZG
GSV UOZNRMT HVIZKS UVZIOVHH, GSLFTS ZOLMV
VMXLNKZHHVW ILFMW DRGS ULVH, GSFH ZMHDVIVW YLOW.
L ZORVMZGV UILN TLW, L HKRIRG ZXXFIHVW,
ULIHZPVM LU ZOO TLLW!  R HVV GSB UZOO
WVGVINRMVW, ZMW GSB SZKOVHH XIVD RMELOEVW
RM GSRH KVIURWRLFH UIZFW, XLMGZTRLM HKIVZW
YLGS LU GSB XIRNV ZMW KFMRHSNVMG:  SVMXVULIGS
ML NLIV YV GILFYOVW SLD GL JFRG GSV BLPV
LU TLWH NVHHRZS GSLHV RMWFOTVMG OZDH
DROO MLG YV MLD ELFXSHZUVW LGSVI WVXIVVH
ZTZRMHG GSVV ZIV TLMV ULIGS DRGSLFG IVXZOO
GSZG TLOWVM HXVKGVI, DSRXS GSLF WRWHG IVQVXG,
RH MLD ZM RILM ILW GL YIFRHV ZMW YIVZP
GSB WRHLYVWRVMXV.  DVOO GSLF WRWHG ZWERHV
BVG MLG ULI GSB ZWERXV LI GSIVZGH R UOB
GSVHV DRXPVW GVMGH WVELGVW, OVHG GSV DIZGS
RNKVMWVMG, IZTRMT RMGL HFWWVM UOZNV,
WRHGRMTFRHS MLG:  ULI HLLM VCKVXG GL UVVO
SRH GSFMWVI LM GSB SVZW, WVELFIRMT URIV.
GSVM DSL XIVZGVW GSVV OZNVMGRMT OVZIM,
DSVM DSL XZM FMXIVZGV GSVV GSLF HSZOG PMLD.
HL HKZPV GSV HVIZKS ZYWRVO, UZRGSUFO ULFMW
ZNLMT GSV UZRGSOVHH, UZRGSUFO LMOB SV
ZNLMT RMMFNVIZYOV UZOHV, FMNLEVW,
FMHSZPVM, FMHVWFXVW, FMGVIIRURVW,
SRH OLBZOGB SV PVKG, SRH OLEV, SRH AVZO
MLI MFNYVI, MLI VCZNKOV, DRGS SRN DILFTSG
GL HDVIEV UILN GIFGS, LI XSZMTV SRH XLMHGZMG NRMW,
GSLFTS HRMTOV.  UILN ZNRWHG GSVN ULIGS SV KZHHVW,
OLMT DZB GSILFTS SLHGROV HXLIM, DSRXS SV HFHGZRMVW
HFKVIRLFI, MLI LU ERLOVMXV UVZIVW ZFTSG
ZMW, DRGS IVGLIGVW HXLIM, SRH YZXP SV GFIMVW
LM GSLHV KILFW GLDVIH GL HDRUG WVHGIFXGRLM WLLNVW.



YLLP ER


ZOO MRTSG GSV WIVZWOVHH ZMTVO, FMKFIHFVW,
GSILFTS SVZEVMH DRWV XSZNKZRM SVOW SRH DZB GROO NLIM,
DZPVW YB GSV XRIXORMT SLFIH, DRGS ILHB SZMW
FMYZIIVW GSV TZGVH LU ORTSG.  GSVIV RH Z XZEV
DRGSRM GSV NLFMG LU TLW, UZHG YB SRH GSILMV,
DSVIV ORTSG ZMW WZIPMVHH RM KVIKVGFZO ILFMW
OLWTV ZMW WRHOLWTV YB GFIMH, DSRXS NZPVH GSILFTS SVZEVM
TIZGVUFO ERXRHHRGFWV, ORPV WZB ZMW MRTSG
ORTSG RHHFVH ULIGS, ZMW ZG GSV LGSVI WLLI
LYHVJFRLFH WZIPMVHH VMGVIH, GROO SVI SLFI
GL EVRO GSV SVZEVM, GSLFTS WZIPMVHH GSVIV NRTSG DVOO
HVVN GDRORTSG SVIV:  ZMW MLD DVMG ULIGS GSV NLIM
HFXS ZH RM SRTSVHG SVZEVM ZIIZBVW RM TLOW
VNKBIVZO UILN YVULIV SVI EZMRHSVW MRTSG,
HSLG GSILFTS DRGS LIRVMG YVZNH DSVM ZOO GSV KOZRM
XLEVIVW DRGS GSRXP VNYZGGOVW HJFZWILMH YIRTSG,
XSZIRLGH, ZMW UOZNRMT ZINH, ZMW URVIB HGVVWH,
IVUOVXGRMT YOZAV LM YOZAV, URIHG NVG SRH ERVD:
DZI SV KVIXVREVW, DZI RM KILXRMXG ZMW ULFMW
ZOIVZWB PMLDM DSZG SV ULI MVDH SZW GSLFTSG
GL SZEV IVKLIGVW:  TOZWOB GSVM SV NRCVW
ZNLMT GSLHV UIRVMWOB KLDVIH, DSL SRN IVXVREVW
DRGS QLB ZMW ZXXOZNZGRLMH OLFW, GSZG LMV,
GSZG LU HL NZMB NBIRZWH UZOOVM, BVG LMV
IVGFIMVW MLG OLHG.  LM GL GSV HZXIVW SROO
GSVB OVW SRN SRTS ZKKOZFWVW, ZMW KIVHVMG
YVULIV GSV HVZG HFKIVNV UILN DSVMXV Z ELRXV,
UILN NRWHG Z TLOWVM XOLFW, GSFH NROW DZH SVZIW.
HVIEZMG LU TLW. DVOO WLMV DVOO SZHG GSLF ULFTSG
GSV YVGGVI URTSG, DSL HRMTOV SZHG NZRMGZRMVW
ZTZRMHG IVELOGVW NFOGRGFWVH GSV XZFHV
LU GIFGS, RM DLIW NRTSGRVI GSZM GSVB RM ZINH
ZMW ULI GSV GVHGRNLMB LU GIFGS SZHG YLIMV
FMREVIHZO IVKILZXS, UZI DLIHV GL YVZI
GSZM ERLOVMXV ULI GSRH DZH ZOO GSB XZIV
GL HGZMW ZKKILEVW RM HRTSG LU TLW, GSLFTS DLIOWH
QFWTVW GSVV KVIEVIHV:  GSV VZHRVI XLMJFVHG MLD
IVNZRMH GSVV, ZRWVW YB GSRH SLHG LU UIRVMWH,
YZXP LM GSB ULVH NLIV TOLIRLFH GL IVGFIM,
GSZM HXLIMVW GSLF WRWHG WVKZIG ZMW GL HFYWFV
YB ULIXV, DSL IVZHLM ULI GSVRI OZD IVUFHV,
IRTSG IVZHLM ULI GSVRI OZD, ZMW ULI GSVRI PRMT
NVHHRZS, DSL YB IRTSG LU NVIRG IVRTMH.
TL, NRXSZVO, LU XVOVHGRZO ZINRVH KIRMXV,
ZMW GSLF, RM NRORGZIB KILDVHH MVCG,
TZYIRVO, OVZW ULIGS GL YZGGOV GSVHV NB HLMH
RMERMXRYOV OVZW ULIGS NB ZINVW HZRMGH,
YB GSLFHZMWH ZMW YB NROORLMH, IZMTVW ULI URTSG,
VJFZO RM MFNYVI GL GSZG TLWOVHH XIVD
IVYVOORLFH:  GSVN DRGS URIV ZMW SLHGROV ZINH
UVZIOVHH ZHHZFOG ZMW, GL GSV YILD LU SVZEVM
KFIHFRMT, WIREV GSVN LFG UILN TLW ZMW YORHH,
RMGL GSVRI KOZXV LU KFMRHSNVMG, GSV TFOU
LU GZIGZIFH, DSRXS IVZWB LKVMH DRWV
SRH URVIB XSZLH GL IVXVREV GSVRI UZOO.
HL HKZPV GSV HLEIZM ELRXV, ZMW XOLFWH YVTZM
GL WZIPVM ZOO GSV SROO, ZMW HNLPV GL ILOO
RM WFHPB DIVZGSH, IVOFXGZMG UOZNVH, GSV HRTM
LU DIZGS ZDZPVW MLI DRGS OVHH WIVZW GSV OLFW
VGSVIVZO GIFNKVG UILN LM SRTS TZM YOLD:
ZG DSRXS XLNNZMW GSV KLDVIH NRORGZMG,
GSZG HGLLW ULI SVZEVM, RM NRTSGB JFZWIZGV QLRMVW
LU FMRLM RIIVHRHGRYOV, NLEVW LM
RM HROVMXV GSVRI YIRTSG OVTRLMH, GL GSV HLFMW
LU RMHGIFNVMGZO SZINLMB, GSZG YIVZGSVW
SVILRXP ZIWLFI GL ZWEVMGFILFH WVVWH
FMWVI GSVRI TLWORPV OVZWVIH, RM GSV XZFHV
LU TLW ZMW SRH NVHHRZS.  LM GSVB NLEV
RMWRHHLOFYOB URIN MLI LYERLFH SROO,
MLI HGIZRGVMRMT EZOV, MLI DLLW, MLI HGIVZN, WRERWVH
GSVRI KVIUVXG IZMPH ULI SRTS ZYLEV GSV TILFMW
GSVRI NZIXS DZH, ZMW GSV KZHHREV ZRI FKYLIV
GSVRI MRNYOV GIVZW ZH DSVM GSV GLGZO PRMW
LU YRIWH, RM LIWVIOB ZIIZB LM DRMT,
XZNV HFNNLMVW LEVI VWVM GL IVXVREV
GSVRI MZNVH LU GSVV HL LEVI NZMB Z GIZXG
LU SVZEVM GSVB NZIXSVW, ZMW NZMB Z KILERMXV DRWV,
GVMULOW GSV OVMTGS LU GSRH GVIIVMV:  ZG OZHG,
UZI RM GSV SLIRALM GL GSV MLIGS ZKKVZIVW
UILN HPRIG GL HPRIG Z URVIB IVTRLM, HGIVGXSVW
RM YZGGZROLFH ZHKVXG, ZMW MVZIVI ERVD
YIRHGOVW DRGS FKIRTSG YVZNH RMMFNVIZYOV
LU IRTRW HKVZIH, ZMW SVONVGH GSILMTVW, ZMW HSRVOWH
EZIRLFH, DRGS YLZHGUFO ZITFNVMG KLIGIZBVW,
GSV YZMWVW KLDVIH LU HZGZM SZHGRMT LM
DRGS UFIRLFH VCKVWRGRLM ULI GSVB DVVMVW
GSZG HVOUHZNV WZB, YB URTSG LI YB HFIKIRHV,
GL DRM GSV NLFMG LU TLW, ZMW LM SRH GSILMV
GL HVG GSV VMERVI LU SRH HGZGV, GSV KILFW
ZHKRIVI YFG GSVRI GSLFTSGH KILEVW ULMW ZMW EZRM
RM GSV NRW DZB:  GSLFTS HGIZMTV GL FH RG HVVNVW
ZG URIHG, GSZG ZMTVO HSLFOW DRGS ZMTVO DZI,
ZMW RM URVIXV SLHGRMT NVVG, DSL DLMG GL NVVG
HL LUG RM UVHGREZOH LU QLB ZMW OLEV
FMZMRNLFH, ZH HLMH LU LMV TIVZG HRIV,
SBNMRMT GSV VGVIMZO UZGSVI:  YFG GSV HSLFG
LU YZGGOV MLD YVTZM, ZMW IFHSRMT HLFMW
LU LMHVG VMWVW HLLM VZXS NROWVI GSLFTSG.
SRTS RM GSV NRWHG, VCZOGVW ZH Z TLW,
GSV ZKLHGZGV RM SRH HFMYIRTSG XSZIRLG HZG,
RWLO LU NZQVHGB WRERMV, VMXOLHVW
DRGS UOZNRMT XSVIFYRN, ZMW TLOWVM HSRVOWH
GSVM ORTSGVW UILN SRH TLITVLFH GSILMV, ULI MLD
"GDRCG SLHG ZMW SLHG YFG MZIILD HKZXV DZH OVUG,
Z WIVZWUFO RMGVIEZO, ZMW UILMG GL UILMG
KIVHVMGVW HGLLW RM GVIIRYOV ZIIZB
LU SRWVLFH OVMTGS:  YVULIV GSV XOLFWB EZM,
LM GSV ILFTS VWTV LU YZGGOV VIV RG QLRMVW,
HZGZM, DRGS EZHG ZMW SZFTSGB HGIRWVH ZWEZMXVW,
XZNV GLDVIRMT, ZINVW RM ZWZNZMG ZMW TLOW
ZYWRVO GSZG HRTSG VMWFIVW MLG, DSVIV SV HGLLW
ZNLMT GSV NRTSGRVHG, YVMG LM SRTSVHG WVVWH,
ZMW GSFH SRH LDM FMWZFMGVW SVZIG VCKOLIVH.
L SVZEVM! GSZG HFXS IVHVNYOZMXV LU GSV SRTSVHG
HSLFOW BVG IVNZRM, DSVIV UZRGS ZMW IVZOGB
IVNZRM MLG:  DSVIVULIV HSLFOW MLG HGIVMTGS ZMW NRTSG
GSVIV UZRO DSVIV ERIGFV UZROH, LI DVZPVHG KILEV
DSVIV YLOWVHG, GSLFTS GL URTSG FMXLMJFVIZYOV?
SRH KFRHHZMXV, GIFHGRMT RM GSV ZONRTSGBH ZRW,
R NVZM GL GIB, DSLHV IVZHLM R SZEV GIRVW
FMHLFMW ZMW UZOHV MLI RH RG ZFTSG YFG QFHG,
GSZG SV, DSL RM WVYZGV LU GIFGS SZGS DLM,
HSLFOW DRM RM ZINH, RM YLGS WRHKFGVH ZORPV
ERXGLI GSLFTS YIFGRHS GSZG XLMGVHG ZMW ULFO,
DSVM IVZHLM SZGS GL WVZO DRGS ULIXV, BVG HL
NLHG IVZHLM RH GSZG IVZHLM LEVIXLNV.
HL KLMWVIRMT, ZMW UILN SRH ZINVW KVVIH
ULIGS HGVKKRMT LKKLHRGV, SZOUDZB SV NVG
SRH WZIRMT ULV, ZG GSRH KIVEVMGRLM NLIV
RMXVMHVW, ZMW GSFH HVXFIVOB SRN WVURVW.
KILFW, ZIG GSLF NVG? GSB SLKV DZH GL SZEV IVZXSVW
GSV SRTSGS LU GSB ZHKRIRMT FMLKKLHVW,
GSV GSILMV LU TLW FMTFZIWVW, ZMW SRH HRWV
ZYZMWLMVW, ZG GSV GVIILFI LU GSB KLDVI
LI KLGVMG GLMTFV:  ULLO!MLG GL GSRMP SLD EZRM
ZTZRMHG GSV LNMRKLGVMG GL IRHV RM ZINH
DSL LFG LU HNZOOVHG GSRMTH XLFOW, DRGSLFG VMW,
SZEV IZRHVW RMXVHHZMG ZINRVH GL WVUVZG
GSB ULOOB LI DRGS HLORGZIB SZMW
IVZXSRMT YVBLMW ZOO ORNRG, ZG LMV YOLD,
FMZRWVW, XLFOW SZEV URMRHSVW GSVV, ZMW DSVONVW
GSB OVTRLMH FMWVI WZIPMVHH:  YFG GSLF HVVHG
ZOO ZIV MLG LU GSB GIZRM GSVIV YV, DSL UZRGS
KIVUVI, ZMW KRVGB GL TLW, GSLFTS GSVM
GL GSVV MLG ERHRYOV, DSVM R ZOLMV
HVVNVW RM GSB DLIOW VIILMVLFH GL WRHHVMG
UILN ZOO:  NB HVXG GSLF HVVHGMLD OVZIM GLL OZGV
SLD UVD HLNVGRNVH NZB PMLD, DSVM GSLFHZMWH VII.
DSLN GSV TIZMW ULV, DRGS HXLIMUFO VBV ZHPZMXV,
GSFH ZMHDVIVW.  ROO ULI GSVV, YFG RM DRHSVW SLFI
LU NB IVEVMTV, URIHG HLFTSG ULI, GSLF IVGFIMVHG
UILN UORTSG, HVWRGRLFH ZMTVO! GL IVXVREV
GSB NVIRGVW IVDZIW, GSV URIHG ZHHZB
LU GSRH IRTSG SZMW KILELPVW, HRMXV URIHG GSZG GLMTFV,
RMHKRIVW DRGS XLMGIZWRXGRLM, WFIHG LKKLHV
Z GSRIW KZIG LU GSV TLWH, RM HBMLW NVG
GSVRI WVRGRVH GL ZHHVIG DSL, DSROV GSVB UVVO
ERTLFI WRERMV DRGSRM GSVN, XZM ZOOLD
LNMRKLGVMXV GL MLMV.  YFG DVOO GSLF XLNVHG
YVULIV GSB UVOOLDH, ZNYRGRLFH GL DRM
UILN NV HLNV KOFNV, GSZG GSB HFXXVHH NZB HSLD
WVHGIFXGRLM GL GSV IVHG:  GSRH KZFHV YVGDVVM,
FMZMHDVIVW OVHG GSLF YLZHG GL OVG GSVV PMLD,
ZG URIHG R GSLFTSG GSZG ORYVIGB ZMW SVZEVM
GL SVZEVMOB HLFOH SZW YVVM ZOO LMV YFG MLD
R HVV GSZG NLHG GSILFTS HOLGS SZW IZGSVI HVIEV,
NRMRHGIRMT HKRIRGH, GIZRMVW FK RM UVZHG ZMW HLMT!
HFXS SZHG GSLF ZINVW, GSV NRMHGIVOHB LU SVZEVM,
HVIERORGB DRGS UIVVWLN GL XLMGVMW,
ZH YLGS GSVRI WVVWH XLNKZIVW GSRH WZB HSZOO KILEV.
GL DSLN RM YIRVU GSFH ZYWRVO HGVIM IVKORVW.
ZKLHGZGV! HGROO GSLF VIIVHG, MLI VMW DROG URMW
LU VIIRMT, UILN GSV KZGS LU GIFGS IVNLGV:
FMQFHGOB GSLF WVKIZEVHG RG DRGS GSV MZNV
LU HVIERGFWV, GL HVIEV DSLN TLW LIWZRMH,
LI MZGFIV:  TLW ZMW MZGFIV YRW GSV HZNV,
DSVM SV DSL IFOVH RH DLIGSRVHG, ZMW VCXVOH
GSVN DSLN SV TLEVIMH.  GSRH RH HVIERGFWV,
GL HVIEV GSV FMDRHV, LI SRN DSL SZGS IVYVOOVW
ZTZRMHG SRH DLIGSRVI, ZH GSRMV MLD HVIEV GSVV,
GSBHVOU MLG UIVV, YFG GL GSBHVOU VMGSIZOOVW
BVG OVDWOB WZIVHG LFI NRMRHGIRMT FKYIZRW.
IVRTM GSLF RM SVOO, GSB PRMTWLN OVG NV HVIEV
RM SVZEVM TLW VEVI YOVHG, ZMW SRH WRERMV
YVSVHGH LYVB, DLIGSRVHG GL YV LYVBVW
BVG XSZRMH RM SVOO, MLG IVZONH, VCKVXG:  NVZM DSROV
UILN NV IVGFIMVW, ZH VIHG GSLF HZRWHG, UILN UORTSG,
GSRH TIVVGRMT LM GSB RNKRLFH XIVHG IVXVREV.
HL HZBRMT, Z MLYOV HGILPV SV ORUGVW SRTS,
DSRXS SFMT MLG, YFG HL HDRUG DRGS GVNKVHG UVOO
LM GSV KILFW XIVHG LU HZGZM, GSZG ML HRTSG,
MLI NLGRLM LU HDRUG GSLFTSG, OVHH XLFOW SRH HSRVOW,
HFXS IFRM RMGVIXVKG:  GVM KZXVH SFTV
SV YZXP IVXLROVW GSV GVMGS LM YVMWVW PMVV
SRH NZHHB HKVZI FKHGZRW ZH RU LM VZIGS
DRMWH FMWVI TILFMW, LI DZGVIH ULIXRMT DZB,
HRWVOLMT SZW KFHSVW Z NLFMGZRM UILN SRH HVZG,
SZOU HFMP DRGS ZOO SRH KRMVH.  ZNZAVNVMG HVRHVW
GSV IVYVO GSILMVH, YFG TIVZGVI IZTV, GL HVV
GSFH ULROVW GSVRI NRTSGRVHG LFIH QLB UROOVW, ZMW HSLFG,
KIVHZTV LU ERXGLIB, ZMW URVIXV WVHRIV
LU YZGGOV:  DSVIVZG NRXSZVO YRW HLFMW
GSV ZIXSZMTVO GIFNKVG GSILFTS GSV EZHG LU SVZEVM
RG HLFMWVW, ZMW GSV UZRGSUFO ZINRVH IFMT
SLHZMMZ GL GSV SRTSVHG:  MLI HGLLW ZG TZAV
GSV ZWEVIHV OVTRLMH, MLI OVHH SRWVLFH QLRMVW
GSV SLIIRW HSLXP.  MLD HGLINRMT UFIB ILHV,
ZMW XOZNLFI HFXS ZH SVZIW RM SVZEVM GROO MLD
DZH MVEVI ZINH LM ZINLFI XOZHSRMT YIZBVW
SLIIRYOV WRHXLIW, ZMW GSV NZWWRMT DSVVOH
LU YIZAVM XSZIRLGH IZTVW WRIV DZH GSV MLRHV
LU XLMUORXG LEVI SVZW GSV WRHNZO SRHH
LU URVIB WZIGH RM UOZNRMT ELOORVH UOVD,
ZMW UOBRMT EZFOGVW VRGSVI SLHG DRGS URIV.
HL FMWVI URVIB XLKV GLTVGSVI IFHSVW
YLGS YZGGOVH NZRM, DRGS IFRMLFH ZHHZFOG
ZMW RMVCGRMTFRHSZYOV IZTV.  ZOO SVZEVM
IVHLFMWVW ZMW SZW VZIGS YVVM GSVM, ZOO VZIGS
SZW GL SVI XVMGVI HSLLP.  DSZG DLMWVI? DSVM
NROORLMH LU URVIXV VMXLFMGVIRMT ZMTVOH ULFTSG
LM VRGSVI HRWV, GSV OVZHG LU DSLN XLFOW DRVOW
GSVHV VOVNVMGH, ZMW ZIN SRN DRGS GSV ULIXV
LU ZOO GSVRI IVTRLMH:  SLD NFXS NLIV LU KLDVI
ZINB ZTZRMHG ZINB MFNYVIOVHH GL IZRHV
WIVZWUFO XLNYFHGRLM DZIIRMT, ZMW WRHGFIY,
GSLFTS MLG WVHGILB, GSVRI SZKKB MZGREV HVZG
SZW MLG GSV VGVIMZO PRMT LNMRKLGVMG,
UILN SRH HGILMT SLOW LU SVZEVM, SRTS LEVIIFOVW
ZMW ORNRGVW GSVRI NRTSG GSLFTS MFNYVIVW HFXS
ZH VZXS WRERWVW OVTRLM NRTSG SZEV HVVNVW
Z MFNVILFH SLHG RM HGIVMTGS VZXS ZINVW SZMW
Z OVTRLM OVW RM URTSG, BVG OVZWVI HVVNVW
VZXS DZIIRLFI HRMTOV ZH RM XSRVU, VCKVIG
DSVM GL ZWEZMXV, LI HGZMW, LI GFIM GSV HDZB
LU YZGGOV, LKVM DSVM, ZMW DSVM GL XOLHV
GSV IRWTVH LU TIRN DZI:  ML GSLFTSG LU UORTSG,
MLMV LU IVGIVZG, ML FMYVXLNRMT WVVW
GSZG ZITFVW UVZI VZXS LM SRNHVOU IVORVW,
ZH LMOB RM SRH ZIN GSV NLNVMG OZB
LU ERXGLIB:  WVVWH LU VGVIMZO UZNV
DVIV WLMV, YFG RMURMRGV ULI DRWV DZH HKIVZW
GSZG DZI ZMW EZIRLFH HLNVGRNVH LM URIN TILFMW
Z HGZMWRMT URTSG, GSVM, HLZIRMT LM NZRM DRMT,
GLINVMGVW ZOO GSV ZRI ZOO ZRI HVVNVW GSVM
XLMUORXGRMT URIV.  OLMT GRNV RM VEVM HXZOV
GSV YZGGOV SFMT GROO HZGZM, DSL GSZG WZB
KILWRTRLFH KLDVI SZW HSLDM, ZMW NVG RM ZINH
ML VJFZO, IZMTRMT GSILFTS GSV WRIV ZGGZXP
LU URTSGRMT HVIZKSRN XLMUFHVW, ZG OVMTGS
HZD DSVIV GSV HDLIW LU NRXSZVO HNLGV, ZMW UVOOVW
HJFZWILMH ZG LMXV DRGS SFTV GDLSZMWVW HDZB
YIZMWRHSVW ZOLUG, GSV SLIIRW VWTV XZNV WLDM
DRWVDZHGRMT HFXS WVHGIFXGRLM GL DRGSHGZMW
SV SZHGVW, ZMW LKKLHVW GSV ILXPB LIY
LU GVMULOW ZWZNZMG, SRH ZNKOV HSRVOW,
Z EZHG XRIXFNUVIVMXV.  ZG SRH ZKKILZXS
GSV TIVZG ZIXSZMTVO UILN SRH DZIORPV GLRO
HFIXVZHVW, ZMW TOZW, ZH SLKRMT SVIV GL VMW
RMGVHGRMV DZI RM SVZEVM, GSV ZIXSULV HFYWFVW
LI XZKGREV WIZTTVW RM XSZRMH, DRGS SLHGROV UILDM
ZMW ERHZTV ZOO RMUOZNVW URIHG GSFH YVTZM.
ZFGSLI LU VERO, FMPMLDM GROO GSB IVELOG,
FMMZNVW RM SVZEVM, MLD KOVMGVLFH ZH GSLF HVVHG
GSVHV ZXGH LU SZGVUFO HGIRUV, SZGVUFO GL ZOO,
GSLFTS SVZERVHG YB QFHG NVZHFIV LM GSBHVOU,
ZMW GSB  ZWSVIVMGH:  SLD SZHG GSLF WRHGFIYVW
SVZEVMH YOVHHVW KVZXV, ZMW RMGL MZGFIV YILFTSG
NRHVIB, FMXIVZGVW GROO GSV XIRNV
LU GSB IVYVOORLM! SLD SZHG GSLF RMHGROOVW
GSB NZORXV RMGL GSLFHZMWH, LMXV FKIRTSG
ZMW UZRGSUFO, MLD KILEVW UZOHV!  YFG GSRMP MLG SVIV
GL GILFYOV SLOB IVHG SVZEVM XZHGH GSVV LFG
UILN ZOO SVI XLMURMVH.  SVZEVM, GSV HVZG LU YORHH,
YILLPH MLG GSV DLIPH LU ERLOVMXV ZMW DZI.
SVMXV GSVM, ZMW VERO TL DRGS GSVV ZOLMT,
GSB LUUHKIRMT, GL GSV KOZXV LU VERO, SVOO
GSLF ZMW GSB DRXPVW XIVD! GSVIV NRMTOV YILROH,
VIV GSRH ZEVMTRMT HDLIW YVTRM GSB WLLN,
LI HLNV NLIV HFWWVM EVMTVZMXV, DRMTVW UILN TLW,
KIVXRKRGZGV GSVV DRGS ZFTNVMGVW KZRM.
HL HKZPV GSV KIRMXV LU ZMTVOH GL DSLN GSFH
GSV ZWEVIHZIB.  MLI GSRMP GSLF DRGS DRMW
LU ZVIB GSIVZGH GL ZDV DSLN BVG DRGS WVVWH
GSLF XZMHG MLG.  SZHG GSLF GFIMVW GSV OVZHG LU GSVHV
GL UORTSG, LI RU GL UZOO, YFG GSZG GSVB IRHV
FMEZMJFRHSVW, VZHRVI GL GIZMHZXG DRGS NV
GSZG GSLF HSLFOWHG SLKV, RNKVIRLFH, ZMW DRGS GSIVZGH
GL XSZHV NV SVMXV? VII MLG, GSZG HL HSZOO VMW
GSV HGIRUV DSRXS GSLF XZOOVHG VERO, YFG DV HGBOV
GSV HGIRUV LU TOLIB DSRXS DV NVZM GL DRM,
LI GFIM GSRH SVZEVM RGHVOU RMGL GSV SVOO
GSLF UZYOVHG SVIV SLDVEVI GL WDVOO UIVV,
RU MLG GL IVRTM:  NVZM DSROV GSB FGNLHG ULIXV,
ZMW QLRM SRN MZNVW ZONRTSGB GL GSB ZRW,
R UOB MLG, YFG SZEV HLFTSG GSVV UZI ZMW MRTS.
GSVB VMWVW KZIOV, ZMW YLGS ZWWIVHHVW ULI URTSG
FMHKVZPZYOV ULI DSL, GSLFTS DRGS GSV GLMTFV
LU ZMTVOH, XZM IVOZGV, LI GL DSZG GSRMTH
ORPVM LM VZIGS XLMHKRXFLFH, GSZG NZB ORUG
SFNZM RNZTRMZGRLM GL HFXS SRTSGS
LU TLWORPV KLDVI? ULI ORPVHG TLWH GSVB HVVNVW,
HGLLW GSVB LI NLEVW, RM HGZGFIV, NLGRLM, ZINH,
URG GL WVXRWV GSV VNKRIV LU TIVZG SVZEVM.
MLD DZEVW GSVRI URVIB HDLIWH, ZMW RM GSV ZRI
NZWV SLIIRW XRIXOVH GDL YILZW HFMH GSVRI HSRVOWH
YOZAVW LKKLHRGV, DSROV VCKVXGZGRLM HGLLW
RM SLIILFI:  UILN VZXS SZMW DRGS HKVVW IVGRIVW,
DSVIV VIHG DZH GSRXPVHG URTSG, GSV ZMTVORXP GSILMT,
ZMW OVUG OZITV URVOW, FMHZUV DRGSRM GSV DRMW
LU HFXS XLNNLGRLM HFXS ZH, GL HVG ULIGS
TIVZG GSRMTH YB HNZOO, RU, MZGFIVH XLMXLIW YILPV,
ZNLMT GSV XLMHGVOOZGRLMH DZI DVIV HKIFMT,
GDL KOZMVGH, IFHSRMT UILN ZHKVXG NZORTM
LU URVIXVHG LKKLHRGRLM, RM NRW HPB
HSLFOW XLNYZG, ZMW GSVRI QZIIRMT HKSVIVH XLMULFMW.
GLTVGSVI YLGS DRGS MVCG GL ZONRTSGB ZIN
FKORUGVW RNNRMVMG, LMV HGILPV GSVB ZRNVW
GSZG NRTSG WVGVINRMV, ZMW MLG MVVW IVKVZG,
ZH MLG LU KLDVI ZG LMXV MLI LWWH ZKKVZIVW
RM NRTSG LI HDRUG KIVEVMGRLM:  YFG GSV HDLIW
LU NRXSZVO UILN GSV ZINLFIB LU TLW
DZH TREVM SRN GVNKVIVW HL, GSZG MVRGSVI PVVM
MLI HLORW NRTSG IVHRHG GSZG VWTV: RG NVG
GSV HDLIW LU HZGZM, DRGS HGVVK ULIXV GL HNRGV
WVHXVMWRMT, ZMW RM SZOU XFG HSVVI MLI HGZRW,
YFG DRGS HDRUG DSVVO IVEVIHV, WVVK VMGVIRMT, HSZIVW
ZOO SRH IRTSG HRWV:  GSVM HZGZM URIHG PMVD KZRM,
ZMW DIRGSVW SRN GL ZMW UIL XLMELOEVW HL HLIV
GSV TIRWRMT HDLIW DRGS WRHXLMGRMFLFH DLFMW
KZHHVW GSILFTS SRN:  YFG GSV VGSVIVZO HFYHGZMXV XOLHVW,
MLG OLMT WRERHRYOV ZMW UILN GSV TZHS
Z HGIVZN LU MVXGFILFH SFNLFI RHHFRMT UOLDVW
HZMTFRMV, HFXS ZH XVOVHGRZO HKRIRGH NZB YOVVW,
ZMW ZOO SRH ZINLFI HGZRMVW, VIV DSROV HL YIRTSG.
ULIGSDRGS LM ZOO HRWVH GL SRH ZRW DZH IFM
YB ZMTVOH NZMB ZMW HGILMT, DSL RMGVIKLHVW
WVUVMXV, DSROV LGSVIH YLIV SRN LM GSVRI HSRVOWH
YZXP GL SRH XSZIRLG, DSVIV RG HGLLW IVGRIVW
UILN LUU GSV UROVH LU DZI:  GSVIV GSVB SRN OZRW
TMZHSRMT ULI ZMTFRHS, ZMW WVHKRGV, ZMW HSZNV,
GL URMW SRNHVOU MLG NZGXSOVHH, ZMW SRH KIRWV
SFNYOVW YB HFXS IVYFPV, HL UZI YVMVZGS
SRH XLMURWVMXV GL VJFZO TLW RM KLDVI.
BVG HLLM SV SVZOVW ULI HKRIRGH GSZG OREV GSILFTSLFG
ERGZO RM VEVIB KZIG, MLG ZH UIZRO NZM
RM VMGIZROH, SVZIG LU SVZW, OREVI LI IVRMH,
XZMMLG YFG YB ZMMRSROZGRMT WRV
MLI RM GSVRI ORJFRW GVCGFIV NLIGZO DLFMW
IVXVREV, ML NLIV GSZM XZM GSV UOFRW ZRI:
ZOO SVZIG GSVB OREV, ZOO SVZW, ZOO VBV, ZOO VZI,
ZOO RMGVOOVXG, ZOO HVMHV ZMW, ZH GSVB KOVZHV,
GSVB ORNY GSVNHVOEVH, ZMW XLOLFI, HSZKV, LI HRAV
ZHHFNV, ZH?PRPVH GSVN YVHG, XLMWVMHV LI IZIV.
NVZM DSROV RM LGSVI KZIGH ORPV WVVWH WVHVIEVW
NVNLIRZO, DSVIV GSV NRTSG LU TZYIRVO ULFTSG,
ZMW DRGS URVIXV VMHRTMH KRVIXVW GSV WVVK ZIIZB
LU NLOLXS, UFIRLFH PRMT DSL SRN WVURVW,
ZMW ZG SRH XSZIRLGDSVVOH GL WIZT SRN YLFMW
GSIVZGVMVW, MLI UILN GSV SLOB LMV LU SVZEVM
IVUIZRMVW SRH GLMTFV YOZHKSVNLFH YFG ZMLM
WLDM XOLEVM GL GSV DZRHG, DRGS HSZGGVIVW ZINH
ZMW FMXLFGS KZRM UOVW YVOOLDRMT.  LM VZXS DRMT
FIRVO, ZMW IZKSZVO, SRH EZFMGRMT ULV,
GSLFTS SFTV, ZMW RM Z ILXP LU WRZNLMW ZINVW,
EZMJFRHSVW ZWIZNVOVXS, ZMW ZHNZWZR,
GDL KLGVMG GSILMVH, GSZG GL YV OVHH GSZM TLWH
WRHWZRMVW, YFG NVZMVI GSLFTSGH OVZIMVW RM GSVRI UORTSG,
NZMTOVW DRGS TSZHGOB DLFMWH GSILFTS KOZGV ZMW NZRO.
MLI HGLLW FMNRMWUFO ZYWRVO GL ZMMLB
GSV ZGSVRHG XIVD, YFG DRGS IVWLFYOVW YOLD
ZIRVO, ZMW ZIRLXS, ZMW GSV ERLOVMXV
LU IZNRVO HXLIXSVW ZMW YOZHGVW, LEVIGSIVD.
R NRTSG IVOZGV LU GSLFHZMWH, ZMW GSVRI MZNVH
VGVIMRAV SVIV LM VZIGS YFG GSLHV VOVXG
ZMTVOH, XLMGVMGVW DRGS GSVRI UZNV RM SVZEVM,
HVVP MLG GSV KIZRHV LU NVM:  GSV LGSVI HLIG,
RM NRTSG GSLFTS DLMWVILFH ZMW RM ZXGH LU DZI,
MLI LU IVMLDM OVHH VZTVI, BVG YB WLLN
XZMXVOOVW UILN SVZEVM ZMW HZXIVW NVNLIB,
MZNVOVHH RM WZIP LYORERLM OVG GSVN WDVOO.
ULI HGIVMTGS UILN GIFGS WRERWVW, ZMW UILN QFHG,
ROOZFWZYOV, MLFTSG NVIRGH YFG WRHKIZRHV
ZMW RTMLNRMB BVG GL TOLIB ZHKRIVH
EZRMTOLIRLFH, ZMW GSILFTS RMUZNB HVVPH UZNV:
GSVIVULIV VGVIMZO HROVMXV YV GSVRI WLLN.
ZMW MLD, GSVRI NRTSGRVHG JFVOOVW, GSV YZGGOV HDVIEVW,
DRGS NZMB ZM RMILZW TLIVW WVULINVW ILFG
VMGVIVW, ZMW ULFO WRHLIWVI ZOO GSV TILFMW
DRGS HSREVIVW ZINLFI HGILDM, ZMW LM Z SVZK
XSZIRLG ZMW XSZIRLGVVI OZB LEVIGFIMVW,
ZMW URVIBULZNRMT HGVVWH DSZG HGLLW, IVXLROVW
LVIDVZIRVW, GSILFTS GSV UZRMG HZGZMRXP SLHG
WVUVMHREV HXZIXV, LI DRGS KZOV UVZI HFIKIRHVW,
GSVM URIHG DRGS UVZI HFIKIRHVW, ZMW HVMHV LU KZRM,
UOVW RTMLNRMRLFH, GL HFXS VERO YILFTSG
YB HRM LU WRHLYVWRVMXV GROO GSZG SLFI
MLG ORZYOV GL UVZI, LI UORTSG, LI KZRM.
UZI LGSVIDRHV GSV RMERLOZYOV HZRMGH,
RM XFYRXP KSZOZMC URIN, ZWEZMXVW VMGRIV,
RMEFOMVIZYOV, RNKVMVGIZYOB ZINVW
HFXS SRTS ZWEZMGZTVH GSVRI RMMLXVMXV
TZEV GSVN ZYLEV GSVRI ULVH MLG GL SZEV HRMMVW,
MLG GL SZEV WRHLYVBVW RM URTSG GSVB HGLLW
FMDVZIRVW, FMLYMLCRLFH GL YV KZRMVW
YB DLFMW, GSLFTS UILN GSVRI KOZXV YB ERLOVMXV NLEVW,
MLD MRTSG SVI XLFIHV YVTZM, ZMW, LEVI SVZEVM
RMWFXRMT WZIPMVHH, TIZGVUFO GIFXV RNKLHVW,
ZMW HROVMXV LM GSV LWRLFH WRM LU DZI:
FMWVI SVI XOLFWB XLEVIG YLGS IVGRIVW,
ERXGLI ZMW EZMJFRHSVW:  LM GSV ULFTSGVM URVOW
NRXSZVO ZMW SRH ZMTVOH KIVEZOVMG
VMXZNKRMT, KOZXVW RM TFZIW GSVRI DZGXSVH ILFMW,
XSVIFYRXP DZERMT URIVH:  LM GSV LGSVI KZIG,
HZGZM DRGS SRH IVYVOORLFH WRHZKKVZIVW,
UZI RM GSV WZIP WRHOLWTVW ZMW, ELRW LU IVHG,
SRH KLGVMGZGVH GL XLFMXRO XZOOVW YB MRTSG
ZMW RM GSV NRWHG GSFH FMWRHNZBVW YVTZM.
L MLD RM WZMTVI GIRVW, MLD PMLDM RM ZINH
MLG GL YV LEVIKLDVIVW, XLNKZMRLMH WVZI,
ULFMW DLIGSB MLG LU ORYVIGB ZOLMV,
GLL NVZM KIVGVMXV! YFG DSZG DV NLIV ZUUVXG,
SLMLFI, WLNRMRLM, TOLIB, ZMW IVMLDM
DSL SZEV HFHGZRMVW LMV WZB RM WLFYGUFO URTSG,
ZMW RU LMV WZB, DSB MLG VGVIMZO WZBH?
DSZG SVZEVMH OLIW SZW KLDVIUFOOVHG GL HVMW
ZTZRMHG FH UILN ZYLFG SRH GSILMV, ZMW QFWTVW
HFUURXRVMG GL HFYWFV FH GL SRH DROO,
YFG KILEVH MLG HL:  GSVM UZOORYOV, RG HVVNH,
LU UFGFIV DV NZB WVVN SRN, GSLFTS GROO MLD
LNMRHXRVMG GSLFTSG.  GIFV RH, OVHH URINOB ZINVW,
HLNV WRHZWEZMGZTV DV VMWFIVW ZMW KZRM,
GROO MLD MLG PMLDM, YFG, PMLDM, ZH HLLM XLMGVNMVW
HRMXV MLD DV URMW GSRH LFI VNKBIVZO ULIN
RMXZKZYOV LU NLIGZO RMQFIB,
RNKVIRHSZYOV, ZMW, GSLFTS KRVIXVW DRGS DLFMW,
HLLM XOLHRMT, ZMW YB MZGREV ERTLFI SVZOVW.
LU VERO GSVM HL HNZOO ZH VZHB GSRMP
GSV IVNVWB KVISZKH NLIV EZORW ZINH,
DVZKLMH NLIV ERLOVMG, DSVM MVCG DV NVVG,
NZB HVIEV GL YVGGVI FH, ZMW DLIHV LFI ULVH,
LI VJFZO DSZG YVGDVVM FH NZWV GSV LWWH,
RM MZGFIV MLMV:  RU LGSVI SRWWVM XZFHV
OVUG GSVN HFKVIRLFI, DSROV DV XZM KIVHVIEV
FMSFIG LFI NRMWH, ZMW FMWVIHGZMWRMT HLFMW,
WFV HVZIXS ZMW XLMHFOGZGRLM DROO WRHXOLHV.
SV HZG ZMW RM GSV ZHHVNYOB MVCG FKHGLLW
MRHILXS, LU KIRMXRKZORGRVH GSV KIRNV
ZH LMV SV HGLLW VHXZKVW UILN XIFVO URTSG,
HLIV GLROVW, SRH IREVM ZINH GL SZELXP SVDM,
ZMW XOLFWB RM ZHKVXG GSFH ZMHDVIRMT HKZPV.
WVOREVIVI UILN MVD OLIWH, OVZWVI GL UIVV
VMQLBNVMG LU LFI IRTSG ZH TLWH BVG SZIW
ULI TLWH, ZMW GLL FMVJFZO DLIP DV URMW,
ZTZRMHG FMVJFZO ZINH GL URTSG RM KZRM,
ZTZRMHG FMKZRMVW, RNKZHHREV UILN DSRXS VERO
IFRM NFHG MVVWH VMHFV ULI DSZG ZEZROH
EZOLFI LI HGIVMTGS, GSLFTS NZGXSOVHH, JFVOOVW DRGS KZRM
DSRXS ZOO HFYWFVH, ZMW NZPVH IVNRHH GSV SZMWH
LU NRTSGRVHG?  HVMHV LU KOVZHFIV DV NZB DVOO
HKZIV LFG LU ORUV KVISZKH, ZMW MLG IVKRMV,
YFG OREV XLMGVMG, DSRXS RH GSV XZONVHG ORUV:
YFG KZRM RH KVIUVXG NRHVIB, GSV DLIHG
LU VEROH, ZMW, VCXVHHREV, LEVIGFIMH
ZOO KZGRVMXV.  SV, DSL GSVIVULIV XZM RMEVMG
DRGS DSZG NLIV ULIXRYOV DV NZB LUUVMW
LFI BVG FMDLFMWVW VMVNRVH, LI ZIN
LFIHVOEVH DRGS ORPV WVUVMXV, GL NV WVHVIEVH
ML OVHH GSZM ULI WVOREVIZMXV DSZG DV LDV.
DSVIVGL DRGS OLLP XLNKLHVW HZGZM IVKORVW.
MLG FMRMEVMGVW GSZG, DSRXS GSLF ZIRTSG
YVORVEVHG HL NZRM GL LFI HFXXVHH, R YIRMT.
DSRXS LU FH DSL YVSLOWH GSV YIRTSG HFIUZXV
LU GSRH VGSVIVLFH NLFOW DSVIVLM DV HGZMW,
GSRH XLMGRMVMG LU HKZXRLFH SVZEVM, ZWLIMVW
DRGS KOZMG, UIFRG, UOLDVI ZNYILHRZO, TVNH, ZMW TLOW
DSLHV VBV HL HFKVIURXRZOOB HFIEVBH
GSVHV GSRMTH, ZH MLG GL NRMW UILN DSVMXV GSVB TILD
WVVK FMWVI TILFMW, NZGVIRZOH WZIP ZMW XIFWV,
LU HKRIRGLFH ZMW URVIB HKFNV, GROO GLFXSVW
DRGS SVZEVMH IZB, ZMW GVNKVIVW, GSVB HSLLG ULIGS
HL YVZFGVLFH, LKVMRMT GL GSV ZNYRVMG ORTSG?
GSVHV RM GSVRI WZIP MZGRERGB GSV WVVK
HSZOO BRVOW FH, KIVTMZMG DRGS RMUVIMZO UOZNV
DSRXS, RMGL SLOOLD VMTRMVH, OLMT ZMW ILFMW,
GSRXP IZNNVW, ZG GSV LGSVI YLIV DRGS GLFXS LU URIV
WROZGVW ZMW RMUFIRZGV, HSZOO HVMW ULIGS
UILN UZI, DRGS GSFMWVIRMT MLRHV, ZNLMT LFI ULVH
HFXS RNKOVNVMGH LU NRHXSRVU, ZH HSZOO WZHS
GL KRVXVH, ZMW LVIDSVON DSZGVEVI HGZMWH
ZWEVIHV, GSZG GSVB HSZOO UVZI DV SZEV WRHZINVW
GSV GSFMWVIVI LU SRH LMOB WIVZWVW YLOG.
MLI OLMT HSZOO YV LFI OZYLFI BVG VIV WZDM,
VUUVXG HSZOO VMW LFI DRHS.  NVZM DSROV IVEREV
ZYZMWLM UVZI GL HGIVMTGS ZMW XLFMHVO QLRMVW
GSRMP MLGSRMT SZIW, NFXS OVHH GL YV WVHKZRIVW.
SV VMWVW, ZMW SRH DLIWH GSVRI WILLKRMT XSVVI
VMORTSGVMVW, ZMW GSVRI OZMTFRHSVW SLKV IVEREVW.
GSV RMEVMGRLM ZOO ZWNRIVW, ZMW VZXS, SLD SV
GL YV GSV RMEVMGVI NRHHVW HL VZHB RG HVVNVW
LMXV ULFMW, DSRXS BVG FMULFMW NLHG DLFOW SZEV GSLFTSG
RNKLHHRYOV:  BVG, SZKOB, LU GSB IZXV
RM UFGFIV WZBH, RU NZORXV HSLFOW ZYLFMW,
HLNV LMV RMGVMG LM NRHXSRVU, LI RMHKRIVW
DRGS WVERORHS NZXSRMZGRLM, NRTSG WVERHV
ORPV RMHGIFNVMG GL KOZTFV GSV HLMH LU NVM
ULI HRM, LM DZI ZMW NFGFZO HOZFTSGVI YVMG.
ULIGSDRGS UILN XLFMXRO GL GSV DLIP GSVB UOVD
MLMV ZITFRMT HGLLW RMMFNVIZYOV SZMWH
DVIV IVZWB RM Z NLNVMG FK GSVB GFIMVW
DRWV GSV XVOVHGRZO HLRO, ZMW HZD YVMVZGS
GSV LIRTRMZOH LU MZGFIV RM GSVRI XIFWV
XLMXVKGRLM HFOKSFILFH ZMW MRGILFH ULZN
GSVB ULFMW, GSVB NRMTOVW, ZMW, DRGS HFYGOV ZIG,
XLMXLXGVW ZMW ZWFHGVW GSVB IVWFXVW
GL YOZXPVHG TIZRM, ZMW RMGL HGLIV XLMEVBVW:
KZIG SRWWVM EVRMH WRTTVW FK MLI SZGS GSRH VZIGS
VMGIZROH FMORPV LU NRMVIZO ZMW HGLMV,
DSVIVLU GL ULFMW GSVRI VMTRMVH ZMW GSVRI YZOOH
LU NRHHREV IFRM KZIG RMXVMGREV IVVW
KILERWV, KVIMRXRLFH DRGS LMV GLFXS GL URIV.
HL ZOO VIV WZBHKIRMT, FMWVI XLMHXRLFH MRTSG,
HVXIVG GSVB URMRHSVW, ZMW RM LIWVI HVG,
DRGS HROVMG XRIXFNHKVXGRLM, FMVHKRVW.
MLD DSVM UZRI NLIM LIRVMG RM SVZEVM ZKKVZIVW,
FK ILHV GSV ERXGLIZMTVOH, ZMW GL ZINH
GSV NZGRM GIFNKVG HFMT:  RM ZINH GSVB HGLLW
LU TLOWVM KZMLKOB, IVUFOTVMG SLHG,
HLLM YZMWVW LGSVIH UILN GSV WZDMRMT SROOH
OLLP ILFMW, ZMW HXLFGH VZXS XLZHG ORTSGZINVW HXLFI,
VZXS JFZIGVI GL WVHXIB GSV WRHGZMG ULV,
DSVIV OLWTVW, LI DSRGSVI UOVW, LI RU ULI URTSG,
RM NLGRLM LI RM SZOG:  SRN HLLM GSVB NVG
FMWVI HKIVZW VMHRTMH NLERMT MRTS, RM HOLD
YFG URIN YZGGZORLM YZXP DRGS HKVVWRVHG HZRO
ALKSRVO, LU XSVIFYRN GSV HDRUGVHG DRMT,
XZNV UOBRMT, ZMW RM NRW ZRI ZOLFW GSFH XIRVW.
ZIN, DZIIRLFIH, ZIN ULI URTSG GSV ULV ZG SZMW,
DSLN UOVW DV GSLFTSG, DROO HZEV FH OLMT KFIHFRG
GSRH WZB UVZI MLG SRH UORTSGHL GSRXP Z XOLFW
SV XLNVH, ZMW HVGGOVW RM SRH UZXV R HVV
HZW IVHLOFGRLM, ZMW HVXFIV:  OVG VZXS
SRH ZWZNZMGRMV XLZG TRIW DVOO, ZMW VZXS
URG DVOO SRH SVON, TIRKV UZHG SRH LIYVW HSRVOW,
YLIMV VEVM LI SRTS ULI GSRH WZB DROO KLFI WLDM,
RU R XLMQVXGFIV ZFTSG, ML WIRAAORMT HSLDVI,
YFG IZGGORMT HGLIN LU ZIILDH YZIYVW DRGS URIV.
HL DZIMVW SV GSVN, ZDZIV GSVNHVOEVH, ZMW HLLM
RM LIWVI, JFRG LU ZOO RNKVWRNVMG
RMHGZMG DRGSLFG WRHGFIY GSVB GLLP ZOZIN,
ZMW LMDZIW NLEVW VNYZGGOVW:  DSVM YVSLOW!
MLG WRHGZMG UZI DRGS SVZEB KZXV GSV ULV
ZKKILZXSRMT TILHH ZMW SFTV, RM SLOOLD XFYV
GIZRMRMT SRH WVERORHS VMTRMVIB, RNKZOVW
LM VEVIB HRWV DRGS HSZWLDRMT HJFZWILMH WVVK,
GL SRWV GSV UIZFW.  ZG RMGVIERVD YLGS HGLLW
Z DSROV YFG HFWWVMOB ZG SVZW ZKKVZIVW
HZGZM, ZMW GSFH DZH SVZIW XLNNZMWRMT OLFW.
EZMTFZIW, GL IRTSG ZMW OVUG GSV UILMG FMULOW
GSZG ZOO NZB HVV DSL SZGV FH, SLD DV HVVP
KVZXV ZMW XLNKLHFIV, ZMW DRGS LKVM YIVZHG
HGZMW IVZWB GL IVXVREV GSVN, RU GSVB ORPV
LFI LEVIGFIV ZMW GFIM MLG YZXP KVIEVIHV:
YFG GSZG R WLFYG SLDVEVI DRGMVHH, SVZEVM!
SVZEVM, DRGMVHH GSLF ZMLM! DSROV DV WRHXSZITV
UIVVOB LFI KZIG: BV, DSL ZKKLRMGVW HGZMW
WL ZH BLF SZEV RM XSZITV, ZMW YIRVUOB GLFXS
DSZG DV KILKLFMW, ZMW OLFW GSZG ZOO NZB SVZI!
HL HXLUURMT RM ZNYRTFLFH DLIWH, SV HXZIXV
SZW VMWVW DSVM GL IRTSG ZMW OVUG GSV UILMG
WRERWVW, ZMW GL VRGSVI UOZMP IVGRIVW:
DSRXS GL LFI VBVH WRHXLEVIVW, MVD ZMW HGIZMTV,
Z GIRKOV NLFMGVW ILD LU KROOZIH OZRW
LM DSVVOH ULI ORPV GL KROOZIH NLHG GSVB HVVNVW,
LI SLOOLDVW YLWRVH NZWV LU LZP LI URI,
DRGS YIZMXSVH OLKG, RM DLLW LI NLFMGZRM UVOOVW,
YIZHH, RILM, HGLMB NLFOW, SZW MLG GSVRI NLFGSH
DRGS SRWVLFH LIRURXV TZKVW LM FH DRWV,
KLIGVMWRMT SLOOLD GIFXV:  ZG VZXS YVSRMW
Z HVIZKS HGLLW, ZMW RM SRH SZMW Z IVVW
HGLLW DZERMT GRKG DRGS URIV DSROV DV, HFHKVMHV,
XLOOVXGVW HGLLW DRGSRM LFI GSLFTSGH ZNFHVW,
MLG OLMT ULI HFWWVM ZOO ZG LMXV GSVRI IVVWH
KFG ULIGS, ZMW GL Z MZIILD EVMG ZKKORVW
DRGS MRXVHG GLFXS.  RNNVWRZGV RM Z UOZNV,
YFG HLLM LYHXFIVW DRGS HNLPV, ZOO SVZEVM ZKKVZIVW,
UILN GSLHV WVVKGSILZGVW VMTRMVH YVOXSVW, DSLHV ILZI
VNYLDVOOVW DRGS LFGIZTVLFH MLRHV GSV ZRI,
ZMW ZOO SVI VMGIZROH GLIV, WRHTLITRMT ULFO
GSVRI WVERORHS TOFG, XSZRMVW GSFMWVIYLOGH ZMW SZRO
LU RILM TOLYVH DSRXS, LM GSV ERXGLI SLHG
OVEVOOVW, DRGS HFXS RNKVGFLFH UFIB HNLGV,
GSZG, DSLN GSVB SRG, MLMV LM GSVRI UVVG NRTSG HGZMW,
GSLFTS HGZMWRMT VOHV ZH ILXPH, YFG WLDM GSVB UVOO
YB GSLFHZMWH, ZMTVO LM ZIXSZMTVO ILOOVW
GSV HLLMVI ULI GSVRI ZINH FMZINVW, GSVB NRTSG
SZEV VZHROB, ZH HKRIRGH, VEZWVW HDRUG
YB JFRXP XLMGIZXGRLM LI IVNLEV YFG MLD
ULFO WRHHRKZGRLM ULOOLDVW, ZMW ULIXVW ILFG
MLI HVIEVW RG GL IVOZC GSVRI HVIIRVW UROVH.
DSZG HSLFOW GSVB WL? RU LM GSVB IFHSVW, IVKFOHV
IVKVZGVW, ZMW RMWVXVMG LEVIGSILD
WLFYOVW, DLFOW IVMWVI GSVN BVG NLIV WVHKRHVW,
ZMW GL GSVRI ULVH Z OZFTSGVI ULI RM ERVD
HGLLW IZMPVW LU HVIZKSRN ZMLGSVI ILD,
RM KLHGFIV GL WRHKOLWV GSVRI HVXLMW GRIV
LU GSFMWVI:  YZXP WVUVZGVW GL IVGFIM
GSVB DLIHV ZYSLIIVW.  HZGZM YVSVOW GSVRI KORTSG,
ZMW GL SRH NZGVH GSFH RM WVIRHRLM XZOOVW.
L UIRVMWH! DSB XLNV MLG LM GSVHV ERXGLIH KILFW
VIV DSROV GSVB URVIXV DVIV XLNRMT ZMW DSVM DV,
GL VMGVIGZRM GSVN UZRI DRGS LKVM UILMG
ZMW YIVZHG, DSZG XLFOW DV NLIV? KILKLFMWVW GVINH
LU XLNKLHRGRLM, HGIZRTSG GSVB XSZMTVW GSVRI NRMWH,
UOVD LUU, ZMW RMGL HGIZMTV EZTZIRVH UVOO,
ZH GSVB DLFOW WZMXV BVG ULI Z WZMXV GSVB HVVNVW
HLNVDSZG VCGIZEZTZMG ZMW DROW KVISZKH
ULI QLB LU LUUVIVW KVZXV:  YFG R HFKKLHV,
RU LFI KILKLHZOH LMXV ZTZRM DVIV SVZIW,
DV HSLFOW XLNKVO GSVN GL Z JFRXP IVHFOG.
GL DSLN GSFH YVORZO, RM ORPV TZNVHLNV NLLW.
OVZWVI! GSV GVINH DV HVMG DVIV GVINH LU DVRTSG,
LU SZIW XLMGVMGH, ZMW UFOO LU ULIXV FITVW SLNV
HFXS ZH DV NRTSG KVIXVREV ZNFHVW GSVN ZOO,
ZMW HGFNYOVW NZMB:  DSL IVXVREVH GSVN IRTSG,
SZW MVVW UILN SVZW GL ULLG DVOO FMWVIHGZMW
MLG FMWVIHGLLW, GSRH TRUG GSVB SZEV YVHRWVH,
GSVB HSLD FH DSVM LFI ULVH DZOP MLG FKIRTSG.
HL GSVB ZNLMT GSVNHVOEVH RM KOVZHZMG EVRM
HGLLW HXLUURMT, SRTSGVMVW RM GSVRI GSLFTSGH YVBLMW
ZOO WLFYG LU ERXGLIB:  VGVIMZO NRTSG
GL NZGXS DRGS GSVRI RMEVMGRLMH GSVB KIVHFNVW
HL VZHB, ZMW LU SRH GSFMWVI NZWV Z HXLIM,
ZMW ZOO SRH SLHG WVIRWVW, DSROV GSVB HGLLW
Z DSROV RM GILFYOV:  YFG GSVB HGLLW MLG OLMT
IZTV KILNKGVW GSVN ZG OVMTGS, ZMW ULFMW GSVN ZINH
ZTZRMHG HFXS SVOORHS NRHXSRVU URG GL LKKLHV.
ULIGSDRGS YVSLOW GSV VCXVOOVMXV, GSV KLDVI,
DSRXS TLW SZGS RM SRH NRTSGB ZMTVOH KOZXVW!
GSVRI ZINH ZDZB GSVB GSIVD, ZMW GL GSV SROOH
ULI VZIGS SZGS GSRH EZIRVGB UILN SVZEVM
LU KOVZHFIV HRGFZGV RM SROO ZMW WZOV,
ORTSG ZH GSV ORTSGMRMT TORNKHV GSVB IZM, GSVB UOVD
UILN GSVRI ULFMWZGRLMH OLLHVMRMT GL ZMW UIL,
GSVB KOFXPVW GSV HVZGVW SROOH, DRGS ZOO GSVRI OLZW,
ILXPH, DZGVIH, DLLWH, ZMW YB GSV HSZTTB GLKH
FKORUGRMT YLIV GSVN RM GSVRI SZMWH:  ZNZAV,
YV HFIV, ZMW GVIILFI, HVRAVW GSV IVYVO SLHG,
DSVM XLNRMT GLDZIWH GSVN HL WIVZW GSVB HZD
GSV YLGGLN LU GSV NLFMGZRMH FKDZIW GFIMVW
GROO LM GSLHV XFIHVW VMTRMVH GIRKOVILD
GSVB HZD GSVN DSVONVW, ZMW ZOO GSVRI XLMURWVMXV
FMWVI GSV DVRTSG LU NLFMGZRMH YFIRVW WVVK
GSVNHVOEVH RMEZWVW MVCG, ZMW LM GSVRI SVZWH
NZRM KILNLMGLIRVH UOFMT, DSRXS RM GSV ZRI
XZNV HSZWLDRMT, ZMW LKKIVHHVW DSLOV OVTRLMH ZINVW
GSVRI ZINLFI SVOKVW GSVRI SZIN, XIFHSVW RM ZMW YIFRHVW
RMGL GSVRI HFYHGZMXV KVMG, DSRXS DILFTSG GSVN KZRM
RNKOZXZYOV, ZMW NZMB Z WLOLILFH TILZM
OLMT HGIFTTORMT FMWVIMVZGS, VIV GSVB XLFOW DRMW
LFG LU HFXS KIRHLM, GSLFTS HKRIRGH LU KFIVHG ORTSG,
KFIVHG ZG URIHG, MLD TILHH YB HRMMRMT TILDM.
GSV IVHG, RM RNRGZGRLM, GL ORPV ZINH
YVGLLP GSVN, ZMW GSV MVRTSYLFIRMT SROOH FKGLIV:
HL SROOH ZNRW GSV ZRI VMXLFMGVIVW SROOH,
SFIOVW GL ZMW UIL DRGS QZXFOZGRLM WRIV
GSZG FMWVI TILFMW GSVB ULFTSG RM WRHNZO HSZWV
RMUVIMZO MLRHV! DZI HVVNVW Z XRERO TZNV
GL GSRH FKILZI SLIIRW XLMUFHRLM SVZKVW
FKLM XLMUFHRLM ILHV:  ZMW MLD ZOO SVZEVM
SZW TLMV GL DIZXP, DRGS IFRM LEVIHKIVZW
SZW MLG GSV ZONRTSGB UZGSVI, DSVIV SV HRGH
HSIRMVW RM SRH HZMXGFZIB LU SVZEVM HVXFIV,
XLMHFOGRMT LM GSV HFN LU GSRMTH, ULIVHVVM
GSRH GFNFOG, ZMW KVINRGGVW ZOO, ZWERHVW:
GSZG SRH TIVZG KFIKLHV SV NRTSG HL UFOURO,
GL SLMLFI SRH ZMLRMGVW HLM ZEVMTVW
FKLM SRH VMVNRVH, ZMW GL WVXOZIV
ZOO KLDVI LM SRN GIZMHUVIIVW:  DSVMXV GL SRH HLM,
GSV ZHHVHHLFI LU SRH GSILMV, SV GSFH YVTZM.
VUUFOTVMXV LU NB TOLIB, HLM YVOLEVW,
HLM, RM DSLHV UZXV RMERHRYOV RH YVSVOW
ERHRYOB, DSZG YB WVRGB R ZN
ZMW RM DSLHV SZMW DSZG YB WVXIVV R WL,
HVXLMW LNMRKLGVMXV! GDL WZBH ZIV KZHG,
GDL WZBH, ZH DV XLNKFGV GSV WZBH LU SVZEVM,
HRMXV NRXSZVO ZMW SRH KLDVIH DVMG ULIGS GL GZNV
GSVHV WRHLYVWRVMG:  HLIV SZGS YVVM GSVRI URTSG,
ZH ORPVORVHG DZH, DSVM GDL HFXS ULVH NVG ZINVW
ULI GL GSVNHVOEVH R OVUG GSVN ZMW GSLF PMLDVHG,
VJFZO RM GSVRI XIVZGRLM GSVB DVIV ULINVW,
HZEV DSZG HRM SZGS RNKZRIVW DSRXS BVG SZGS DILFTSG
RMHVMHRYOB, ULI R HFHKVMW GSVRI WLLN
DSVMXV RM KVIKVGFZO URTSG GSVB MVVWH NFHG OZHG
VMWOVHH, ZMW ML HLOFGRLM DROO YV ULFMW:
DZI DVZIRVW SZGS KVIULINVW DSZG DZI XZM WL,
ZMW GL WRHLIWVIVW IZTV OVG OLLHV GSV IVRMH
DRGS NLFMGZRMH, ZH DRGS DVZKLMH, ZINVW DSRXS NZPVH
DROW DLIP RM SVZEVM, ZMW WZMTVILFH GL GSV NZRM.
GDL WZBH ZIV GSVIVULIV KZHG, GSV GSRIW RH GSRMV
ULI GSVV R SZEV LIWZRMVW RG ZMW GSFH UZI
SZEV HFUUVIVW, GSZG GSV TOLIB NZB YV GSRMV
LU VMWRMT GSRH TIVZG DZI, HRMXV MLMV YFG GSLF
XZM VMW RG.  RMGL GSVV HFXS ERIGFV ZMW TIZXV
RNNVMHV R SZEV GIZMHUFHVW, GSZG ZOO NZB PMLD
RM SVZEVM ZMW SVOO GSB KLDVI ZYLEV XLNKZIV
ZMW, GSRH KVIEVIHV XLNNLGRLM TLEVIMVW GSFH,
GL NZMRUVHG GSVV DLIGSRVHG GL YV SVRI
LU ZOO GSRMTH GL YV SVRI, ZMW GL YV PRMT
YB HZXIVW FMXGRLM, GSB WVHVIEVW IRTSG.
TL GSVM, GSLF NRTSGRVHG, RM GSB UZGSVIH NRTSG
ZHXVMW NB XSZIRLG, TFRWV GSV IZKRW DSVVOH
GSZG HSZPV SVZEVMH YZHRH, YIRMT ULIGS ZOO NB DZI,
NB YLD ZMW GSFMWVI, NB ZONRTSGB ZINH
TRIW LM, ZMW HDLIW FKLM GSB KFRHHZMG GSRTS
KFIHFV GSVHV HLMH LU WZIPMVHH, WIREV GSVN LFG
UILN ZOO SVZEVMH YLFMWH RMGL GSV FGGVI WVVK:
GSVIV OVG GSVN OVZIM, ZH ORPVH GSVN, GL WVHKRHV
TLW, ZMW NVHHRZS SRH ZMLRMGVW PRMT.
SV HZRW, ZMW LM SRH HLM DRGS IZBH WRIVXG
HSLMV UFOO SV ZOO SRH UZGSVI UFOO VCKIVHHVW
RMVUUZYOB RMGL SRH UZXV IVXVREVW
ZMW GSFH GSV URORZO TLWSVZW ZMHDVIRMT HKZPV.
L UZGSVI, L HFKIVNV LU SVZEVMOB GSILMVH,
URIHG, SRTSVHG, SLORVHG, YVHG GSLF ZODZBH HVVPHG
GL TOLIRUB GSB HLM, R ZODZBH GSVV,
ZH RH NLHG QFHG:  GSRH R NB TOLIB ZXXLFMG,
NB VCZOGZGRLM, ZMW NB DSLOV WVORTSG,
GSZG GSLF, RM NV DVOO KOVZHVW, WVXOZIVHG GSB DROO
UFOUROOVW, DSRXS GL UFOURO RH ZOO NB YORHH.
HXVKGVI ZMW KLDVI, GSB TRERMT, R ZHHFNV,
ZMW TOZWORVI HSZOO IVHRTM, DSVM RM GSV VMW
GSLF HSZOG YV ZOO RM ZOO, ZMW R RM GSVV
ULI VEVI ZMW RM NV ZOO DSLN GSLF OLEVHG:
YFG DSLN GSLF SZGVHG, R SZGV, ZMW XZM KFG LM
GSB GVIILFIH, ZH R KFG GSB NROWMVHH LM,
RNZTV LU GSVV RM ZOO GSRMTH ZMW HSZOO HLLM,
ZINVW DRGS GSB NRTSG, IRW SVZEVM LU GSVHV IVYVOOVW
GL GSVRI KIVKZIVW ROO NZMHRLM WIREVM WLDM,
GL XSZRMH LU WZIPMVHH, ZMW GSV FMWBRMT DLIN
GSZG UILN GSB QFHG LYVWRVMXV XLFOW IVELOG,
DSLN GL LYVB RH SZKKRMVHH VMGRIV.
GSVM HSZOO GSB HZRMGH FMNRCVW, ZMW UILN GSV RNKFIV
UZI HVKZIZGV, XRIXORMT GSB SLOB NLFMG,
FMUVRTMVW SZOOVOFRZSH GL GSVV HRMT,
SBNMH LU SRTS KIZRHV, ZMW R ZNLMT GSVN XSRVU.
HL HZRW, SV, LVI SRH HXVKGVI YLDRMT, ILHV
UILN GSV IRTSG SZMW LU TOLIB DSVIV SV HZG
ZMW GSV GSRIW HZXIVW NLIM YVTZM GL HSRMV,
WZDMRMT GSILFTS SVZEVM.  ULIGS IFHSVW DRGS DSRIODRMW HLFMW
GSV XSZIRLG LU KZGVIMZO WVRGB,
UOZHSRMT GSRXP UOZNVH, DSVVO DRGSRM DSVVO FMWIZDM,
RGHVOU RMHGRMXG DRGS HKRIRG, YFG XLMELBVW
YB ULFI XSVIFYRXP HSZKVH ULFI UZXVH VZXS
SZW DLMWVILFH ZH DRGS HGZIH, GSVRI YLWRVH ZOO
ZMW DRMTH DVIV HVG DRGS VBVH DRGS VBVH GSV DSVVOH
LU YVIBO, ZMW XZIVVIRMT URIVH YVGDVVM
LEVI GSVRI SVZWH Z XIBHGZO URINZNVMG,
DSVIVLM Z HZKKSRIV GSILMV, RMOZRW DRGS KFIV
ZNYVI, ZMW XLOLFIH LU GSV HSLDVIB ZIXS.
SV, RM XVOVHGRZO KZMLKOB ZOO ZINVW
LU IZWRZMG FIRN, DLIP WRERMVOB DILFTSG,
ZHXVMWVW ZG SRH IRTSG SZMW ERXGLIB
HZG VZTOVDRMTVW YVHRWV SRN SFMT SRH YLD
ZMW JFREVI DRGS GSIVVYLOGVW GSFMWVI HGLIVW
ZMW UILN ZYLFG SRN URVIXV VUUFHRLM ILOOVW
LU HNLPV, ZMW YRXPVIRMT UOZNV, ZMW HKZIPOVH WRIV:
ZGGVMWVW DRGS GVM GSLFHZMW GSLFHZMW HZRMGH,
SV LMDZIW XZNV UZI LUU SRH XLNRMT HSLMV
ZMW GDVMGB GSLFHZMW R GSVRI MFNYVI SVZIW
XSZIRLGH LU TLW, SZOU LM VZXS SZMW, DVIV HVVM
SV LM GSV DRMTH LU XSVIFY ILWV HFYORNV
LM GSV XIBHGZOORMV HPB, RM HZKKSRIV GSILMVW,
ROOFHGIRLFH UZI ZMW DRWV YFG YB SRH LDM
URIHG HVVM:  GSVN FMVCKVXGVW QLB HFIKIRHVW,
DSVM GSV TIVZG VMHRTM LU NVHHRZS YOZAVW
ZOLUG YB ZMTVOH YLIMV, SRH HRTM RM SVZEVM
FMWVI DSLHV XLMWFXG NRXSZVO HLLM IVWFXVW
SRH ZINB, XRIXFNUFHVW LM VRGSVI DRMT,
FMWVI GSVRI SVZW RNYLWRVW ZOO RM LMV.
YVULIV SRN KLDVI WRERMV SRH DZB KIVKZIVW
ZG SRH XLNNZMW GSV FKILLGVW SROOH IVGRIVW
VZXS GL SRH KOZXV GSVB SVZIW SRH ELRXV, ZMW DVMG
LYHVJFRLFH SVZEVM SRH DLMGVW UZXV IVMVDVW,
ZMW DRGS UIVHS UOLDVIVGH SROO ZMW EZOOVB HNROVW.
GSRH HZD SRH SZKOVHH ULVH, YFG HGLLW LYWFIVW,
ZMW GL IVYVOORLFH URTSG IZOORVW GSVRI KLDVIH,
RMHVMHZGV, SLKV XLMXVRERMT UILN WVHKZRI.
RM SVZEVMOB HKRIRGH XLFOW HFXS KVIEVIHVMVHH WDVOO?
YFG GL XLMERMXV GSV KILFW DSZG HRTMH ZEZRO,
LI DLMWVIH NLEV GSV LYWFIZGV GL IVOVMG?
GSVB, SZIWVMVW NLIV YB DSZG NRTSG NLHG IVXOZRN,
TIRVERMT GL HVV SRH TOLIB, ZG GSV HRTSG
GLLP VMEB ZMW, ZHKRIRMT GL SRH SRTSGS,
HGLLW IVVNYZGGOVW URVIXV, YB ULIXV LI UIZFW
DVVMRMT GL KILHKVI, ZMW ZG OVMTGS KIVEZRO
ZTZRMHG TLW ZMW NVHHRZS, LI GL UZOO
RM FMREVIHZO IFRM OZHG ZMW MLD
GL URMZO YZGGOV WIVD, WRHWZRMRMT UORTSG,
LI UZRMG IVGIVZG DSVM GSV TIVZG HLM LU TLW
GL ZOO SRH SLHG LM VRGSVI SZMW GSFH HKZPV.
HGZMW HGROO RM YIRTSG ZIIZB, BV HZRMGH SVIV HGZMW,
BV ZMTVOH ZINVW GSRH WZB UILN YZGGOV IVHG:
UZRGSUFO SZGS YVVM BLFI DZIUZIV, ZMW LU TLW
ZXXVKGVW, UVZIOVHH RM SRH IRTSGVLFH XZFHV
ZMW ZH BV SZEV IVXVREVW, HL SZEV BV WLMV,
RMERMXRYOB:  YFG LU GSRH XFIHVW XIVD
GSV KFMRHSNVMG GL LGSVI SZMW YVOLMTH
EVMTVZMXV RH SRH, LI DSLHV SV HLOV ZKKLRMGH:
MFNYVI GL GSRH WZBH DLIP RH MLG LIWZRMVW,
MLI NFOGRGFWV HGZMW LMOB, ZMW YVSLOW
TLWH RMWRTMZGRLM LM GSVHV TLWOVHH KLFIVW
YB NV MLG BLF, YFG NV, GSVB SZEV WVHKRHVW,
BVG VMERVW ZTZRMHG NV RH ZOO GSVRI IZTV,
YVXZFHV GSV UZGSVI, GL DSLN RM SVZEVM HKIVNV
PRMTWLN, ZMW KLDVI, ZMW TOLIB ZKKVIGZRMH,
SZGS SLMLFIVW NV, ZXXLIWRMT GL SRH DROO.
GSVIVULIV GL NV GSVRI WLLN SV SZGS ZHHRTMVW
GSZG GSVB NZB SZEV GSVRI DRHS, GL GIB DRGS NV
RM YZGGOV DSRXS GSV HGILMTVI KILEVH GSVB ZOO,
LI R ZOLMV ZTZRMHG GSVN HRMXV YB HGIVMTGS
GSVB NVZHFIV ZOO, LU LGSVI VCXVOOVMXV
MLG VNFOLFH, MLI XZIV DSL GSVN VCXVOH
MLI LGSVI HGIRUV DRGS GSVN WL R ELFXSHZUV.
HL HKZPV GSV HLM, ZMW RMGL GVIILFI XSZMTVW
SRH XLFMGVMZMXV GLL HVEVIV GL YV YVSVOW,
ZMW UFOO LU DIZGS YVMG LM SRH VMVNRVH.
ZG LMXV GSV ULFI HKIVZW LFG GSVRI HGZIIB DRMTH
DRGS WIVZWUFO HSZWV XLMGRTFLFH, ZMW GSV LIYH
LU SRH URVIXV XSZIRLG ILOOVW, ZH DRGS GSV HLFMW
LU GLIIVMG UOLLWH, LI LU Z MFNVILFH SLHG.
SV LM SRH RNKRLFH ULVH IRTSG LMDZIW WILEV,
TOLLNB ZH MRTSG FMWVI SRH YFIMRMT DSVVOH
GSV HGVWUZHG VNKBIVZM HSLLP GSILFTSLFG,
ZOO YFG GSV GSILMV RGHVOU LU TLW.  UFOO HLLM
ZNLMT GSVN SV ZIIREVW RM SRH IRTSG SZMW
TIZHKRMT GVM GSLFHZMW GSFMWVIH, DSRXS SV HVMG
YVULIV SRN, HFXS ZH RM GSVRI HLFOH RMURCVW
KOZTFVH:  GSVB, ZHGLMRHSVW, ZOO IVHRHGZMXV OLHG,
ZOO XLFIZTV WLDM GSVRI RWOV DVZKLMH WILKG:
LVI HSRVOWH, ZMW SVONH, ZMW SVONVW SVZWH SV ILWV
LU GSILMVH ZMW NRTSGB HVIZKSRN KILHGIZGV,
GSZG DRHSVW GSV NLFMGZRMH MLD NRTSG YV ZTZRM
GSILDM LM GSVN, ZH Z HSVOGVI UILN SRH RIV.
MLI OVHH LM VRGSVI HRWV GVNKVHGFLFH UVOO
SRH ZIILDH, UILN GSV ULFIULOWERHZTVW ULFI
WRHGRMXG DRGS VBVH, ZMW UILN GSV ORERMT DSVVOH
WRHGRMXG ZORPV DRGS NFOGRGFWV LU VBVH
LMV HKRIRG RM GSVN IFOVW ZMW VEVIB VBV
TOZIVW ORTSGMRMT, ZMW HSLG ULIGS KVIMRXRLFH URIV
ZNLMT GSV ZXXFIHVW, GSZG DRGSVIVW ZOO GSVRI HGIVMTGS,
ZMW LU GSVRI DLMGVW ERTLFI OVUG GSVN WIZRMVW,
VCSZFHGVW, HKRIRGOVHH, ZUUORXGVW, UZOOVM.
BVG SZOU SRH HGIVMTGS SV KFG MLG ULIGS, YFG XSVXPVW
SRH GSFMWVI RM NRW ELOOVB ULI SV NVZMG
MLG GL WVHGILB, YFG ILLG GSVN LFG LU SVZEVM:
GSV LEVIGSILDM SV IZRHVW, ZMW ZH Z SVIW
LU TLZGH LI GRNLILFH UOLXP GLTVGSVI GSILMTVW
WILEV GSVN YVULIV SRN GSFMWVIHGIFXP, KFIHFVW
DRGS GVIILFIH, ZMW DRGS UFIRVH, GL GSV YLFMWH
ZMW XIBHGZO DZOO LU SVZEVM DSRXS, LKVMRMT DRWV,
ILOOVW RMDZIW, ZMW Z HKZXRLFH TZK WRHXOLHVW
RMGL GSV DZHGVUFO WVVK:  GSV NLMHGILFH HRTSG
HGIFXP GSVN DRGS SLIILFI YZXPDZIW, YFG UZI DLIHV
FITVW GSVN YVSRMW:  SVZWOLMT GSVNHVOEVH GSVB GSIVD
WLDM UILN GSV EVITV LU SVZEVM VGVIMZO DIZGS
YFIMG ZUGVI GSVN GL GSV YLGGLNOVHH KRG.
SVOO SVZIW GSV FMHFUUVIZYOV MLRHV, SVOO HZD
SVZEVM IFRMRMT UILN SVZEVM, ZMW DLFOW SZEV UOVW
ZUUIRTSGVW YFG HGIRXG UZGV SZW XZHG GLL WVVK
SVI WZIP ULFMWZGRLMH, ZMW GLL UZHG SZW YLFMW.
MRMV WZBH GSVB UVOO:  XLMULFMWVW XSZLH ILZIVW,
ZMW UVOG GVMULOW XLMUFHRLM RM GSVRI UZOO
GSILFTS SRH DROW ZMZIXSB, HL SFTV Z ILFG
RMXFNYVIVW SRN DRGS IFRM:  SVOO ZG OZHG
BZDMRMT IVXVREVW GSVN DSLOV, ZMW LM GSVN XOLHVW
SVOO, GSVRI URG SZYRGZGRLM, UIZFTSG DRGS URIV
FMJFVMXSZYOV, GSV SLFHV LU DLV ZMW KZRM.
WRHYFIWVMVW SVZEVM IVQLRXVW, ZMW HLLM IVKZRIVW
SVI NFIZO YIVZXS, IVGFIMRMT DSVMXV RG ILOOVW.
HLOV ERXGLI, UILN GSV VCKFOHRLM LU SRH ULVH,
NVHHRZS SRH GIRFNKSZO XSZIRLG GFIMVW:
GL NVVG SRN ZOO SRH HZRMGH, DSL HROVMG HGLLW
VBVDRGMVHHVH LU SRH ZONRTSGB ZXGH,
DRGS QFYROVV ZWEZMXVW ZMW, ZH GSVB DVMG,
HSZWVW DRGS YIZMXSRMT KZON, VZXS LIWVI YIRTSG,
HFMT GIRFNKS, ZMW SRN HFMT ERXGLIRLFH PRMT,
HLM, SVRI, ZMW OLIW, GL SRN WLNRMRLM TREVM,
DLIGSRVHG GL IVRTM:  SV, XVOVYIZGVW, ILWV
GIRFNKSZMG GSILFTS NRW SVZEVM, RMGL GSV XLFIGH
ZMW GVNKOV LU SRH NRTSGB UZGSVI GSILMVW
LM SRTS DSL RMGL TOLIB SRN IVXVREVW,
DSVIV MLD SV HRGH ZG GSV IRTSG SZMW LU YORHH.
GSFH, NVZHFIRMT GSRMTH RM SVZEVM YB GSRMTH LM VZIGS,
ZG GSB IVJFVHG, ZMW GSZG GSLF NZBVHG YVDZIV
YB DSZG RH KZHG, GL GSVV R SZEV IVEVZOVW
DSZG NRTSG SZEV VOHV GL SFNZM IZXV YVVM SRW
GSV WRHXLIW DSRXS YVUVO, ZMW DZI RM SVZEVM
ZNLMT GSV ZMTVORXP KLDVIH, ZMW GSV WVVK UZOO
LU GSLHV GLL SRTS ZHKRIRMT, DSL IVYVOOVW
DRGS HZGZM SV DSL VMERVH MLD GSB HGZGV,
DSL MLD RH KOLGGRMT SLD SV NZB HVWFXV
GSVV ZOHL UILN LYVWRVMXV, GSZG, DRGS SRN
YVIVZEVW LU SZKKRMVHH, GSLF NZBVHG KZIGZPV
SRH KFMRHSNVMG, VGVIMZO NRHVIB
DSRXS DLFOW YV ZOO SRH HLOZXV ZMW IVEVMTV,
ZH Z WVHKRGV WLMV ZTZRMHG GSV NLHG SRTS,
GSVV LMXV GL TZRM XLNKZMRLM LU SRH DLV.
YFG ORHGVM MLG GL SRH GVNKGZGRLMH, DZIM
GSB DVZPVI OVG RG KILURG GSVV GL SZEV SVZIW,
YB GVIIRYOV VCZNKOV, GSV IVDZIW
LU WRHLYVWRVMXV URIN GSVB NRTSG SZEV HGLLW,
BVG UVOO IVNVNYVI, ZMW UVZI GL GIZMHTIVHH.



YLLP ERR


WVHXVMW UILN SVZEVM, FIZMRZ, YB GSZG MZNV
RU IRTSGOB GSLF ZIG XZOOVW, DSLHV ELRXV WRERMV
ULOOLDRMT, ZYLEV GSV LOBNKRZM SROO R HLZI,
ZYLEV GSV UORTSG LU KVTZHVZM DRMT!
GSV NVZMRMT, MLG GSV MZNV, R XZOO: ULI GSLF
MLI LU GSV NFHVH MRMV, MLI LM GSV GLK
LU LOW LOBNKFH WDVOOVHG YFG, SVZEVMOBYLIM,
YVULIV GSV SROOH ZKKVZIVW, LI ULFMGZRM UOLDVW,
GSLF DRGS VGVIMZO DRHWLN WRWHG XLMEVIHV,
DRHWLN GSB HRHGVI, ZMW DRGS SVI WRWHG KOZB
RM KIVHVMXV LU GSV ZONRTSGB UZGSVI, KOVZHVW
DRGS GSB XVOVHGRZO HLMT.  FK OVW YB GSVV
RMGL GSV SVZEVM LU SVZEVMH R SZEV KIVHFNVW,
ZM VZIGSOB TFVHG, ZMW WIZDM VNKBIVZO ZRI,
GSB GVNKVIRMT: DRGS ORPV HZUVGB TFRWVW WLDM
IVGFIM NV GL NB MZGREV VOVNVMG:
OVHG UILN GSRH UOBRMT HGVVW FMIVRMVW, ZH LMXV
YVOOVILKSLM, GSLFTS UILN Z OLDVI XORNV,
WRHNLFMGVW, LM GSV ZOVRZM URVOW R UZOO,
VIILMVLFH GSVIV GL DZMWVI, ZMW ULIOLIM.
SZOU BVG IVNZRMH FMHFMT, YFG MZIILDVI YLFMW
DRGSRM GSV ERHRYOV WRFIMZO HKSVIV
HGZMWRMT LM VZIGS, MLG IZKG ZYLEV GSV KLOV,
NLIV HZUV R HRMT DRGS NLIGZO ELRXV, FMXSZMTVW
GL SLZIHV LI NFGV, GSLFTS UZOOVM LM VERO WZBH,
LM VERO WZBH GSLFTS UZOOVM, ZMW VERO GLMTFVH
RM WZIPMVHH, ZMW DRGS WZMTVIH XLNKZHHVW ILFMW,
ZMW HLORGFWV BVG MLG ZOLMV, DSROV GSLF
ERHRGVHG NB HOFNYVIH MRTSGOB, LI DSVM NLIM
KFIKOVH GSV VZHG: HGROO TLEVIM GSLF NB HLMT,
FIZMRZ, ZMW URG ZFWRVMXV URMW, GSLFTS UVD.
YFG WIREV UZI LUU GSV YZIYZILFH WRHHLMZMXV
LU YZXXSFH ZMW SRH IVEVOOVIH, GSV IZXV
LU GSZG DROW ILFG GSZG GLIV GSV GSIZXRZM YZIW
RM ISLWLKV, DSVIV DLLWH ZMW ILXPH SZW VZIH
GL IZKGFIV, GROO GSV HZEZTV XOZNLFI WILDMVW
YLGS SZIK ZMW ELRXV MLI XLFOW GSV NFHV WVUVMW
SVI HLM.  HL UZRO MLG GSLF, DSL GSVV RNKOLIVH:
ULI GSLF ZIG SVZEVMOB, HSV ZM VNKGB WIVZN.
HZB, TLWWVHH, DSZG VMHFVW DSVM IZKSZVO,
GSV ZUUZYOV ZIXSZMTVO, SZW ULIVDZIMVW
ZWZN, YB WRIV VCZNKOV, GL YVDZIV
ZKLHGZHB, YB DSZG YVUVO RM SVZEVM
GL GSLHV ZKLHGZGVH OVHG GSV ORPV YVUZOO
RM KZIZWRHV GL ZWZN LI SRH IZXV,
XSZITVW MLG GL GLFXS GSV RMGVIWRXGVW GIVV,
RU GSVB GIZMHTIVHH, ZMW HORTSG GSZG HLOV XLNNZMW,
HL VZHROB LYVBVW ZNRW GSV XSLRXV
LU ZOO GZHGVH VOHV GL KOVZHV GSVRI ZKKVGRGV,
GSLFTS DZMWVIRMT.  SV, DRGS SRH XLMHLIGVW VEV,
GSV HGLIB SVZIW ZGGVMGREV, ZMW DZH UROOVW
DRGS ZWNRIZGRLM ZMW WVVK NFHV, GL SVZI
LU GSRMTH HL SRTS ZMW HGIZMTV GSRMTH, GL GSVRI GSLFTSG
HL FMRNZTRMZYOV, ZH SZGV RM SVZEVM,
ZMW DZI HL MVZI GSV KVZXV LU TLW RM YORHH,
DRGS HFXS XLMUFHRLM: YFG GSV VERO, HLLM
WIREVM YZXP, IVWLFMWVW ZH Z UOLLW LM GSLHV
UILN DSLN RG HKIFMT RNKLHHRYOV GL NRC
DRGS YOVHHVWMVHH.  DSVMXV ZWZN HLLM IVKVZOVW
GSV WLFYGH GSZG RM SRH SVZIG ZILHV: ZMW MLD
OVW LM, BVG HRMOVHH, DRGS WVHRIV GL PMLD
DSZG MVZIVI NRTSG XLMXVIM SRN, SLD GSRH DLIOW
LU SVZEVM ZMW VZIGS XLMHKRXFLFH URIHG YVTZM
DSVM, ZMW DSVIVLU XIVZGVW ULI DSZG XZFHV
DSZG DRGSRM VWVM, LI DRGSLFG, DZH WLMV
YVULIV SRH NVNLIB ZH LMV DSLHV WILFGS
BVG HXZIXV ZOOZBVW HGROO VBVH GSV XFIIVMG HGIVZN,
DSLHV ORJFRW NFINFI SVZIW MVD GSRIHG VCXRGVH,
KILXVVWVW GSFH GL ZHP SRH SVZEVMOB TFVHG.
TIVZG GSRMTH, ZMW UFOO LU DLMWVI RM LFI VZIH,
UZI WRUUVIRMT UILN GSRH DLIOW, GSLF SZHG IVEVZOVW,
WRERMV RMGVIKIVGVI! YB UZELFI HVMG
WLDM UILN GSV VNKBIVZM, GL ULIVDZIM
FH GRNVOB LU DSZG NRTSG VOHV SZEV YVVM LFI OLHH,
FMPMLDM, DSRXS SFNZM PMLDOVWTV XLFOW MLG IVZXS
ULI DSRXS GL GSV RMURMRGVOB TLLW DV LDV
RNNLIGZO GSZMPH, ZMW SRH ZWNLMRHSNVMG
IVXVREV, DRGS HLOVNM KFIKLHV GL LYHVIEV
RNNFGZYOB SRH HLEIZM DROO, GSV VMW
LU DSZG DV ZIV.  YFG HRMXV GSLF SZHG ELFXSHZUVW
TVMGOB, ULI LFI RMHGIFXGRLM, GL RNKZIG
GSRMTH ZYLEV VZIGSOB GSLFTSG, DSRXS BVG XLMXVIMVW
LFI PMLDRMT, ZH GL SRTSVHG DRHWLN HVVNVW,
WVRTM GL WVHXVMW MLD OLDVI, ZMW IVOZGV
DSZG NZB ML OVHH KVISZKH ZEZRO FH PMLDM,
SLD URIHG YVTZM GSRH SVZEVM DSRXS DV YVSLOW
WRHGZMG HL SRTS, DRGS NLERMT URIVH ZWLIMVW
RMMFNVIZYOV ZMW GSRH DSRXS BRVOWH LI UROOH
ZOO HKZXV, GSV ZNYRVMG ZRI DRWV RMGVIUFHVW
VNYIZXRMT ILFMW GSRH UOLIRVW VZIGS DSZG XZFHV
NLEVW GSV XIVZGLI, RM SRH SLOB IVHG
GSILFTS ZOO VGVIMRGB, HL OZGV GL YFROW
RM XSZLH ZMW GSV DLIP YVTFM, SLD HLLM
ZYHLOEVW RU FMULIYRW GSLF NZBVHG FMULOW
DSZG DV, MLG GL VCKOLIV GSV HVXIVGH ZHP
LU SRH VGVIMZO VNKRIV, YFG GSV NLIV
GL NZTMRUB SRH DLIPH, GSV NLIV DV PMLD.
ZMW GSV TIVZG ORTSG LU WZB BVG DZMGH GL IFM
NFXS LU SRH IZXV GSLFTS HGVVK HFHKVMHV RM SVZEVM,
SVOW YB GSB ELRXV, GSB KLGVMG ELRXV, SV SVZIH,
ZMW OLMTVI DROO WVOZB GL SVZI GSVV GVOO
SRH TVMVIZGRLM, ZMW GSV IRHRMT YRIGS
LU MZGFIV UILN GSV FMZKKZIVMG WVVK:
LI RU GSV HGZI LU VEVMRMT ZMW GSV NLLM
SZHGV GL GSB ZFWRVMXV, MRTSG DRGS SVI DROO YIRMT,
HROVMXV ZMW HOVVK, ORHGVMRMT GL GSVV, DROO DZGXS
LI DV XZM YRW SRH ZYHVMXV, GROO GSB HLMT
VMW, ZMW WRHNRHH GSVV VIV GSV NLIMRMT HSRMV.
GSFH ZWZN SRH ROOFHGIRLFH TFVHG YVHLFTSG:
ZMW GSFH GSV TLWORPV ZMTVO ZMHDVIVW NROW.
GSRH ZOHL GSB IVJFVHG, DRGS XZFGRLM ZHPVW,
LYGZRM GSLFTS GL IVXLFMG ZONRTSGB DLIPH
DSZG DLIWH LI GLMTFV LU HVIZKS XZM HFUURXV,
LI SVZIG LU NZM HFUURXV GL XLNKIVSVMW?
BVG DSZG GSLF XZMHG ZGGZRM, DSRXS YVHG NZB HVIEV
GL TOLIRUB GSV NZPVI, ZMW RMUVI
GSVV ZOHL SZKKRVI, HSZOO MLG YV DRGSSVOW
GSB SVZIRMT HFXS XLNNRHHRLM UILN ZYLEV
R SZEV IVXVREVW, GL ZMHDVI GSB WVHRIV
LU PMLDOVWTV DRGSRM YLFMWH YVBLMW, ZYHGZRM
GL ZHP MLI OVG GSRMV LDM RMEVMGRLMH SLKV
GSRMTH MLG IVEVZOVW, DSRXS GSV RMERHRYOV PRMT,
LMOB LNMRHXRVMG, SZGS HFKKIVHHVW RM MRTSG
GL MLMV XLNNFMRXZYOV RM VZIGS LI SVZEVM:
VMLFTS RH OVUG YVHRWVH GL HVZIXS ZMW PMLD.
YFG PMLDOVWTV RH ZH ULLW, ZMW MVVWH ML OVHH
SVI GVNKVIZMXV LEVI ZKKVGRGV, GL PMLD
RM NVZHFIV DSZG GSV NRMW NZB DVOO XLMGZRM
LKKIVHHVH VOHV DRGS HFIUVRG, ZMW HLLM GFIMH
DRHWLN GL ULOOB, ZH MLFIRHSNVMG GL DRMW.
PMLD GSVM, GSZG, ZUGVI OFXRUVI UILN SVZEVM
HL XZOO SRN, YIRTSGVI LMXV ZNRWHG GSV SLHG
LU ZMTVOH, GSZM GSZG HGZI GSV HGZIH ZNLMT,
UVOO DRGS SRH UOZNRMT OVTRLMH GSILFTS GSV WVVK
RMGL SRH KOZXV, ZMW GSV TIVZG HLM IVGFIMVW
ERXGLIRLFH DRGS SRH HZRMGH, GSV LNMRKLGVMG
VGVIMZO UZGSVI UILN SRH GSILMV YVSVOW
GSVRI NFOGRGFWV, ZMW GL SRH HLM GSFH HKZPV.
ZG OVZHG LFI VMERLFH ULV SZGS UZROVW, DSL GSLFTSG
ZOO ORPV SRNHVOU IVYVOORLFH, YB DSLHV ZRW
GSRH RMZXXVHHRYOV SRTS HGIVMTGS, GSV HVZG
LU WVRGB HFKIVNV, FH WRHKLHHVHHVW,
SV GIFHGVW GL SZEV HVRHVW, ZMW RMGL UIZFW
WIVD NZMB, DSLN GSVRI KOZXV PMLDH SVIV ML NLIV:
BVG UZI GSV TIVZGVI KZIG SZEV PVKG, R HVV,
GSVRI HGZGRLM SVZEVM, BVG KLKFOLFH, IVGZRMH
MFNYVI HFUURXRVMG GL KLHHVHH SVI IVZONH
GSLFTS DRWV, ZMW GSRH SRTS GVNKOV GL UIVJFVMG
DRGS NRMRHGVIRVH WFV, ZMW HLOVNM IRGVH:
YFG, OVHG SRH SVZIG VCZOG SRN RM GSV SZIN
ZOIVZWB WLMV, GL SZEV WRHKVLKOVW SVZEVM,
NB WZNZTV ULMWOB WVVNVW, R XZM IVKZRI
GSZG WVGIRNVMG, RU HFXS RG YV GL OLHV
HVOUOLHG ZMW RM Z NLNVMG DROO XIVZGV
ZMLGSVI DLIOW, LFG LU LMV NZM Z IZXV
LU NVM RMMFNVIZYOV, GSVIV GL WDVOO,
MLG SVIV GROO, YB WVTIVVH LU NVIRG IZRHVW,
GSVB LKVM GL GSVNHVOEVH ZG OVMTGS GSV DZB
FK SRGSVI, FMWVI OLMT LYVWRVMXV GIRVW
ZMW VZIGS YV XSZMTVW GL SVZEVM, ZMW SVZEVM GL VZIGS,
LMV PRMTWLN, QLB ZMW FMRLM DRGSLFG VMW.
NVZM DSROV RMSZYRG OZC, BV KLDVIH LU SVZEVM
ZMW GSLF NB DLIW, YVTLGGVM HLM, YB GSVV
GSRH R KVIULIN HKVZP GSLF, ZMW YV RG WLMV!
NB LEVIHSZWLDRMT HKRIRG ZMW NRTSG DRGS GSVV
R HVMW ZOLMT IRWV ULIGS, ZMW YRW GSV WVVK
DRGSRM ZKKLRMGVW YLFMWH YV SVZEVM ZMW VZIGS
YLFMWOVHH GSV WVVK, YVXZFHV R ZN DSL UROO
RMURMRGFWV, MLI EZXFLFH GSV HKZXV.
GSLFTS R, FMXRIXFNHXIRYVW NBHVOU, IVGRIV,
ZMW KFG MLG ULIGS NB TLLWMVHH, DSRXS RH UIVV
GL ZXG LI MLG, MVXVHHRGB ZMW XSZMXV
ZKKILZXS MLG NV, ZMW DSZG R DROO RH UZGV.
HL HKZPV GSV ZONRTSGB, ZMW GL DSZG SV HKZPV
SRH DLIW, GSV URORZO TLWSVZW, TZEV VUUVXG.
RNNVWRZGV ZIV GSV ZXGH LU TLW, NLIV HDRUG
GSZM GRNV LI NLGRLM, YFG GL SFNZM VZIH
XZMMLG DRGSLFG KILXVHH LU HKVVXS YV GLOW,
HL GLOW ZH VZIGSOB MLGRLM XZM IVXVREV.
TIVZG GIRFNKS ZMW IVQLRXRMT DZH RM SVZEVM,
DSVM HFXS DZH SVZIW WVXOZIVW GSV ZONRTSGBH DROO
TOLIB GSVB HFMT GL GSV NLHG SRTS, TLLW DROO
GL UFGFIV NVM, ZMW RM GSVRI WDVOORMTH KVZXV
TOLIB GL SRN, DSLHV QFHG ZEVMTRMT RIV
SZW WIREVM LFG GSV FMTLWOB UILN SRH HRTSG
ZMW GSV SZYRGZGRLMH LU GSV QFHG GL SRN
TOLIB ZMW KIZRHV, DSLHV DRHWLN SZW LIWZRMVW
TLLW LFG LU VERO GL XIVZGV RMHGVZW
LU HKRIRGH NZORTM, Z YVGGVI IZXV GL YIRMT
RMGL GSVRI EZXZMG ILLN, ZMW GSVMXV WRUUFHV
SRH TLLW GL DLIOWH ZMW ZTVH RMURMRGV.
HL HZMT GSV SRVIZIXSRVH:  NVZM DSROV GSV HLM
LM SRH TIVZG VCKVWRGRLM MLD ZKKVZIVW,
TRIG DRGS LNMRKLGVMXV, DRGS IZWRZMXV XILDMVW
LU NZQVHGB WRERMV HZKRVMXV ZMW OLEV
RNNVMHV, ZMW ZOO SRH UZGSVI RM SRN HSLMV.
ZYLFG SRH XSZIRLG MFNYVIOVHH DVIV KLFIVW
XSVIFY, ZMW HVIZKS, KLGVMGZGVH, ZMW GSILMVH,
ZMW ERIGFVH, DRMTVW HKRIRGH, ZMW XSZIRLGH DRMTVW
UILN GSV ZINLFIB LU TLW DSVIV HGZMW LU LOW
NBIRZWH, YVGDVVM GDL YIZAVM NLFMGZRMH OLWTVW
ZTZRMHG Z HLOVNM WZB, SZIMVHHVW ZG SZMW,
XVOVHGRZO VJFRKZTV ZMW MLD XZNV ULIGS
HKLMGZMVLFH, ULI DRGSRM GSVN HKRIRG OREVW,
ZGGVMWZMG LM GSVRI OLIW:  SVZEVM LKVMVW DRWV
SVI VEVIWFIRMT TZGVH, SZINLMRLFH HLFMW
LM TLOWVM SRMTVH NLERMT, GL OVG ULIGS
GSV PRMT LU TOLIB, RM SRH KLDVIUFO DLIW
ZMW HKRIRG, XLNRMT GL XIVZGV MVD DLIOWH.
LM SVZEVMOB TILFMW GSVB HGLLW ZMW UILN GSV HSLIV
GSVB ERVDVW GSV EZHG RNNVZHFIZYOV ZYBHH
LFGIZTVLFH ZH Z HVZ, WZIP, DZHGVUFO, DROW,
FK UILN GSV YLGGLN GFIMVW YB UFIRLFH DRMWH
ZMW HFITRMT DZEVH, ZH NLFMGZRMH, GL ZHHZFOG
SVZEVMH SRTSGS, ZMW DRGS GSV XVMGVI NRC GSV KLOV.
HROVMXV, BV GILFYOVW DZEVH, ZMW GSLF WVVK, KVZXV,
HZRW GSVM GSV LNMRURXP DLIW BLFI WRHXLIW VMW!
MLI HGZRW YFG, LM GSV DRMTH LU XSVIFYRN
FKORUGVW, RM KZGVIMZO TOLIB ILWV
UZI RMGL XSZLH, ZMW GSV DLIOW FMYLIM
ULI XSZLH SVZIW SRH ELRXV:  SRN ZOO SRH GIZRM
ULOOLDVW RM YIRTSG KILXVHHRLM, GL YVSLOW
XIVZGRLM, ZMW GSV DLMWVIH LU SRH NRTSG.
GSVM HGZRW GSV UVIERW DSVVOH, ZMW RM SRH SZMW
SV GLLP GSV TLOWVM XLNKZHHVH, KIVKZIVW
RM TLWH VGVIMZO HGLIV, GL XRIXFNHXIRYV
GSRH FMREVIHV, ZMW ZOO XIVZGVW GSRMTH:
LMV ULLG SV XVMGVIVW, ZMW GSV LGSVI GFIMVW
ILFMW GSILFTS GSV EZHG KILUFMWRGB LYHXFIV
ZMW HZRW, GSFH UZI VCGVMW, GSFH UZI GSB YLFMWH,
GSRH YV GSB QFHG XRIXFNUVIVMXV, L DLIOW!
GSFH TLW GSV SVZEVM XIVZGVW, GSFH GSV VZIGS,
NZGGVI FMULINVW ZMW ELRW:  WZIPMVHH KILULFMW
XLEVIVW GSV ZYBHH: YFG LM GSV DZGVIB XZON
SRH YILLWRMT DRMTH GSV HKRIRG LU TLW LFGHKIVZW,
ZMW ERGZO ERIGFV RMUFHVW, ZMW ERGZO DZINGS
GSILFTSLFG GSV UOFRW NZHH YFG WLDMDZIW KFITVW
GSV YOZXP GZIGZIVLFH XLOW RMUVIMZO WIVTH,
ZWEVIHV GL ORUV: GSVM ULFMWVW, GSVM XLMTOLYVW
ORPV GSRMTH GL ORPV GSV IVHG GL HVEVIZO KOZXV
WRHKZIGVW, ZMW YVGDVVM HKFM LFG GSV ZRI
ZMW VZIGS HVOUYZOZMXVW LM SVI XVMGVI SFMT.
OVG GSVIV YV ORTSG, HZRW TLW ZMW ULIGSDRGS ORTSG
VGSVIVZO, URIHG LU GSRMTH, JFRMGVHHVMXV KFIV,
HKIFMT UILN GSV WVVK ZMW UILN SVI MZGREV VZHG
GL QLFIMVB GSILFTS GSV ZVIB TOLLN YVTZM,
HKSVIVW RM Z IZWRZMG XOLFW, ULI BVG GSV HFM
DZH MLG HSV RM Z XOLFWB GZYVIMZXOV
HLQLFIMVW GSV DSROV.  TLW HZD GSV ORTSG DZH TLLW
ZMW ORTSG UILN WZIPMVHH YB GSV SVNRHKSVIV
WRERWVW: ORTSG GSV WZB, ZMW WZIPMVHH MRTSG,
SV MZNVW.  GSFH DZH GSV URIHG WZB VEVM ZMW NLIM:
MLI KZHG FMXVOVYIZGVW, MLI FMHFMT
YB GSV XVOVHGRZO JFRIVH, DSVM LIRVMG ORTSG
VCSZORMT URIHG UILN WZIPMVHH GSVB YVSVOW
YRIGSWZB LU SVZEVM ZMW VZIGS DRGS QLB ZMW HSLFG
GSV SLOOLD FMREVIHZO LIY GSVB UROOVW,
ZMW GLFXSVW GSVRI TLOWVM SZIKH, ZMW SBNMRMT KIZRHVW
TLW ZMW SRH DLIPH XIVZGLI SRN GSVB HFMT,
YLGS DSVM URIHG VEVMRMT DZH, ZMW DSVM URIHG NLIM.
ZTZRM, TLW HZRW,  OVG GSVIV YV URINZNVMG
ZNRW GSV DZGVIH, ZMW OVG RG WRERWV
GSV DZGVIH UILN GSV DZGVIH ZMW TLW NZWV
GSV URINZNVMG, VCKZMHV LU ORJFRW, KFIV,
GIZMHKZIVMG, VOVNVMGZO ZRI, WRUUFHVW
RM XRIXFRG GL GSV FGGVINLHG XLMEVC
LU GSRH TIVZG ILFMW KZIGRGRLM URIN ZMW HFIV,
GSV DZGVIH FMWVIMVZGS UILN GSLHV ZYLEV
WRERWRMT: ULI ZH VZIGS, HL SV GSV DLIOW
YFROG LM XRIXFNUOFLFH DZGVIH XZON, RM DRWV
XIBHGZOORMV LXVZM, ZMW GSV OLFW NRHIFOV
LU XSZLH UZI IVNLEVW OVHG URVIXV VCGIVNVH
XLMGRTFLFH NRTSG WRHGVNKVI GSV DSLOV UIZNV:
ZMW SVZEVM SV MZNVW GSV URINZNVMG:  HL VEVM
ZMW NLIMRMT XSLIFH HFMT GSV HVXLMW WZB.
GSV VZIGS DZH ULINVW, YFG RM GSV DLNY ZH BVG
LU DZGVIH, VNYIBLM RNNZGFIV RMELOEVW,
ZKKVZIVW MLG: LEVI ZOO GSV UZXV LU VZIGS
NZRM LXVZM UOLDVW, MLG RWOV YFG, DRGS DZIN
KILORURXP SFNLFI HLUGVMRMT ZOO SVI TOLYV,
UVINVMGVW GSV TIVZG NLGSVI GL XLMXVREV,
HZGRZGV DRGS TVMRZO NLRHGFIV DSVM TLW HZRW,
YV TZGSVIVW MLD BV DZGVIH FMWVI SVZEVM
RMGL LMV KOZXV, ZMW OVG WIB OZMW ZKKVZI.
RNNVWRZGVOB GSV NLFMGZRMH SFTV ZKKVZI
VNVITVMG, ZMW GSVRI YILZW YZIV YZXPH FKSVZEV
RMGL GSV XOLFWH GSVRI GLKH ZHXVMW GSV HPB:
HL SRTS ZH SVZEVW GSV GFNRW SROOH, HL OLD
WLDM HFMP Z SLOOLD YLGGLN YILZW ZMW WVVK,
XZKZXRLFH YVW LU DZGVIH:  GSRGSVI GSVB
SZHGVW DRGS TOZW KIVXRKRGZMXV, FKILOOVW,
ZH WILKH LM WFHG XLMTOLYRMT UILN GSV WIB:
KZIG IRHV RM XIBHGZO DZOO, LI IRWTV WRIVXG,
ULI SZHGV HFXS UORTSG GSV TIVZG XLNNZMW RNKIVHHVW
LM GSV HDRUG UOLLWH:  ZH ZINRVH ZG GSV XZOO
LU GIFNKVG ULI LU ZINRVH GSLF SZHG SVZIW
GILLK GL GSVRI HGZMWZIW HL GSV DZGVIB GSILMT,
DZEV ILOORMT ZUGVI DZEV, DSVIV DZB GSVB ULFMW,
RU HGVVK, DRGS GLIIVMG IZKGFIV, RU GSILFTS KOZRM,
HLUGVYYRMT MLI DRGSHGLLW GSVN ILXP LI SROO
YFG GSVB, LI FMWVI TILFMW, LI XRIXFRG DRWV
DRGS HVIKVMG VIILFI DZMWVIRMT, ULFMW GSVRI DZB,
ZMW LM GSV DZHSB LLHV WVVK XSZMMVOH DLIV
VZHB, VIV TLW SZW YRW GSV TILFMW YV WIB,
ZOO YFG DRGSRM GSLHV YZMPH, DSVIV IREVIH MLD
HGIVZN, ZMW KVIKVGFZO WIZD GSVRI SFNRW GIZRM.
GSV WIB OZMW, VZIGS ZMW GSV TIVZG IVXVKGZXOV
LU XLMTIVTZGVW DZGVIH, SV XZOOVW HVZH:
ZMW HZD GSZG RG DZH TLLW ZMW HZRW, OVG GSV VZIGS
KFG ULIGS GSV EVIWZMG TIZHH, SVIY BRVOWRMT HVVW,
ZMW UIFRGGIVV BRVOWRMT UIFRG ZUGVI SVI PRMW,
DSLHV HVVW RH RM SVIHVOU FKLM GSV VZIGS.
SV HXZIXV SZW HZRW, DSVM GSV YZIV VZIGS, GROO GSVM
WVHZIG ZMW YZIV, FMHRTSGOB, FMZWLIMVW,
YILFTSG ULIGS GSV GVMWVI TIZHH, DSLHV EVIWFIV XOZW
SVI FMREVIHZO UZXV DRGS KOVZHZMG TIVVM
GSVM SVIYH LU VEVIB OVZU, GSZG HFWWVM UOLDVIVW
LKVMRMT GSVRI EZIRLFH XLOLFIH, ZMW NZWV TZB
SVI YLHLN, HNVOORMT HDVVG: ZMW, GSVHV HXZIXV YOLDM,
ULIGS UOLFIRHSVW GSRXP GSV XOFHGVIRMT ERMV, ULIGS XIVKG
GSV HDVOORMT TLFIW, FK HGLLW GSV XLIMB IVVW
VNYZGGOVW RM SVI URVOW, ZMW GSV SFNYOV HSIFY,
ZMW YFHS DRGS UIRAAOVW SZRI RNKORXRG:  OZHG
ILHV, ZH RM WZMXV, GSV HGZGVOB GIVVH, ZMW HKIVZW
GSVRI YIZMXSVH SFMT DRGS XLKRLFH UIFRG, LI TVNNVW
GSVRI YOLHHLNH:  DRGS SRTS DLLWH GSV SROOH DVIV XILDMVW
DRGS GFUGH GSV EZOOVBH, ZMW VZXS ULFMGZRM HRWV
DRGS YLIWVIH OLMT GSV IREVIH: GSZG VZIGS MLD
HVVNVW ORPV GL SVZEVM, Z HVZG DSVIV TLWH NRTSG WDVOO,
LI DZMWVI DRGS WVORTSG, ZMW OLEV GL SZFMG
SVI HZXIVW HSZWVH: GSLFTS TLW SZW BVG MLG IZRMVW
FKLM GSV VZIGS, ZMW NZM GL GROO GSV TILFMW
MLMV DZH YFG UILN GSV VZIGS Z WVDB NRHG
DVMG FK, ZMW DZGVIVW ZOO GSV TILFMW, ZMW VZXS
KOZMG LU GSV URVOW DSRXS, VIV RG DZH RM GSV VZIGS,
TLW NZWV, ZMW VEVIB SVIY, YVULIV RG TIVD
LM GSV TIVVM HGVN:  TLW HZD GSZG RG DZH TLLW:
HL VEVM ZMW NLIM IVXLIWVW GSV GSRIW WZB.
ZTZRM GSV ZONRTSGB HKZPV, OVG GSVIV YV ORTSGH
SRTS RM GSV VCKZMHV LU SVZEVM, GL WRERWV
GSV WZB UILN MRTSG ZMW OVG GSVN YV ULI HRTMH,
ULI HVZHLMH, ZMW ULI WZBH, ZMW XRIXORMT BVZIH
ZMW OVG GSVN YV ULI ORTSGH, ZH R LIWZRM
GSVRI LUURXV RM GSV URINZNVMG LU SVZEVM,
GL TREV ORTSG LM GSV VZIGS ZMW RG DZH HL.
ZMW TLW NZWV GDL TIVZG ORTSGH, TIVZG ULI GSVRI FHV
GL NZM, GSV TIVZGVI GL SZEV IFOV YB WZB,
GSV OVHH YB MRTSG, ZOGVIM ZMW NZWV GSV HGZIH,
ZMW HVG GSVN RM GSV URINZNVMG LU SVZEVM
GL ROOFNRMZGV GSV VZIGS, ZMW IFOV GSV WZB
RM GSVRI ERXRHHRGFWV, ZMW IFOV GSV MRTSG,
ZMW ORTSG UILN WZIPMVHH GL WRERWV.  TLW HZD,
HFIEVBRMT SRH TIVZG DLIP, GSZG RG DZH TLLW:
ULI LU XVOVHGRZO YLWRVH URIHG GSV HFM
Z NRTSGB HKSVIV SV UIZNVW, FMORTSGHLNV URIHG,
GSLFTS LU VGSVIVZO NLFOW: GSVM ULINVW GSV NLLM
TOLYLHV, ZMW VEVIB NZTMRGFWV LU HGZIH,
ZMW HLDVW DRGS HGZIH GSV SVZEVM, GSRXP ZH Z URVOW:
LU ORTSG YB UZI GSV TIVZGVI KZIG SV GLLP,
GIZMHKOZMGVW UILN SVI XOLFWB HSIRMV, ZMW KOZXVW
RM GSV HFMH LIY, NZWV KLILFH GL IVXVREV
ZMW WIRMP GSV ORJFRW ORTSG URIN GL IVGZRM
SVI TZGSVIVW YVZNH, TIVZG KZOZXV MLD LU ORTSG.
SRGSVI, ZH GL GSVRI ULFMGZRM, LGSVI HGZIH
IVKZRIRMT, RM GSVRI TLOWVM FIMH WIZD ORTSG,
ZMW SVMXV GSV NLIMRMTKOZMVG TROWH SVI SLIMH
YB GRMXGFIV LI IVUOVXGRLM GSVB ZFTNVMG
GSVRI HNZOO KVXFORZI, GSLFTS UILN SFNZM HRTSG
HL UZI IVNLGV, DRGS WRNRMFGRLM HVVM,
URIHG RM SRH VZHG GSV TOLIRLFH OZNK DZH HVVM,
IVTVMG LU WZB, ZMW ZOO GSV SLIRALM ILFMW
RMEVHGVW DRGS YIRTSG IZBH, QLXFMW GL IFM
SRH OLMTRGFWV GSILFTS SVZEVMH SRTS ILZW GSV TIZB
WZDM, ZMW GSV KOVRZWVH, YVULIV SRN WZMXVW,
HSVWWRMT HDVVG RMUOFVMXV:  OVHH YIRTSG GSV NLLM,
YFG LKKLHRGV RM OVEVOOVW DVHG DZH HVG,
SRH NRIILFI, DRGS UFOO UZXV YLIILDRMT SVI ORTSG
UILN SRN ULI LGSVI ORTSG HSV MVVWVW MLMV
RM GSZG ZHKVXG, ZMW HGROO GSZG WRHGZMXV PVVKH
GROO MRTSG GSVM RM GSV VZHG SVI GFIM HSV HSRMVH,
IVELOEVW LM SVZEVMH TIVZG ZCOV, ZMW SVI IVRTM
DRGS GSLFHZMW OVHHVI ORTSGH WRERWFZO SLOWH,
DRGS GSLFHZMW GSLFHZMW HGZIH, GSZG GSVM ZKKVZIVW
HKZMTORMT GSV SVNRHKSVIV:  GSVM URIHG ZWLIMVW
DRGS GSVRI YIRTSG OFNRMZIRVH GSZG HVG ZMW ILHV,
TOZW VEVMRMT ZMW TOZW NLIM XILDMVW GSV ULFIGS WZB.
ZMW TLW HZRW, OVG GSV DZGVIH TVMVIZGV
IVKGROV DRGS HKZDM ZYFMWZMG, ORERMT HLFO:
ZMW OVG ULDO UOB ZYLEV GSV VZIGS, DRGS DRMTH
WRHKOZBVW LM GSV LKVM URINZNVMG LU SVZEVM.
ZMW TLW XIVZGVW GSV TIVZG DSZOVH, ZMW VZXS
HLFO ORERMT, VZXS GSZG XIVKG, DSRXS KOVMGVLFHOB
GSV DZGVIH TVMVIZGVW YB GSVRI PRMWH
ZMW VEVIB YRIW LU DRMT ZUGVI SRH PRMW
ZMW HZD GSZG RG DZH TLLW, ZMW YOVHHVW GSVN, HZBRMT.
YV UIFRGUFO, NFOGRKOB, ZMW RM GSV HVZH,
ZMW OZPVH, ZMW IFMMRMT HGIVZNH, GSV DZGVIH UROO
ZMW OVG GSV ULDO YV NFOGRKORVW, LM GSV VZIGS.
ULIGSDRGS GSV HLFMWH ZMW HVZH, VZXS XIVVP ZMW YZB,
DRGS UIB RMMFNVIZYOV HDZIN, ZMW HSLZOH
LU URHS GSZG DRGS GSVRI URMH, ZMW HSRMRMT HXZOVH,
TORWV FMWVI GSV TIVVM DZEV, RM HXFOOH GSZG LUG
YZMP GSV NRW HVZ: KZIG HRMTOV, LI DRGS NZGV,
TIZAV GSV HVZDVVW GSVRI KZHGFIV, ZMW GSILFTS TILEVH
LU XLIZO HGIZB LI, HKLIGRMT DRGS JFRXP TOZMXV,
HSLD GL GSV HFM GSVRI DZEVW XLZGH WILKG DRGS TLOW
LI, RM GSVRI KVZIOB HSVOOH ZG VZHV, ZGGVMW
NLRHG MFGIRNVMG LI FMWVI ILXPH GSVRI ULLW
RM QLRMGVW ZINLFI DZGXS: LM HNLLGS GSV HVZO
ZMW YVMWVW WLOKSRMH KOZB: KZIG SFTV LU YFOP
DZOOLDRMT FMDRVOWB, VMLINLFH RM GSVRI TZRG,
GVNKVHG GSV LXVZM: GSVIV OVERZGSZM,
SFTVHG LU ORERMT XIVZGFIVH, LM GSV WVVK
HGIVGXSVW ORPV Z KILNLMGLIB HOVVKH LI HDRNH,
ZMW HVVNH Z NLERMT OZMW ZMW ZG SRH TROOH
WIZDH RM, ZMW ZG SRH GIFMP HKLFGH LFG, Z HVZ.
NVZM DSROV GSV GVKRW XZEVH, ZMW UVMH, ZMW HSLIVH,
GSVRI YILLW ZH MFNVILFH SZGXS, UILN GSV VTT GSZG HLLM
YFIHGRMT DRGS PRMWOB IFKGFIV ULIGS WRHXOLHVW
GSVRI XZOOLD BLFMT YFG UVZGSVIVW HLLM ZMW UOVWTV
GSVB HFNNVW GSVRI KVMH ZMW, HLZIRMT GSV ZRI HFYORNV,
DRGS XOZMT WVHKRHVW GSV TILFMW, FMWVI Z XOLFW
RM KILHKVXG GSVIV GSV VZTOV ZMW GSV HGLIP
LM XORUUH ZMW XVWZI GLKH GSVRI VBIRVH YFROW:
KZIG OLLHVOB DRMT GSV IVTRLM, KZIG NLIV DRHV
RM XLNNLM, IZMTVW RM URTFIV, DVWTV GSVRI DZB,
RMGVOORTVMG LU HVZHLMH, ZMW HVG ULIGS
GSVRI ZVIB XZIZEZM, SRTS LEVI HVZH
UOBRMT, ZMW LEVI OZMWH, DRGS NFGFZO DRMT
VZHRMT GSVRI UORTSG HL HGVVIH GSV KIFWVMG XIZMV
SVI ZMMFZO ELBZTV, YLIMV LM DRMWH GSV ZRI
UOLZGH ZH GSVB KZHH, UZMMVW DRGS FMMFNYVIVW KOFNVH:
UILN YIZMXS GL YIZMXS GSV HNZOOVI YRIWH DRGS HLMT
HLOZXVW GSV DLLWH, ZMW HKIVZW GSVRI KZRMGVW DRMTH
GROO VEVM MLI GSVM GSV HLOVNM MRTSGRMTZOV
XVZHVW DZIYORMT, YFG ZOO MRTSG GFMW SVI HLUG OZBH:
LGSVIH, LM HROEVI OZPVH ZMW IREVIH, YZGSVW
GSVRI WLDMB YIVZHG GSV HDZM DRGS ZIXSVW MVXP,
YVGDVVM SVI DSRGV DRMTH NZMGORMT KILFWOB, ILDH
SVI HGZGV DRGS LZIB UVVG BVG LUG GSVB JFRG
GSV WZMP, ZMW, IRHRMT LM HGRUU KVMMLMH, GLDVI
GSV NRW ZVIVZO HPB:  LGSVIH LM TILFMW
DZOPVW URIN GSV XIVHGVW XLXP DSLHV XOZIRLM HLFMWH
GSV HROVMG SLFIH, ZMW GSV LGSVI DSLHV TZB GIZRM
ZWLIMH SRN, XLOLFIVW DRGS GSV UOLIRW SFV
LU IZRMYLDH ZMW HGZIIB VBVH.  GSV DZGVIH GSFH
DRGS URHS IVKOVMRHSVW, ZMW GSV ZRI DRGS ULDO,
VEVMRMT ZMW NLIM HLOVNMRAVW GSV URUGS WZB.
GSV HRCGS, ZMW LU XIVZGRLM OZHG, ZILHV
DRGS VEVMRMT SZIKH ZMW NZGRM DSVM TLW HZRW,
OVG GSV VZIGS YIRMT ULIGS HLFO ORERMT RM SVI PRMW,
XZGGOV, ZMW XIVVKRMT GSRMTH, ZMW YVZHG LU GSV VZIGS,
VZXS RM GSVRI PRMW.  GSV VZIGS LYVBVW, ZMW HGIZRTSG
LKVMRMT SVI UVIGROV DLNY GVVNVW ZG Z YRIGS
RMMFNVILFH ORERMT XIVZGFIVH, KVIUVXG ULINH,
ORNYVW ZMW UFOO TILDM:  LFG LU GSV TILFMW FK ILHV,
ZH UILN SRH OZRI, GSV DROW YVZHG DSVIV SV DLMH
RM ULIVHG DROW, RM GSRXPVG, YIZPV, LI WVM
ZNLMT GSV GIVVH RM KZRIH GSVB ILHV, GSVB DZOPVW:
GSV XZGGOV RM GSV URVOWH ZMW NVZWLDH TIVVM:
GSLHV IZIV ZMW HLORGZIB, GSVHV RM UOLXPH
KZHGFIRMT ZG LMXV, ZMW RM YILZW SVIWH FKHKIFMT.
GSV TIZHHB XOLWH MLD XZOEVW MLD SZOU ZKKVZIVW
GSV GZDMB ORLM, KZDRMT GL TVG UIVV
SRH SRMWVI KZIGH, GSVM HKIRMTH ZH YILPV UILN YLMWH,
ZMW IZNKZMG HSZPVH SRH YIRMWVW NZMV GSV LFMXV,
GSV ORYYZIW, ZMW GSV GRTVI, ZH GSV NLOV
IRHRMT, GSV XIFNYOVW VZIGS ZYLEV GSVN GSIVD
RM SROOLXPH:  GSV HDRUG HGZT UILN FMWVI TILFMW
YLIV FK SRH YIZMXSRMT SVZW:  HXZIXV UILN SRH NLFOW
YVSVNLGS YRTTVHG YLIM LU VZIGS FKSVZEVW
SRH EZHGMVHH:  UOVVXVW GSV UOLXPH ZMW YOVZGRMT ILHV,
ZH KOZMGH:  ZNYRTFLFH YVGDVVM HVZ ZMW OZMW
GSV IREVISLIHV, ZMW HXZOB XILXLWROV.
ZG LMXV XZNV ULIGS DSZGVEVI XIVVKH GSV TILFMW,
RMHVXG LI DLIN: GSLHV DZEVW GSVRI ORNYVI UZMH
ULI DRMTH, ZMW HNZOOVHG ORMVZNVMGH VCZXG
RM ZOO GSV OREVIRVH WVXPVW LU HFNNVIH KIRWV
DRGS HKLGH LU TLOW ZMW KFIKOV, ZAFIV ZMW TIVVM:
GSVHV, ZH Z ORMV, GSVRI OLMT WRNVMHRLM WIVD,
HGIVZPRMT GSV TILFMW DRGS HRMFLFH GIZXV MLG ZOO
NRMRNH LU MZGFIV HLNV LU HVIKVMGPRMW,
DLMWVILFH RM OVMTGS ZMW XLIKFOVMXV, RMELOEVW
GSVRI HMZPB ULOWH, ZMW ZWWVW DRMTH.  URIHG XIVKG
GSV KZIHRNLMRLFH VNNVG, KILERWVMG
LU UFGFIV RM HNZOO ILLN OZITV SVZIG VMXOLHVW
KZGGVIM LU QFHG VJFZORGB KVISZKH
SVIVZUGVI, QLRMVW RM SVI KLKFOZI GIRYVH
LU XLNNLMZOGB:  HDZINRMT MVCG ZKKVZIVW
GSV UVNZOV YVV, GSZG UVVWH SVI SFHYZMW WILMV
WVORXRLFHOB, ZMW YFROWH SVI DZCVM XVOOH
DRGS SLMVB HGLIVW:  GSV IVHG ZIV MFNYVIOVHH,
ZMW GSLF GSVRI MZGFIVH PMLDVHG, ZMW TZEVHG GSVN MZNVH,
MVVWOVHH GL GSVV IVKVZGVW MLI FMPMLDM
GSV HVIKVMG, HFYGOVHG YVZHG LU ZOO GSV URVOW,
LU SFTV VCGVMG HLNVGRNVH, DRGS YIZAVM VBVH
ZMW SZRIB NZMV GVIIRURXP, GSLFTS GL GSVV
MLG MLCRLFH, YFG LYVWRVMG ZG GSB XZOO.
MLD SVZEVM RM ZOO SVI TOLIB HSLMV, ZMW ILOOVW
SVI NLGRLMH, ZH GSV TIVZG URIHG NLEVIH SZMW
URIHG DSVVOVW GSVRI XLFIHV:  VZIGS RM SVI IRXS ZGGRIV
XLMHFNNZGV OLEVOB HNROVW ZRI, DZGVI, VZIGS,
YB ULDO, URHS, YVZHG, DZH UOLDM, DZH HDFN, DZH DZOPVW,
UIVJFVMG ZMW LU GSV HRCGS WZB BVG IVNZRMVW:
GSVIV DZMGVW BVG GSV NZHGVIDLIP, GSV VMW
LU ZOO BVG WLMV Z XIVZGFIV, DSL, MLG KILMV
ZMW YIFGV ZH LGSVI XIVZGFIVH, YFG VMWFVW
DRGS HZMXGRGB LU IVZHLM, NRTSG VIVXG
SRH HGZGFIV, ZMW FKIRTSG DRGS UILMG HVIVMV
TLEVIM GSV IVHG, HVOUPMLDRMT ZMW UILN GSVMXV
NZTMZMRNLFH GL XLIIVHKLMW DRGS SVZEVM,
YFG TIZGVUFO GL ZXPMLDOVWTV DSVMXV SRH TLLW
WVHXVMWH, GSRGSVI DRGS SVZIG, ZMW ELRXV, ZMW VBVH
WRIVXGVW RM WVELGRLM, GL ZWLIV
ZMW DLIHSRK TLW HFKIVNV, DSL NZWV SRN XSRVU
LU ZOO SRH DLIPH:  GSVIVULIV GSV LNMRKLGVMG
VGVIMZO UZGSVI ULI DSVIV RH MLG SV
KIVHVMG? GSFH GL SRH HLM ZFWRYOB HKZPV.
OVG FH NZPV MLD NZM RM LFI RNZTV, NZM
RM LFI HRNRORGFWV, ZMW OVG GSVN IFOV
LEVI GSV URHS ZMW ULDO LU HVZ ZMW ZRI,
YVZHG LU GSV URVOW, ZMW LEVI ZOO GSV VZIGS,
ZMW VEVIB XIVVKRMT GSRMT GSZG XIVVKH GSV TILFMW.
GSRH HZRW, SV ULINVW GSVV, ZWZN, GSVV, L NZM,
WFHG LU GSV TILFMW, ZMW RM GSB MLHGIROH YIVZGSVW
GSV YIVZGS LU ORUV RM SRH LDM RNZTV SV
XIVZGVW GSVV, RM GSV RNZTV LU TLW
VCKIVHH ZMW GSLF YVXZNVHG Z ORERMT HLFO.
NZOV SV XIVZGVW GSVV YFG GSB XLMHLIG
UVNZOV, ULI IZXV GSVM YOVHHVW NZMPRMW, ZMW HZRW,
YV UIFRGUFO, NFOGRKOB, ZMW UROO GSV VZIGS
HFYWFV RG, ZMW GSILFTSLFG WLNRMRLM SLOW
LEVI URHS LU GSV HVZ, ZMW ULDO LU GSV ZRI,
ZMW VEVIB ORERMT GSRMT GSZG NLEVH LM GSV VZIGS.
DSVIVEVI GSFH XIVZGVW, ULI ML KOZXV
RH BVG WRHGRMXG YB MZNV, GSVMXV, ZH GSLF PMLDVHG,
SV YILFTSG GSVV RMGL GSRH WVORXRLFH TILEV,
GSRH TZIWVM, KOZMGVW DRGS GSV GIVVH LU TLW,
WVOVXGZYOV YLGS GL YVSLOW ZMW GZHGV
ZMW UIVVOB ZOO GSVRI KOVZHZMG UIFRG ULI ULLW
TZEV GSVV ZOO HLIGH ZIV SVIV GSZG ZOO GSV VZIGS BRVOWH,
EZIRVGB DRGSLFG VMW YFG LU GSV GIVV,
DSRXS, GZHGVW, DLIPH PMLDOVWTV LU TLLW ZMW VERO,
GSLF NZBVHG MLG RM GSV WZB GSLF VZGVHG, GSLF WRVHG
WVZGS RH GSV KVMZOGB RNKLHVW YVDZIV,
ZMW TLEVIM DVOO GSB ZKKVGRGV OVHG HRM
HFIKIRHV GSVV, ZMW SVI YOZXP ZGGVMWZMG WVZGS.
SVIV URMRHSVW SV, ZMW ZOO GSZG SV SZW NZWV
ERVDVW, ZMW YVSLOW ZOO DZH VMGRIVOB TLLW
HL VEVM ZMW NLIM ZXXLNKORHSVW GSV HRCGS WZB:
BVG MLG GROO GSV XIVZGLI UILN SRH DLIP
WVHRHGRMT, GSLFTS FMDVZIRVW, FK IVGFIMVW,
FK GL GSV SVZEVM LU SVZEVMH, SRH SRTS ZYLWV
GSVMXV GL YVSLOW GSRH MVD XIVZGVW DLIOW,
GSV ZWWRGRLM LU SRH VNKRIV, SLD RG HSLDVW
RM KILHKVXG UILN SRH GSILMV, SLD TLLW, SLD UZRI,
ZMHDVIRMT SRH TIVZG RWVZ.  FK SV ILWV
ULOOLDVW DRGS ZXXOZNZGRLM, ZMW GSV HLFMW
HBNKSLMRLFH LU GVM GSLFHZMW SZIKH, GSZG GFMVW
ZMTVORXP SZINLMRVH:  GSV VZIGS, GSV ZRI
IVHLFMWVW, GSLF IVNVNYVIVHG, ULI GSLF SVZIWHG,
GSV SVZEVMH ZMW ZOO GSV XLMHGVOOZGRLMH IFMT,
GSV KOZMVGH RM GSVRI HGZGRLM ORHGVMRMT HGLLW,
DSROV GSV YIRTSG KLNK ZHXVMWVW QFYROZMG.
LKVM, BV VEVIOZHGRMT TZGVH! GSVB HFMT,
LKVM, BV SVZEVMH! BLFI ORERMT WLLIHOVG RM
GSV TIVZG XIVZGLI UILN SRH DLIP IVGFIMVW
NZTMRURXVMG, SRH HRC WZBH DLIP, Z DLIOW
LKVM, ZMW SVMXVULIGS LUG ULI TLW DROO WVRTM
GL ERHRG LUG GSV WDVOORMTH LU QFHG NVM,
WVORTSGVW ZMW DRGS UIVJFVMG RMGVIXLFIHV
GSRGSVI DROO HVMW SRH DRMTVW NVHHVMTVIH
LM VIIZMWH LU HFKVIMZO TIZXV.  HL HFMT
GSV TOLIRLFH GIZRM ZHXVMWRMT:  SV GSILFTS SVZEVM,
GSZG LKVMVW DRWV SVI YOZARMT KLIGZOH, OVW
GL TLWH VGVIMZO SLFHV WRIVXG GSV DZB
Z YILZW ZMW ZNKOV ILZW, DSLHV WFHG RH TLOW
ZMW KZEVNVMG HGZIH, ZH HGZIH GL GSVV ZKKVZI,
HVVM RM GSV TZOZCB, GSZG NROPB DZB,
DSRXS MRTSGOB, ZH Z XRIXORMT ALMV, GSLF HVVHG
KLDWVIVW DRGS HGZIH.  ZMW MLD LM VZIGS GSV HVEVMGS
VEVMRMT ZILHV RM VWVM, ULI GSV HFM
DZH HVG, ZMW GDRORTSG UILN GSV VZHG XZNV LM,
ULIVIFMMRMT MRTSG DSVM ZG GSV SLOB NLFMG
LU SVZEVMH SRTSHVZGVW GLK, GSV RNKVIRZO GSILMV
LU TLWSVZW, URCVW ULI VEVI URIN ZMW HFIV,
GSV URORZO KLDVI ZIIREVW, ZMW HZG SRN WLDM
DRGS SRH TIVZG UZGSVI ULI SV ZOHL DVMG
RMERHRYOV, BVG HGZRW, HFXS KIREROVTV
SZGS LNMRKIVHVMXV ZMW GSV DLIP LIWZRMVW,
ZFGSLI ZMW VMW LU ZOO GSRMTH ZMW, UILN DLIP
MLD IVHGRMT, YOVHHVW ZMW SZOOLDVW GSV HVEVMGS WZB,
ZH IVHGRMT LM GSZG WZB UILN ZOO SRH DLIP,
YFG MLG RM HROVMXV SLOB PVKG: GSV SZIK
SZW DLIP ZMW IVHGVW MLG GSV HLOVNM KRKV,
ZMW WFOXRNVI, ZOO LITZMH LU HDVVG HGLK,
ZOO HLFMWH LM UIVG YB HGIRMT LI TLOWVM DRIV,
GVNKVIVW HLUG GFMRMTH, RMGVINRCVW DRGS ELRXV
XSLIZO LI FMRHLM: LU RMXVMHV XOLFWH,
UFNRMT UILN TLOWVM XVMHVIH, SRW GSV NLFMG.
XIVZGRLM ZMW GSV HRC WZBH ZXGH GSVB HFMT:
TIVZG ZIV GSB DLIPH, QVSLEZS! RMURMRGV
GSB KLDVI! DSZG GSLFTSG XZM NVZHFIV GSVV, LI GLMTFV
IVOZGV GSVV!  TIVZGVI MLD RM GSB IVGFIM
GSZM UILN GSV TRZMG ZMTVOH:  GSVV GSZG WZB
GSB GSFMWVIH NZTMRURVW YFG GL XIVZGV
RH TIVZGVI GSZM XIVZGVW GL WVHGILB.
DSL XZM RNKZRI GSVV, NRTSGB PRMT, LI YLFMW
GSB VNKRIV!  VZHROB GSV KILFW ZGGVNKG
LU HKRIRGH ZKLHGZGV, ZMW GSVRI XLFMHVOH EZRM,
GSLF SZHG IVKVOOVW DSROV RNKRLFHOB GSVB GSLFTSG
GSVV GL WRNRMRHS, ZMW UILN GSVV DRGSWIZD
GSV MFNYVI LU GSB DLIHSRKKVIH.  DSL HVVPH
GL OVHHVM GSVV, ZTZRMHG SRH KFIKLHV HVIEVH
GL NZMRUVHG GSV NLIV GSB NRTSG: SRH VERO
GSLF FHVHG, ZMW UILN GSVMXV XIVZGVHG NLIV TLLW.
DRGMVHH GSRH MVDNZWV DLIOW, ZMLGSVI SVZEVM
UILN SVZEVMTZGV MLG UZI, ULFMWVW RM ERVD
LM GSV XOVZI SBZORMV, GSV TOZHHB HVZ
LU ZNKORGFWV ZONLHG RNNVMHV, DRGS HGZIH
MFNVILFH, ZMW VEVIB HGZI KVISZKH Z DLIOW
LU WVHGRMVW SZYRGZGRLM YFG GSLF PMLDVHG
GSVRI HVZHLMH: ZNLMT GSVHV GSV HVZG LU NVM,
VZIGS, DRGS SVI MVGSVI LXVZM XRIXFNUFHVW,
GSVRI KOVZHZMG WDVOORMTKOZXV.  GSIRXV SZKKB NVM,
ZMW HLMH LU NVM, DSLN TLW SZGS GSFH ZWEZMXVW!
XIVZGVW RM SRH RNZTV, GSVIV GL WDVOO
ZMW DLIHSRK SRN ZMW RM IVDZIW GL IFOV
LEVI SRH DLIPH, LM VZIGS, RM HVZ, LI ZRI,
ZMW NFOGRKOB Z IZXV LU DLIHSRKKVIH
SLOB ZMW QFHG:  GSIRXV SZKKB, RU GSVB PMLD
GSVRI SZKKRMVHH, ZMW KVIHVEVIV FKIRTSG!
HL HFMT GSVB, ZMW GSV VNKBIVZM IFMT
DRGS SZOOVOFRZSH:  GSFH DZH HZYYZGS PVKG.
ZMW GSB IVJFVHG GSRMP MLD UFOUROOVW, GSZG ZHPVW
SLD URIHG GSRH DLIOW ZMW UZXV LU GSRMTH YVTZM,
ZMW DSZG YVULIV GSB NVNLIB DZH WLMV
UILN GSV YVTRMMRMT GSZG KLHGVIRGB,
RMULINVW YB GSVV, NRTSG PMLD:  RU VOHV GSLF HVVPVHG
ZFTSG, MLG HFIKZHHRMT SFNZM NVZHFIV, HZB.



YLLP ERRR


GSV ZMTVO VMWVW, ZMW RM ZWZNH VZI
HL XSZINRMT OVUG SRH ELRXV, GSZG SV Z DSROV
GSLFTSG SRN HGROO HKVZPRMT, HGROO HGLLW URCVW GL SVZI
GSVM, ZH MVD DZPVW, GSFH TIZGVUFOOB IVKORVW.
DSZG GSZMPH HFUURXRVMG, LI DSZG IVXLNKVMXV
VJFZO, SZEV R GL IVMWVI GSVV, WRERMV
SRHGLIRZM, DSL GSFH OZITVOB SZHG ZOOZBVW
GSV GSRIHG R SZW LU PMLDOVWTV, ZMW ELFXSHZUVW
GSRH UIRVMWOB XLMWVHXVMHRLM GL IVOZGV
GSRMTH, VOHV YB NV FMHVZIXSZYOV MLD SVZIW
DRGS DLMWVI, YFG WVORTSG, ZMW, ZH RH WFV,
DRGS TOLIB ZGGIRYFGVW GL GSV SRTS
XIVZGLI!  HLNVGSRMT BVG LU WLFYG IVNZRMH,
DSRXS LMOB GSB HLOFGRLM XZM IVHLOEV.
DSVM R YVSLOW GSRH TLLWOB UIZNV, GSRH DLIOW,
LU SVZEVM ZMW VZIGS XLMHRHGRMT ZMW XLNKFGV
GSVRI NZTMRGFWVH GSRH VZIGS, Z HKLG, Z TIZRM,
ZM ZGLN, DRGS GSV URINZNVMG XLNKZIVW
ZMW ZOO SVI MFNYVIVW HGZIH, GSZG HVVN GL ILOO
HKZXVH RMXLNKIVSVMHRYOV, ULI HFXS
GSVRI WRHGZMXV ZITFVH, ZMW GSVRI HDRUG IVGFIM
WRFIMZO, NVIVOB GL LUURXRZGV ORTSG
ILFMW GSRH LKZXLFH VZIGS, GSRH KFMXGFZO HKLG,
LMV WZB ZMW MRTSG RM ZOO SVI EZHG HFIEVB
FHVOVHH YVHRWVH IVZHLMRMT R LUG ZWNRIV,
SLD MZGFIV DRHV ZMW UIFTZO XLFOW XLNNRG
HFXS WRHKILKLIGRLMH, DRGS HFKVIUOFLFH SZMW
HL NZMB MLYOVI YLWRVH GL XIVZGV,
TIVZGVI HL NZMRULOW, GL GSRH LMV FHV,
ULI ZFTSG ZKKVZIH, ZMW LM GSVRI LIYH RNKLHV
HFXS IVHGOVHH IVELOFGRLM WZB YB WZB
IVKVZGVW DSROV GSV HVWVMGZIB VZIGS,
GSZG YVGGVI NRTSG DRGS UZI OVHH XLNKZHH NLEV,
HVIEVW YB NLIV MLYOV GSZM SVIHVOU, ZGGZRMH
SVI VMW DRGSLFG OVZHG NLGRLM, ZMW IVXVREVH,
ZH GIRYFGV, HFXS Z HFNOVHH QLFIMVB YILFTSG
LU RMXLIKLIVZO HKVVW, SVI DZINGS ZMW ORTSG
HKVVW, GL WVHXIRYV DSLHV HDRUGMVHH MFNYVI UZROH.
HL HKZPV LFI HRIV, ZMW YB SRH XLFMGVMZMXV HVVNVW
VMGVIRMT LM HGFWRLFH GSLFTSGH ZYHGIFHV DSRXS VEV
KVIXVRERMT, DSVIV HSV HZG IVGRIVW RM HRTSG,
DRGS OLDORMVHH NZQVHGRXP UILN SVI HVZG,
ZMW TIZXV GSZG DLM DSL HZD GL DRHS SVI HGZB,
ILHV, ZMW DVMG ULIGS ZNLMT SVI UIFRGH ZMW UOLDVIH,
GL ERHRG SLD GSVB KILHKVIVW, YFW ZMW YOLLN,
SVI MFIHVIB GSVB ZG SVI XLNRMT HKIFMT,
ZMW, GLFXSVW YB SVI UZRI GVMWZMXV, TOZWORVI TIVD.
BVG DVMG HSV MLG, ZH MLG DRGS HFXS WRHXLFIHV
WVORTSGVW, LI MLG XZKZYOV SVI VZI
LU DSZG DZH SRTS: HFXS KOVZHFIV HSV IVHVIEVW,
ZWZN IVOZGRMT, HSV HLOV ZFWRGIVHH
SVI SFHYZMW GSV IVOZGVI HSV KIVUVIIVW
YVULIV GSV ZMTVO, ZMW LU SRN GL ZHP
XSLHV IZGSVI SV, HSV PMVD, DLFOW RMGVINRC
TIZGVUFO WRTIVHHRLMH, ZMW HLOEV SRTS WRHKFGV
DRGS XLMQFTZO XZIVHHVH: UILN SRH ORK
MLG DLIWH ZOLMV KOVZHVW SVI.  L! DSVM NVVG MLD
HFXS KZRIH, RM OLEV ZMW NFGFZO SLMLFI QLRMVW?
DRGS TLWWVHHORPV WVNVZMLFI ULIGS HSV DVMG,
MLG FMZGGVMWVW ULI LM SVI, ZH JFVVM,
Z KLNK LU DRMMRMT TIZXVH DZRGVW HGROO,
ZMW UILN ZYLFG SVI HSLG WZIGH LU WVHRIV
RMGL ZOO VBVH, GL DRHS SVI HGROO RM HRTSG.
ZMW IZKSZVO MLD, GL ZWZNH WLFYG KILKLHVW,
YVMVELOVMG ZMW UZXROV GSFH IVKORVW.
GL ZHP LI HVZIXS, R YOZNV GSVV MLG ULI SVZEVM
RH ZH GSV YLLP LU TLW YVULIV GSVV HVG,
DSVIVRM GL IVZW SRH DLMWVILFH DLIPH, ZMW OVZIM
SRH HVZHLMH, SLFIH, LI WZBH, LI NLMGSH, LI BVZIH:
GSRH GL ZGGZRM, DSVGSVI SVZEVM NLEV LI VZIGS,
RNKLIGH MLG, RU GSLF IVXPLM IRTSG GSV IVHG
UILN NZM LI ZMTVO GSV TIVZG ZIXSRGVXG
WRW DRHVOB GL XLMXVZO, ZMW MLG WREFOTV
SRH HVXIVGH GL YV HXZMMVW YB GSVN DSL LFTSG
IZGSVI ZWNRIV LI, RU GSVB ORHG GL GIB
XLMQVXGFIV, SV SRH UZYIRXP LU GSV SVZEVMH
SZGS OVUG GL GSVRI WRHKFGVH, KVISZKH GL NLEV
SRH OZFTSGVI ZG GSVRI JFZRMG LKRMRLMH DRWV
SVIVZUGVI DSVM GSVB XLNV GL NLWVO SVZEVM
ZMW XZOXFOZGV GSV HGZIH, SLD GSVB DROO DRVOW
GSV NRTSGB UIZNV SLD YFROW, FMYFROW, XLMGIREV
GL HZEV ZKKVZIZMXVH SLD TRIW GSV HKSVIV
DRGS XVMGIRXP ZMW VXXVMGIRXP HXIRYYOVW LVI,
XBXOV ZMW VKRXBXOV, LIY RM LIY:
ZOIVZWB YB GSB IVZHLMRMT GSRH R TFVHH,
DSL ZIG GL OVZW GSB LUUHKIRMT, ZMW HFKKLHVHG
GSZG YLWRVH YIRTSG ZMW TIVZGVI HSLFOW MLG HVIEV
GSV OVHH MLG YIRTSG, MLI SVZEVM HFXS QLFIMVBH IFM,
VZIGS HRGGRMT HGROO, DSVM HSV ZOLMV IVXVREVH
GSV YVMVURG:  XLMHRWVI URIHG, GSZG TIVZG
LI YIRTSG RMUVIH MLG VCXVOOVMXV: GSV VZIGS
GSLFTS, RM XLNKZIRHLM LU SVZEVM, HL HNZOO,
MLI TORHGVIRMT, NZB LU HLORW TLLW XLMGZRM
NLIV KOVMGB GSZM GSV HFM GSZG YZIIVM HSRMVH
DSLHV ERIGFV LM RGHVOU DLIPH ML VUUVXG,
YFG RM GSV UIFRGUFO VZIGS GSVIV URIHG IVXVREVW,
SRH YVZNH, FMZXGREV VOHV, GSVRI ERTLFI URMW.
BVG MLG GL VZIGS ZIV GSLHV YIRTSG OFNRMZIRVH
LUURXRLFH YFG GL GSVV, VZIGSH SZYRGZMG.
ZMW ULI GSV SVZEVMH DRWV XRIXFRG, OVG RG HKVZP
GSV NZPVIH SRTS NZTMRURXVMXV, DSL YFROG
HL HKZXRLFH, ZMW SRH ORMV HGIVGXSVW LFG HL UZI
GSZG NZM NZB PMLD SV WDVOOH MLG RM SRH LDM
ZM VWRURXV GLL OZITV ULI SRN GL UROO,
OLWTVW RM Z HNZOO KZIGRGRLM ZMW GSV IVHG
LIWZRMVW ULI FHVH GL SRH OLIW YVHG PMLDM.
GSV HDRUGMVHH LU GSLHV XRIXOVH ZGGIRYFGV,
GSLFTS MFNYVIOVHH, GL SRH LNMRKLGVMXV,
GSZG GL XLIKLIVZO HFYHGZMXVH XLFOW ZWW
HKVVW ZONLHG HKRIRGFZO:  NV GSLF GSRMPVHG MLG HOLD,
DSL HRMXV GSV NLIMRMTSLFI HVG LFG UILN SVZEVM
DSVIV TLW IVHRWVH, ZMW VIV NRWWZB ZIIREVW
RM VWVM WRHGZMXV RMVCKIVHHRYOV
YB MFNYVIH GSZG SZEV MZNV.  YFG GSRH R FITV,
ZWNRGGRMT NLGRLM RM GSV SVZEVMH, GL HSLD
RMEZORW GSZG DSRXS GSVV GL WLFYG RG NLEVW
MLG GSZG R HL ZUURIN, GSLFTS HL RG HVVN
GL GSVV DSL SZHG GSB WDVOORMT SVIV LM VZIGS.
TLW, GL IVNLEV SRH DZBH UILN SFNZM HVMHV,
KOZXVW SVZEVM UILN VZIGS HL UZI, GSZG VZIGSOB HRTSG,
RU RG KIVHFNV, NRTSG VII RM GSRMTH GLL SRTS,
ZMW ML ZWEZMGZTV TZRM.  DSZG RU GSV HFM
YV XVMGVI GL GSV DLIOW ZMW LGSVI HGZIH,
YB SRH ZGGIZXGREV ERIGFV ZMW GSVRI LDM
RMXRGVW, WZMXV ZYLFG SRN EZIRLFH ILFMWH?
GSVRI DZMWVIRMT XLFIHV MLD SRTS, MLD OLD, GSVM SRW,
KILTIVHHREV, IVGILTIZWV, LI HGZMWRMT HGROO,
RM HRC GSLF HVVHG ZMW DSZG RU HVEVMGS GL GSVHV
GSV KOZMVG VZIGS, HL HGVWUZHG GSLFTS HSV HVVN,
RMHVMHRYOB GSIVV WRUUVIVMG NLGRLMH NLEV?
DSRXS VOHV GL HVEVIZO HKSVIVH GSLF NFHG ZHXIRYV,
NLEVW XLMGIZIB DRGS GSDZIG LYORJFRGRVH
LI HZEV GSV HFM SRH OZYLFI, ZMW GSZG HDRUG
MLXGFIMZO ZMW WRFIMZO ISLNY HFKKLHVW,
RMERHRYOV VOHV ZYLEV ZOO HGZIH, GSV DSVVO
LU WZB ZMW MRTSG DSRXS MVVWH MLG GSB YVORVU,
RU VZIGS, RMWFHGIRLFH LU SVIHVOU, UVGXS WZB
GIZEVOORMT VZHG, ZMW DRGS SVI KZIG ZEVIHV
UILN GSV HFMH YVZN NVVG MRTSG, SVI LGSVI KZIG
HGROO OFNRMLFH YB SRH IZB.  DSZG RU GSZG ORTSG,
HVMG UILN SVI GSILFTS GSV DRWV GIZMHKRXFLFH ZRI,
GL GSV GVIIVHGIRZO NLLM YV ZH Z HGZI,
VMORTSGVMRMT SVI YB WZB, ZH HSV YB MRTSG
GSRH VZIGS? IVXRKILXZO, RU OZMW YV GSVIV,
URVOWH ZMW RMSZYRGZMGH:  SVI HKLGH GSLF HVVHG
ZH XOLFWH, ZMW XOLFWH NZB IZRM, ZMW IZRM KILWFXV
UIFRGH RM SVI HLUGVMVW HLRO ULI HLNV GL VZG
ZOOLGGVW GSVIV ZMW LGSVI HFMH KVISZKH,
DRGS GSVRI ZGGVMWZMG NLLMH, GSLF DROG WVHXIB,
XLNNFMRXZGRMT NZOV ZMW UVNZOV ORTSG
DSRXS GDL TIVZG HVCVH ZMRNZGV GSV DLIOW,
HGLIVW RM VZXS LIY KVISZKH DRGS HLNV GSZG OREV.
ULI HFXS EZHG ILLN RM MZGFIV FMKLHHVHHVW
YB ORERMT HLFO, WVHZIG ZMW WVHLOZGV,
LMOB GL HSRMV, BVG HXZIXV GL XLMGIRYFGV
VZXS LIY Z TORNKHV LU ORTSG, XLMEVBVW HL UZI
WLDM GL GSRH SZYRGZYOV, DSRXS IVGFIMH
ORTSG YZXP GL GSVN, RH LYERLFH GL WRHKFGV.
YFG DSVGSVI GSFH GSVHV GSRMTH, LI DSVGSVI MLG
YFG DSVGSVI GSV HFM, KIVWLNRMZMG RM SVZEVM,
IRHV LM GSV VZIGS LI VZIGS IRHV LM GSV HFM
SV UILN GSV VZHG SRH UOZNRMT ILZW YVTRM
LI HSV UILN DVHG SVI HROVMG XLFIHV ZWEZMXV,
DRGS RMLUUVMHREV KZXV GSZG HKRMMRMT HOVVKH
LM SVI HLUG ZCOV, DSROV HSV KZXVH VEVM,
ZMW YVZIH GSVV HLUG DRGS GSV HNLLGS SZRI ZOLMT
HLOORXRG MLG GSB GSLFTSGH DRGS NZGGVIH SRW
OVZEV GSVN GL TLW ZYLEV SRN HVIEV, ZMW UVZI!
LU LGSVI XIVZGFIVH, ZH SRN KOVZHVH YVHG,
DSVIVEVI KOZXVW, OVG SRN WRHKLHV QLB GSLF
RM DSZG SV TREVH GL GSVV, GSRH KZIZWRHV
ZMW GSB UZRI VEV SVZEVM RH ULI GSVV GLL SRTS
GL PMLD DSZG KZHHVH GSVIV YV OLDOB DRHV:
GSRMP LMOB DSZG XLMXVIMH GSVV, ZMW GSB YVRMT
WIVZN MLG LU LGSVI DLIOWH, DSZG XIVZGFIVH GSVIV
OREV, RM DSZG HGZGV, XLMWRGRLM, LI WVTIVV
XLMGVMGVW GSZG GSFH UZI SZGS YVVM IVEVZOVW
MLG LU VZIGS LMOB, YFG LU SRTSVHG SVZEVM.
GL DSLN GSFH ZWZN, XOVZIVW LU WLFYG, IVKORVW.
SLD UFOOB SZHG GSLF HZGRHURVW NV, KFIV
RMGVOORTVMXV LU SVZEVM, ZMTVO HVIVMV!
ZMW, UIVVW UILN RMGIRXZXRVH, GZFTSG GL OREV
GSV VZHRVHG DZB MLI DRGS KVIKOVCRMT GSLFTSGH
GL RMGVIIFKG GSV HDVVG LU ORUV, UILN DSRXS
TLW SZGS YRW WDVOO UZI LUU ZOO ZMCRLFH XZIVH,
ZMW MLG NLOVHG FH FMOVHH DV LFIHVOEVH
HVVP GSVN DRGS DZMWVIRMT GSLFTSGH, ZMW MLGRLMH EZRM.
YFG ZKG GSV NRMW LI UZMXB RH GL ILEV
FMXSVXPVW, ZMW LU SVI ILERMT RH ML VMW
GROO DZIMVW, LI YB VCKVIRVMXV GZFTSG, HSV OVZIM,
GSZG, MLG GL PMLD ZG OZITV LU GSRMTH IVNLGV
UILN FHV, LYHXFIV ZMW HFYGOV YFG, GL PMLD
GSZG DSRXS YVULIV FH ORVH RM WZROB ORUV,
RH GSV KIRNV DRHWLN:  DSZG RH NLIV, RH UFNV,
LI VNKGRMVHH, LI ULMW RNKVIGRMVMXV:
ZMW IVMWVIH FH, RM GSRMTH GSZG NLHG XLMXVIM,
FMKIZXGRHVW, FMKIVKZIVW, ZMW HGROO GL HVVP.
GSVIVULIV UILN GSRH SRTS KRGXS OVG FH WVHXVMW
Z OLDVI UORTSG, ZMW HKVZP LU GSRMTH ZG SZMW
FHVUFO DSVMXV, SZKOB, NVMGRLM NZB ZIRHV
LU HLNVGSRMT MLG FMHVZHLMZYOV GL ZHP,
YB HFUUVIZMXV, ZMW GSB DLMGVW UZELFI, WVRTMVW.
GSVV R SZEV SVZIW IVOZGRMT DSZG DZH WLMV
VIV NB IVNVNYIZMXV: MLD, SVZI NV IVOZGV
NB HGLIB, DSRXS KVISZKH GSLF SZHG MLG SVZIW
ZMW WZB RH MLG BVG HKVMG GROO GSVM GSLF HVVHG
SLD HFYGOB GL WVGZRM GSVV R WVERHV
RMERGRMT GSVV GL SVZI DSROV R IVOZGV
ULMW! DVIV RG MLG RM SLKV LU GSB IVKOB:
ULI, DSROV R HRG DRGS GSVV, R HVVN RM SVZEVM
ZMW HDVVGVI GSB WRHXLFIHV RH GL NB VZI
GSZM UIFRGH LU KZONGIVV KOVZHZMGVHG GL GSRIHG
ZMW SFMTVI YLGS, UILN OZYLFI, ZG GSV SLFI
LU HDVVG IVKZHG GSVB HZGRZGV, ZMW HLLM UROO,
GSLFTS KOVZHZMG YFG GSB DLIWH, DRGS TIZXV WRERMV
RNYFVW, YIRMT GL GSVRI HDVVGMVHH ML HZGRVGB.
GL DSLN GSFH IZKSZVO ZMHDVIVW SVZEVMOB NVVP.
MLI ZIV GSB ORKH FMTIZXVUFO, HRIV LU NVM,
MLI GLMTFV RMVOLJFVMG ULI TLW LM GSVV
ZYFMWZMGOB SRH TRUGH SZGS ZOHL KLFIVW
RMDZIW ZMW LFGDZIW YLGS, SRH RNZTV UZRI:
HKVZPRMT, LI NFGV, ZOO XLNVORMVHH ZMW TIZXV
ZGGVMWH GSVV ZMW VZXS DLIW, VZXS NLGRLM, ULINH
MLI OVHH GSRMP DV RM SVZEVM LU GSVV LM VZIGS
GSZM LU LFI UVOOLDHVIEZMG, ZMW RMJFRIV
TOZWOB RMGL GSV DZBH LU TLW DRGS NZM:
ULI TLW, DV HVV, SZGS SLMLFIVW GSVV, ZMW HVG
LM NZM SRH VJFZO OLEV:  HZB GSVIVULIV LM
ULI R GSZG WZB DZH ZYHVMG, ZH YVUVO,
YLFMW LM Z ELBZTV FMXLFGS ZMW LYHXFIV,
UZI LM VCXFIHRLM GLDZIW GSV TZGVH LU SVOO
HJFZIVW RM UFOO OVTRLM HFXS XLNNZMW DV SZW
GL HVV GSZG MLMV GSVMXV RHHFVW ULIGS Z HKB,
LI VMVNB, DSROV TLW DZH RM SRH DLIP
OVHG SV, RMXVMHVW ZG HFXS VIFKGRLM YLOW,
WVHGIFXGRLM DRGS XIVZGRLM NRTSG SZEV NRCVW.
MLG GSZG GSVB WFIHG DRGSLFG SRH OVZEV ZGGVNKG
YFG FH SV HVMWH FKLM SRH SRTS YVSVHGH
ULI HGZGV, ZH HLEIZM PRMT ZMW GL RMFIV
LFI KILNKG LYVWRVMXV.  UZHG DV ULFMW, UZHG HSFG,
GSV WRHNZO TZGVH, ZMW YZIIRXZWLVW HGILMT
YFG OLMT VIV LFI ZKKILZXSRMT SVZIW DRGSRM
MLRHV, LGSVI GSZM GSV HLFMW LU WZMXV LI HLMT,
GLINVMG, ZMW OLFW OZNVMG, ZMW UFIRLFH IZTV.
TOZW DV IVGFIMVW FK GL GSV XLZHGH LU ORTSG
VIV HZYYZGSVEVMRMT: HL DV SZW RM XSZITV.
YFG GSB IVOZGRLM MLD ULI R ZGGVMW,
KOVZHVW DRGS GSB DLIWH ML OVHH GSZM GSLF DRGS NRMV.
HL HKZPV GSV TLWORPV KLDVI, ZMW GSFH LFI HRIV.
ULI NZM GL GVOO SLD SFNZM ORUV YVTZM
RH SZIW ULI DSL SRNHVOU YVTRMMRMT PMVD
WVHRIV DRGS GSVV HGROO OLMTVI GL XLMEVIHV
RMWFXVW NV.  ZH MVD DZPVW UILN HLFMWVHG HOVVK,
HLUG LM GSV UOLDVIB SVIY R ULFMW NV OZRW,
RM YZONB HDVZG DSRXS DRGS SRH YVZNH GSV HFM
HLLM WIRVW, ZMW LM GSV IVVPRMT NLRHGFIV UVW.
HGIZRTSG GLDZIW SVZEVM NB DLMWVIRMT VBVH R GFIMVW,
ZMW TZAVW Z DSROV GSV ZNKOV HPB GROO, IZRHVW
YB JFRXP RMHGRMXGREV NLGRLM, FK R HKIFMT,
ZH GSRGSVIDZIW VMWVZELFIRMT, ZMW FKIRTSG
HGLLW LM NB UVVG: ZYLFG NV ILFMW R HZD
SROO, WZOV, ZMW HSZWB DLLWH, ZMW HFMMB KOZRMH,
ZMW ORJFRW OZKHV LU NFINFIRMT HGIVZNH YB GSVHV,
XIVZGFIVH GSZG OREVW ZMW NLEVW, ZMW DZOPVW, LI UOVD
YRIWH LM GSV YIZMXSVH DZIYORMT ZOO GSRMTH HNROVW
DRGS UIZTIZMXV ZMW DRGS QLB NB SVZIG LVIUOLDVW.
NBHVOU R GSVM KVIFHVW, ZMW ORNY YB ORNY
HFIEVBVW, ZMW HLNVGRNVH DVMG, ZMW HLNVGRNVH IZM
DRGS HFKKOV QLRMGH, ZH OREVOB ERTLFI OVW:
YFG DSL R DZH, LI DSVIV, LI UILN DSZG XZFHV,
PMVD MLG GL HKVZP R GIRVW, ZMW ULIGSDRGS HKZPV
NB GLMTFV LYVBVW, ZMW IVZWROB XLFOW MZNV
DSZGVVI R HZD.  GSLF HFM, HZRW R, UZRI ORTSG,
ZMW GSLF VMORTSGVMVW VZIGS, HL UIVHS ZMW TZB,
BV SROOH, ZMW WZOVH, BV IREVIH, DLLWH, ZMW KOZRMH,
ZMW BV GSZG OREV ZMW NLEV, UZRI XIVZGFIVH, GVOO,
GVOO, RU BV HZD, SLD R XZNV GSFH, SLD SVIV?
MLG LU NBHVOUYB HLNV TIVZG NZPVI GSVM,
RM TLLWMVHH ZMW RM KLDVI KIVVNRMVMG:
GVOO NV, SLD NZB R PMLD SRN, SLD ZWLIV,
UILN DSLN R SZEV GSZG GSFH R NLEV ZMW OREV,
ZMW UVVO GSZG R ZN SZKKRVI GSZM R PMLD.
DSROV GSFH R XZOOVW, ZMW HGIZBVW R PMVD MLG DSRGSVI,
UILN DSVIV R URIHG WIVD ZRI, ZMW URIHG YVSVOW
GSRH SZKKB ORTSG DSVM, ZMHDVI MLMV IVGFIMVW,
LM Z TIVVM HSZWB YZMP, KILUFHV LU UOLDVIH,
KVMHREV R HZG NV WLDM:  GSVIV TVMGOV HOVVK
URIHG ULFMW NV, ZMW DRGS HLUG LKKIVHHRLM HVRHVW
NB WILFHVW HVMHV, FMGILFYOVW, GSLFTS R GSLFTSG
R GSVM DZH KZHHRMT GL NB ULINVI HGZGV
RMHVMHRYOV, ZMW ULIGSDRGS GL WRHHLOEV:
DSVM HFWWVMOB HGLLW ZG NB SVZW Z WIVZN,
DSLHV RMDZIW ZKKZIRGRLM TVMGOB NLEVW
NB UZMXB GL YVORVEV R BVG SZW YVRMT,
ZMW OREVW:  LMV XZNV, NVGSLFTSG, LU HSZKV WRERMV,
ZMW HZRW, GSB NZMHRLM DZMGH GSVV, ZWZN IRHV,
URIHG NZM, LU NVM RMMFNVIZYOV LIWZRMVW
URIHG UZGSVI! XZOOVW YB GSVV, R XLNV GSB TFRWV
GL GSV TZIWVM LU YORHH, GSB HVZG KIVKZIVW.
HL HZBRMT, YB GSV SZMW SV GLLP NV IZRHVW,
ZMW LEVI URVOWH ZMW DZGVIH, ZH RM ZRI
HNLLGSHORWRMT DRGSLFG HGVK, OZHG OVW NV FK
Z DLLWB NLFMGZRM DSLHV SRTS GLK DZH KOZRM,
Z XRIXFRG DRWV, VMXOLHVW, DRGS TLLWORVHG GIVVH
KOZMGVW, DRGS DZOPH, ZMW YLDVIH GSZG DSZG R HZD
LU VZIGS YVULIV HXZIXV KOVZHZMG HVVNVW.  VZXS GIVV,
OLZWVM DRGS UZRIVHG UIFRG GSZG SFMT GL GSV VBV
GVNKGRMT, HGRIIVW RM NV HFWWVM ZKKVGRGV
GL KOFXP ZMW VZG DSVIVZG R DZPVW, ZMW ULFMW
YVULIV NRMV VBVH ZOO IVZO, ZH GSV WIVZN
SZW OREVOB HSZWLDVW:  SVIV SZW MVD YVTFM
NB DZMWVIRMT, SZW MLG SV, DSL DZH NB TFRWV
FK SRGSVI, UILN ZNLMT GSV GIVVH ZKKVZIVW,
KIVHVMXV WRERMV.  IVQLRXRMT, YFG DRGS ZDV,
RM ZWLIZGRLM ZG SRH UVVG R UVOO
HFYNRHH:  SV IVZIVW NV, ZMW DSLN GSLF HLFTSGVHG R ZN,
HZRW NROWOB, ZFGSLI LU ZOO GSRH GSLF HVVHG
ZYLEV, LI ILFMW ZYLFG GSVV, LI YVMVZGS.
GSRH KZIZWRHV R TREV GSVV, XLFMG RG GSRMV
GL GROO ZMW PVVK, ZMW LU GSV UIFRG GL VZG:
LU VEVIB GIVV GSZG RM GSV TZIWVM TILDH
VZG UIVVOB DRGS TOZW SVZIG UVZI SVIV ML WVZIGS:
YFG LU GSV GIVV DSLHV LKVIZGRLM YIRMTH
PMLDOVWTV LU TLLW ZMW ROO, DSRXS R SZEV HVG
GSV KOVWTV LU GSB LYVWRVMXV ZMW GSB UZRGS,
ZNRW GSV TZIWVM YB GSV GIVV LU ORUV,
IVNVNYVI DSZG R DZIM GSVV, HSFM GL GZHGV,
ZMW HSFM GSV YRGGVI XLMHVJFVMXV: ULI PMLD,
GSV WZB GSLF VZGVHG GSVIVLU, NB HLOV XLNNZMW
GIZMHTIVHHVW, RMVERGZYOB GSLF HSZOG WRV,
UILN GSZG WZB NLIGZO ZMW GSRH SZKKB HGZGV
HSZOG OLHV, VCKVOOVW UILN SVMXV RMGL Z DLIOW
LU DLV ZMW HLIILD.  HGVIMOB SV KILMLFMXVW
GSV IRTRW RMGVIWRXGRLM, DSRXS IVHLFMWH
BVG WIVZWUFO RM NRMV VZI, GSLFTS RM NB XSLRXV
MLG GL RMXFI YFG HLLM SRH XOVZI ZHKVXG
IVGFIMVW, ZMW TIZXRLFH KFIKLHV GSFH IVMVDVW.
MLG LMOB GSVHV UZRI YLFMWH, YFG ZOO GSV VZIGS
GL GSVV ZMW GL GSB IZXV R TREV ZH OLIWH
KLHHVHH RG, ZMW ZOO GSRMTH GSZG GSVIVRM OREV,
LI OREV RM HVZ, LI ZRI YVZHG, URHS, ZMW ULDO.
RM HRTM DSVIVLU, VZXS YRIW ZMW YVZHG YVSLOW
ZUGVI GSVRI PRMWH R YIRMT GSVN GL IVXVREV
UILN GSVV GSVRI MZNVH, ZMW KZB GSVV UVZOGB
DRGS OLD HFYQVXGRLM FMWVIHGZMW GSV HZNV
LU URHS DRGSRM GSVRI DZGVIB IVHRWVMXV,
MLG SRGSVI HFNNLMVW, HRMXV GSVB XZMMLG XSZMTV
GSVRI VOVNVMG, GL WIZD GSV GSRMMVI ZRI.
ZH GSFH SV HKZPV, VZXS YRIW ZMW YVZHG YVSLOW
ZKKILZXSRMT GDL ZMW GDL GSVHV XLDVIRMT OLD
DRGS YOZMWRHSNVMG VZXS YRIW HGLLKVW LM SRH DRMT.
R MZNVW GSVN, ZH GSVB KZHHVW, ZMW FMWVIHGLLW
GSVRI MZGFIV, DRGS HFXS PMLDOVWTV TLW VMWFVW
NB HFWWVM ZKKIVSVMHRLM:  YFG RM GSVHV
R ULFMW MLG DSZG NVGSLFTSG R DZMGVW HGROO
ZMW GL GSV SVZEVMOB ERHRLM GSFH KIVHFNVW.
L, YB DSZG MZNV, ULI GSLF ZYLEV ZOO GSVHV,
ZYLEV NZMPRMW, LI ZFTSG GSZM NZMPRMW SRTSVI,
HFIKZHHVHG UZI NB MZNRMT SLD NZB R
ZWLIV GSVV, ZFGSLI LU GSRH FMREVIHV,
ZMW ZOO GSRH TLLW GL NZM? ULI DSLHV DVOO YVRMT
HL ZNKOB, ZMW DRGS SZMWH HL ORYVIZO,
GSLF SZHG KILERWVW ZOO GSRMTH:  YFG DRGS NV
R HVV MLG DSL KZIGZPVH.  RM HLORGFWV
DSZG SZKKRMVHH, DSL XZM VMQLB ZOLMV,
LI, ZOO VMQLBRMT, DSZG XLMGVMGNVMG URMW?
GSFH R KIVHFNKGFLFH ZMW GSV ERHRLM YIRTSG,
ZH DRGS Z HNROV NLIV YIRTSGVMVW, GSFH IVKORVW.
DSZG XZOOVHG GSLF HLORGFWV?  RH MLG GSV VZIGS
DRGS EZIRLFH ORERMT XIVZGFIVH, ZMW GSV ZRI
IVKOVMRHSVW, ZMW ZOO GSVHV ZG GSB XLNNZMW
GL XLNV ZMW KOZB YVULIV GSVV?  PMLDVHG GSLF MLG
GSVRI OZMTFZTV ZMW GSVRI DZBH?  GSVB ZOHL PMLD,
ZMW IVZHLM MLG XLMGVNKGRYOB:  DRGS GSVHV
URMW KZHGRNV, ZMW YVZI IFOV GSB IVZON RH OZITV.
HL HKZPV GSV FMREVIHZO OLIW, ZMW HVVNVW
HL LIWVIRMT:  R, DRGS OVZEV LU HKVVXS RNKOLIVW,
ZMW SFNYOV WVKIVXZGRLM, GSFH IVKORVW.
OVG MLG NB DLIWH LUUVMW GSVV, SVZEVMOB KLDVI
NB NZPVI, YV KILKRGRLFH DSROV R HKVZP.
SZHG GSLF MLG NZWV NV SVIV GSB HFYHGRGFGV,
ZMW GSVHV RMUVIRLFI UZI YVMVZGS NV HVG?
