Can sort, what harmony, or true delight?
Which must be mutual, in proportion due
Given and received but, in disparity
The one intense, the other still remiss,
Cannot well suit with either, but soon prove
Tedious alike:  Of fellowship I speak
Such as I seek, fit to participate
All rational delight: wherein the brute
Cannot be human consort:  They rejoice
Each with their kind, lion with lioness
So fitly them in pairs thou hast combined:
Much less can bird with beast, or fish with fowl
So well converse, nor with the ox the ape
Worse then can man with beast, and least of all.
Whereto the Almighty answered, not displeased.
A nice and subtle happiness, I see,
Thou to thyself proposest, in the choice
Of thy associates, Adam! and wilt taste
No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitary.
What thinkest thou then of me, and this my state?
Seem I to thee sufficiently possessed
Of happiness, or not? who am alone
From all eternity for none I know
Second to me or like, equal much less.
How have I then with whom to hold converse,
Save with the creatures which I made, and those
To me inferiour, infinite descents
Beneath what other creatures are to thee?
He ceased I lowly answered.  To attain
The highth and depth of thy eternal ways
All human thoughts come short, Supreme of things!
Thou in thyself art perfect, and in thee
Is no deficience found:  Not so is Man,
But in degree the cause of his desire
By conversation with his like to help
Or solace his defects.  No need that thou
Shouldst propagate, already Infinite
And through all numbers absolute, though One:
But Man by number is to manifest
His single imperfection, and beget
Like of his like, his image multiplied,
In unity defective which requires
Collateral love, and dearest amity.
Thou in thy secresy although alone,
Best with thyself accompanied, seekest not
Social communication yet, so pleased,
Canst raise thy creature to what highth thou wilt
Of union or communion, deified:
I, by conversing, cannot these erect
From prone nor in their ways complacence find.
Thus I emboldened spake, and freedom used
Permissive, and acceptance found which gained
This answer from the gracious Voice Divine.
Thus far to try thee, Adam, I was pleased
And find thee knowing, not of beasts alone,
Which thou hast rightly named, but of thyself
Expressing well the spirit within thee free,
My image, not imparted to the brute
Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee
Good reason was thou freely shouldst dislike
And be so minded still:  I, ere thou spakest,
Knew it not good for Man to be alone
And no such company as then thou sawest
Intended thee for trial only brought,
To see how thou couldest judge of fit and meet:
What next I bring shall please thee, be assured,
Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,
Thy wish exactly to thy hearts desire.
He ended, or I heard no more for now
My earthly by his heavenly overpowered,
Which it had long stood under, strained to the highth
In that celestial colloquy sublime,
As with an object that excels the sense
Dazzled and spent, sunk down and sought repair
Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, called
By Nature as in aid, and closed mine eyes.
Mine eyes he closed, but open left the cell
Of fancy, my internal sight by which,
Abstract as in a trance, methought I saw,
Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape
Still glorious before whom awake I stood:
Who stooping opened my left side, and took
From thence a rib, with cordial spirits warm,
And lifeblood streaming fresh wide was the wound,
But suddenly with flesh filled up and healed:
The rib he formed and fashioned with his hands
Under his forming hands a creature grew,
Manlike, but different sex so lovely fair,
That what seemed fair in all the world, seemed now
Mean, or in her summed up, in her contained
And in her looks which from that time infused
Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before,
And into all things from her air inspired
The spirit of love and amorous delight.
She disappeared, and left me dark I waked
To find her, or for ever to deplore
Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure:
When out of hope, behold her, not far off,
Such as I saw her in my dream, adorned
With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow
To make her amiable:  On she came,
Led by her heavenly Maker, though unseen,
And guided by his voice nor uninformed
Of nuptial sanctity, and marriage rites:
Grace was in all her steps, Heaven in her eye,
In every gesture dignity and love.
I, overjoyed, could not forbear aloud.
This turn hath made amends thou hast fulfilled
Thy words, Creator bounteous and benign,
Giver of all things fair! but fairest this
Of all thy gifts! nor enviest.  I now see
Bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh, myself
Before me:  Woman is her nameof Man
Extracted: for this cause he shall forego
Father and mother, and to his wife adhere
And they shall be one flesh, one heart, one soul.
She heard me thus and though divinely brought,
Yet innocence, and virgin modesty,
Her virtue, and the conscience of her worth,
That would be wooed, and not unsought be won,
Not obvious, not obtrusive, but, retired,
The more desirable or, to say all,
Nature herself, though pure of sinful thought,
Wrought in her so, that, seeing me, she turned:
I followed her she what was honour knew,
And with obsequious majesty approved
My pleaded reason.  To the nuptial bower
I led her blushing like the morn: All Heaven,
And happy constellations, on that hour
Shed their selectest influence the Earth
Gave sign of gratulation, and each hill
Joyous the birds fresh gales and gentle airs
Whispered it to the woods, and from their wings
Flung rose, flung odours from the spicy shrub,
Disporting, till the amorous bird of night
Sung spousal, and bid haste the eveningstar
On his hill top, to light the bridal lamp.
Thus have I told thee all my state, and brought
My story to the sum of earthly bliss,
Which I enjoy and must confess to find
In all things else delight indeed, but such
As, used or not, works in the mind no change,
Nor vehement desire these delicacies
I mean of taste, sight, smell, herbs, fruits, and flowers,
Walks, and the melody of birds: but here
Far otherwise, transported I behold,
Transported touch here passion first I felt,
Commotion strange! in all enjoyments else
Superiour and unmoved here only weak
Against the charm of Beautys powerful glance.
Or Nature failed in me, and left some part
Not proof enough such object to sustain
Or, from my side subducting, took perhaps
More than enough at least on her bestowed
Too much of ornament, in outward show
Elaborate, of inward less exact.
For well I understand in the prime end
Of Nature her the inferiour, in the mind
And inward faculties, which most excel
In outward also her resembling less
His image who made both, and less expressing
The character of that dominion given
Oer other creatures:  Yet when I approach
Her loveliness, so absolute she seems
And in herself complete, so well to know
Her own, that what she wills to do or say,
Seems wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best:
All higher knowledge in her presence falls
Degraded  Wisdom in discourse with her
Loses discountenanced, and like Folly shows
Authority and Reason on her wait,
As one intended first, not after made
Occasionally and, to consummate all,
Greatness of mind and Nobleness their seat
Build in her loveliest, and create an awe
About her, as a guard angelick placed.
To whom the Angel with contracted brow.
Accuse not Nature, she hath done her part
Do thou but thine and be not diffident
Of Wisdom she deserts thee not, if thou
Dismiss not her, when most thou needest her nigh,
By attributing overmuch to things
Less excellent, as thou thyself perceivest.
For, what admirest thou, what transports thee so,
An outside? fair, no doubt, and worthy well
Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love
Not thy subjection:  Weigh with her thyself
Then value:  Ofttimes nothing profits more
Than selfesteem, grounded on just and right
Well managed of that skill the more thou knowest,
The more she will acknowledge thee her head,
And to realities yield all her shows:
Made so adorn for thy delight the more,
So awful, that with honour thou mayest love
Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise.
But if the sense of touch, whereby mankind
Is propagated, seem such dear delight
Beyond all other think the same vouchsafed
To cattle and each beast which would not be
To them made common and divulged, if aught
Therein enjoyed were worthy to subdue
The soul of man, or passion in him move.
What higher in her society thou findest
Attractive, human, rational, love still
In loving thou dost well, in passion not,
Wherein true love consists not:  Love refines
The thoughts, and heart enlarges hath his seat
In reason, and is judicious is the scale
By which to heavenly love thou mayest ascend,
Not sunk in carnal pleasure for which cause,
Among the beasts no mate for thee was found.
To whom thus, half abashed, Adam replied.
Neither her outside formed so fair, nor aught
In procreation common to all kinds,
Though higher of the genial bed by far,
And with mysterious reverence I deem,
So much delights me, as those graceful acts,
Those thousand decencies, that daily flow
From all her words and actions mixed with love
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned
Union of mind, or in us both one soul
Harmony to behold in wedded pair
More grateful than harmonious sound to the ear.
Yet these subject not I to thee disclose
What inward thence I feel, not therefore foiled,
Who meet with various objects, from the sense
Variously representing yet, still free,
Approve the best, and follow what I approve.
To love, thou blamest me not for Love, thou sayest,
Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask:
Love not the heavenly Spirits, and how their love
Express they? by looks only? or do they mix
Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch?
To whom the Angel, with a smile that glowed
Celestial rosy red, Loves proper hue,
Answered.  Let it suffice thee that thou knowest
Us happy, and without love no happiness.
Whatever pure thou in the body enjoyest,
And pure thou wert created we enjoy
In eminence and obstacle find none
Of membrane, joint, or limb, exclusive bars
Easier than air with air, if Spirits embrace,
Total they mix, union of pure with pure
Desiring, nor restrained conveyance need,
As flesh to mix with flesh, or soul with soul.
But I can now no more the parting sun
Beyond the Earths green Cape and verdant Isles
Hesperian sets, my signal to depart.
Be strong, live happy, and love!  But, first of all,
Him, whom to love is to obey, and keep
His great command take heed lest passion sway
Thy judgement to do aught, which else free will
Would not admit: thine, and of all thy sons,
The weal or woe in thee is placed beware!
I in thy persevering shall rejoice,
And all the Blest:  Stand fastto stand or fall
Free in thine own arbitrement it lies.
Perfect within, no outward aid require
And all temptation to transgress repel.
So saying, he arose whom Adam thus
Followed with benediction.  Since to part,
Go, heavenly guest, ethereal Messenger,
Sent from whose sovran goodness I adore!
Gentle to me and affable hath been
Thy condescension, and shall be honoured ever
With grateful memory:  Thou to mankind
Be good and friendly still, and oft return!
So parted they the Angel up to Heaven
From the thick shade, and Adam to his bower.



Book IX


No more of talk where God or Angel guest
With Man, as with his friend, familiar usd,
To sit indulgent, and with him partake
Rural repast permitting him the while
Venial discourse unblamd. I now must change
Those notes to tragick foul distrust, and breach
Disloyal on the part of Man, revolt,
And disobedience: on the part of Heaven
Now alienated, distance and distaste,
Anger and just rebuke, and judgement given,
That brought into this world a world of woe,
Sin and her shadow Death, and Misery
Deaths harbinger: Sad talk!yet argument
Not less but more heroick than the wrath
Of stern Achilles on his foe pursued
Thrice fugitive about Troy wall or rage
Of Turnus for Lavinia disespousd
Or Neptunes ire, or Junos, that so long
Perplexed the Greek, and Cythereas son:

   00482129
If answerable style I can obtain
Of my celestial patroness, who deigns
Her nightly visitation unimplord,
And dictates to me slumbering or inspires
Easy my unpremeditated verse:
Since first this subject for heroick song
Pleasd me long choosing, and beginning late
Not sedulous by nature to indite
Wars, hitherto the only argument
Heroick deemd chief mastery to dissect
With long and tedious havock fabled knights
In battles feignd the better fortitude
Of patience and heroick martyrdom
Unsung or to describe races and games,
Or tilting furniture, imblazond shields,
Impresses quaint, caparisons and steeds,
Bases and tinsel trappings, gorgeous knights
At joust and tournament then marshalld feast
Servd up in hall with sewers and seneshals
The skill of artifice or office mean,
Not that which justly gives heroick name
To person, or to poem.  Me, of these
Nor skilld nor studious, higher argument
Remains sufficient of itself to raise
That name, unless an age too late, or cold
Climate, or years, damp my intended wing
Depressd and much they may, if all be mine,
Not hers, who brings it nightly to my ear.
The sun was sunk, and after him the star
Of Hesperus, whose office is to bring
Twilight upon the earth, short arbiter
"twixt day and night, and now from end to end
Nights hemisphere had veild the horizon round:
When satan, who late fled before the threats
Of Gabriel out of Eden, now improvd
In meditated fraud and malice, bent
On Mans destruction, maugre what might hap
Of heavier on himself, fearless returned
From compassing the earth cautious of day,
Since Uriel, regent of the sun, descried
His entrance, and foreworned the Cherubim
That kept their watch thence full of anguish driven,
The space of seven continued nights he rode
With darkness thrice the equinoctial line
He circled four times crossed the car of night
From pole to pole, traversing each colure
On the eighth returned and, on the coast averse
From entrance or Cherubick watch, by stealth
Found unsuspected way.  There was a place,
Now not, though sin, not time, first wrought the change,
Where Tigris, at the foot of Paradise,
Into a gulf shot under ground, till part
Rose up a fountain by the tree of life:
In with the river sunk, and with it rose
Satan, involved in rising mist then sought
Where to lie hid sea he had searched, and land,
From Eden over Pontus and the pool
Maeotis, up beyond the river Ob
Downward as far antarctick and in length,
West from Orontes to the ocean barred
At Darien  thence to the land where flows
Ganges and Indus: Thus the orb he roamed
With narrow search and with inspection deep
Considered every creature, which of all
Most opportune might serve his wiles and found
The Serpent subtlest beast of all the field.
Him after long debate, irresolute
Of thoughts revolved, his final sentence chose
Fit vessel, fittest imp of fraud, in whom
To enter, and his dark suggestions hide
From sharpest sight: for, in the wily snake
Whatever sleights, none would suspicious mark,
As from his wit and native subtlety
Proceeding which, in other beasts observed,
Doubt might beget of diabolick power
Active within, beyond the sense of brute.
Thus he resolved, but first from inward grief
His bursting passion into plaints thus poured.
More justly, seat worthier of Gods, as built
With second thoughts, reforming what was old!
O Earth, how like to Heaven, if not preferred
For what God, after better, worse would build?
Terrestrial Heaven, danced round by other Heavens
That shine, yet bear their bright officious lamps,
Light above light, for thee alone, as seems,
In thee concentring all their precious beams
Of sacred influence!  As God in Heaven
Is center, yet extends to all so thou,
Centring, receivest from all those orbs: in thee,
Not in themselves, all their known virtue appears
Productive in herb, plant, and nobler birth
Of creatures animate with gradual life
Of growth, sense, reason, all summed up in Man.
With what delight could I have walked thee round,
If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange
Of hill, and valley, rivers, woods, and plains,
Now land, now sea and shores with forest crowned,
Rocks, dens, and caves!  But I in none of these
Find place or refuge and the more I see
Pleasures about me, so much more I feel
Torment within me, as from the hateful siege
Of contraries: all good to me becomes
Bane, and in Heaven much worse would be my state.
But neither here seek I, no nor in Heaven
To dwell, unless by mastering Heavens Supreme
Nor hope to be myself less miserable
By what I seek, but others to make such
As I, though thereby worse to me redound:
For only in destroying I find ease
To my relentless thoughts and, him destroyed,
Or won to what may work his utter loss,
For whom all this was made, all this will soon
Follow, as to him linked in weal or woe
In woe then that destruction wide may range:
To me shall be the glory sole among
The infernal Powers, in one day to have marred
What he, Almighty styled, six nights and days
Continued making and who knows how long
Before had been contriving? though perhaps
Not longer than since I, in one night, freed
From servitude inglorious well nigh half
The angelick name, and thinner left the throng
Of his adorers: He, to be avenged,
And to repair his numbers thus impaired,
Whether such virtue spent of old now failed
More Angels to create, if they at least
Are his created, or, to spite us more,
Determined to advance into our room
A creature formed of earth, and him endow,
Exalted from so base original,
With heavenly spoils, our spoils: What he decreed,
He effected Man he made, and for him built
Magnificent this world, and earth his seat,
Him lord pronounced and, O indignity!
Subjected to his service angelwings,
And flaming ministers to watch and tend
Their earthly charge: Of these the vigilance
I dread and, to elude, thus wrapt in mist
Of midnight vapour glide obscure, and pry
In every bush and brake, where hap may find
The serpent sleeping in whose mazy folds
To hide me, and the dark intent I bring.
O foul descent! that I, who erst contended
With Gods to sit the highest, am now constrained
Into a beast and, mixed with bestial slime,
This essence to incarnate and imbrute,
That to the highth of Deity aspired!
But what will not ambition and revenge
Descend to?  Who aspires, must down as low
As high he soared obnoxious, first or last,
To basest things.  Revenge, at first though sweet,
Bitter ere long, back on itself recoils:
Let it I reck not, so it light well aimed,
Since higher I fall short, on him who next
Provokes my envy, this new favourite
Of Heaven, this man of clay, son of despite,
Whom, us the more to spite, his Maker raised
From dust: Spite then with spite is best repaid.
So saying, through each thicket dank or dry,
Like a black mist lowcreeping, he held on
His midnightsearch, where soonest he might find
The serpent him fastsleeping soon he found
In labyrinth of many a round selfrolled,
His head the midst, well stored with subtile wiles:
Not yet in horrid shade or dismal den,
Nor nocent yet but, on the grassy herb,
Fearless unfeared he slept: in at his mouth
The Devil entered and his brutal sense,
In heart or head, possessing, soon inspired
With act intelligential but his sleep
Disturbed not, waiting close the approach of morn.
Now, when as sacred light began to dawn
In Eden on the humid flowers, that breathed
Their morning incense, when all things, that breathe,
From the Earths great altar send up silent praise
To the Creator, and his nostrils fill
With grateful smell, forth came the human pair,
And joined their vocal worship to the quire
Of creatures wanting voice that done, partake
The season prime for sweetest scents and airs:
Then commune, how that day they best may ply
Their growing work: for much their work outgrew
The hands dispatch of two gardening so wide,
And Eve first to her husband thus began.
Adam, well may we labour still to dress
This garden, still to tend plant, herb, and flower,
Our pleasant task enjoined but, till more hands
Aid us, the work under our labour grows,
Luxurious by restraint what we by day
Lop overgrown, or prune, or prop, or bind,
One night or two with wanton growth derides
Tending to wild.  Thou therefore now advise,
Or bear what to my mind first thoughts present:
Let us divide our labours thou, where choice
Leads thee, or where most needs, whether to wind
The woodbine round this arbour, or direct
The clasping ivy where to climb while I,
In yonder spring of roses intermixed
With myrtle, find what to redress till noon:
For, while so near each other thus all day
Our task we choose, what wonder if so near
Looks intervene and smiles, or object new
Casual discourse draw on which intermits
Our days work, brought to little, though begun
Early, and the hour of supper comes unearned?
To whom mild answer Adam thus returned.
Sole Eve, associate sole, to me beyond
Compare above all living creatures dear!
Well hast thou motioned, well thy thoughts employed,
How we might best fulfil the work which here
God hath assigned us nor of me shalt pass
Unpraised: for nothing lovelier can be found
In woman, than to study houshold good,
And good works in her husband to promote.
Yet not so strictly hath our Lord imposed
Labour, as to debar us when we need
Refreshment, whether food, or talk between,
Food of the mind, or this sweet intercourse
Of looks and smiles for smiles from reason flow,
To brute denied, and are of love the food
Love, not the lowest end of human life.
For not to irksome toil, but to delight,
He made us, and delight to reason joined.
These paths and bowers doubt not but our joint hands
Will keep from wilderness with ease, as wide
As we need walk, till younger hands ere long
Assist us But, if much converse perhaps
Thee satiate, to short absence I could yield:
For solitude sometimes is best society,
And short retirement urges sweet return.
But other doubt possesses me, lest harm
Befall thee severed from me for thou knowest
What hath been warned us, what malicious foe
Envying our happiness, and of his own
Despairing, seeks to work us woe and shame
By sly assault and somewhere nigh at hand
Watches, no doubt, with greedy hope to find
His wish and best advantage, us asunder
Hopeless to circumvent us joined, where each
To other speedy aid might lend at need:
Whether his first design be to withdraw
Our fealty from God, or to disturb
Conjugal love, than which perhaps no bliss
Enjoyed by us excites his envy more
Or this, or worse, leave not the faithful side
That gave thee being, still shades thee, and protects.
The wife, where danger or dishonour lurks,
Safest and seemliest by her husband stays,
Who guards her, or with her the worst endures.
To whom the virgin majesty of Eve,
As one who loves, and some unkindness meets,
With sweet austere composure thus replied.
Offspring of Heaven and Earth, and all Earths Lord!
That such an enemy we have, who seeks
Our ruin, both by thee informed I learn,
And from the parting Angel overheard,
As in a shady nook I stood behind,
Just then returned at shut of evening flowers.
But, that thou shouldst my firmness therefore doubt
To God or thee, because we have a foe
May tempt it, I expected not to hear.
His violence thou fearest not, being such
As we, not capable of death or pain,
Can either not receive, or can repel.
His fraud is then thy fear which plain infers
Thy equal fear, that my firm faith and love
Can by his fraud be shaken or seduced
Thoughts, which how found they harbour in thy breast,
Adam, misthought of her to thee so dear?
To whom with healing words Adam replied.
Daughter of God and Man, immortal Eve!
For such thou art from sin and blame entire:
Not diffident of thee do I dissuade
Thy absence from my sight, but to avoid
The attempt itself, intended by our foe.
For he who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses
The tempted with dishonour foul supposed
Not incorruptible of faith, not proof
Against temptation: Thou thyself with scorn
And anger wouldst resent the offered wrong,
Though ineffectual found: misdeem not then,
If such affront I labour to avert
From thee alone, which on us both at once
The enemy, though bold, will hardly dare
Or daring, first on me the assault shall light.
Nor thou his malice and false guile contemn
Subtle he needs must be, who could seduce
Angels nor think superfluous others aid.
I, from the influence of thy looks, receive
Access in every virtue in thy sight
More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were
Of outward strength while shame, thou looking on,
Shame to be overcome or overreached,
Would utmost vigour raise, and raised unite.
Why shouldst not thou like sense within thee feel
When I am present, and thy trial choose
With me, best witness of thy virtue tried?
So spake domestick Adam in his care
And matrimonial love but Eve, who thought
Less attributed to her faith sincere,
Thus her reply with accent sweet renewed.
If this be our condition, thus to dwell
In narrow circuit straitened by a foe,
Subtle or violent, we not endued
Single with like defence, wherever met
How are we happy, still in fear of harm?
But harm precedes not sin: only our foe,
Tempting, affronts us with his foul esteem
Of our integrity: his foul esteem
Sticks no dishonour on our front, but turns
Foul on himself then wherefore shunned or feared
By us? who rather double honour gain
From his surmise proved false find peace within,
Favour from Heaven, our witness, from the event.
And what is faith, love, virtue, unassayed
Alone, without exteriour help sustained?
Let us not then suspect our happy state
Left so imperfect by the Maker wise,
As not secure to single or combined.
Frail is our happiness, if this be so,
And Eden were no Eden, thus exposed.
To whom thus Adam fervently replied.
O Woman, best are all things as the will
Of God ordained them: His creating hand
Nothing imperfect or deficient left
Of all that he created, much less Man,
Or aught that might his happy state secure,
Secure from outward force within himself
The danger lies, yet lies within his power:
Against his will he can receive no harm.
But God left free the will for what obeys
Reason, is free and Reason he made right,
But bid her well be ware, and still erect
Lest, by some fairappearing good surprised,
She dictate false and misinform the will
To do what God expressly hath forbid.
Not then mistrust, but tender love, enjoins,
That I should mind thee oft and mind thou me.
Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve
Since Reason not impossibly may meet
Some specious object by the foe suborned,
And fall into deception unaware,
Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warned.
Seek not temptation then, which to avoid
Were better, and most likely if from me
Thou sever not: Trial will come unsought.
Wouldst thou approve thy constancy, approve
First thy obedience the other who can know,
Not seeing thee attempted, who attest?
But, if thou think, trial unsought may find
Us both securer than thus warned thou seemest,
Go for thy stay, not free, absents thee more
Go in thy native innocence, rely
On what thou hast of virtue summon all!
For God towards thee hath done his part, do thine.
So spake the patriarch of mankind but Eve
Persisted yet submiss, though last, replied.
With thy permission then, and thus forewarned
Chiefly by what thy own last reasoning words
Touched only that our trial, when least sought,
May find us both perhaps far less prepared,
The willinger I go, nor much expect
A foe so proud will first the weaker seek
So bent, the more shall shame him his repulse.
Thus saying, from her husbands hand her hand
Soft she withdrew and, like a WoodNymph light,
Oread or Dryad, or of Delias train,
Betook her to the groves but Delias self
In gait surpassed, and Goddesslike deport,
Though not as she with bow and quiver armed,
But with such gardening tools as Art yet rude,
Guiltless of fire, had formed, or Angels brought.
To Pales, or Pomona, thus adorned,
Likest she seemed, Pomona when she fled
Vertumnus, or to Ceres in her prime,
Yet virgin of Proserpina from Jove.
Her long with ardent look his eye pursued
Delighted, but desiring more her stay.
Oft he to her his charge of quick return
Repeated she to him as oft engaged
To be returned by noon amid the bower,
And all things in best order to invite
Noontide repast, or afternoons repose.
O much deceived, much failing, hapless Eve,
Of thy presumed return! event perverse!
Thou never from that hour in Paradise
Foundst either sweet repast, or sound repose
Such ambush, hid among sweet flowers and shades,
Waited with hellish rancour imminent
To intercept thy way, or send thee back
Despoiled of innocence, of faith, of bliss!
For now, and since first break of dawn, the Fiend,
Mere serpent in appearance, forth was come
And on his quest, where likeliest he might find
The only two of mankind, but in them
The whole included race, his purposed prey.
In bower and field he sought, where any tuft
Of grove or gardenplot more pleasant lay,
Their tendance, or plantation for delight
By fountain or by shady rivulet
He sought them both, but wished his hap might find
Eve separate he wished, but not with hope
Of what so seldom chanced when to his wish,
Beyond his hope, Eve separate he spies,
Veiled in a cloud of fragrance, where she stood,
Half spied, so thick the roses blushing round
About her glowed, oft stooping to support
Each flower of slender stalk, whose head, though gay
Carnation, purple, azure, or specked with gold,
Hung drooping unsustained them she upstays
Gently with myrtle band, mindless the while
Herself, though fairest unsupported flower,
From her best prop so far, and storm so nigh.
Nearer he drew, and many a walk traversed
Of stateliest covert, cedar, pine, or palm
Then voluble and bold, now hid, now seen,
Among thickwoven arborets, and flowers
Imbordered on each bank, the hand of Eve:
Spot more delicious than those gardens feigned
Or of revived Adonis, or renowned
Alcinous, host of old Laertes son
Or that, not mystick, where the sapient king
Held dalliance with his fair Egyptian spouse.
Much he the place admired, the person more.
As one who long in populous city pent,
Where houses thick and sewers annoy the air,
Forth issuing on a summers morn, to breathe
Among the pleasant villages and farms
Adjoined, from each thing met conceives delight
The smell of grain, or tedded grass, or kine,
Or dairy, each rural sight, each rural sound
If chance, with nymphlike step, fair virgin pass,
What pleasing seemed, for her now pleases more
She most, and in her look sums all delight:
Such pleasure took the Serpent to behold
This flowery plat, the sweet recess of Eve
Thus early, thus alone: Her heavenly form
Angelick, but more soft, and feminine,
Her graceful innocence, her every air
Of gesture, or least action, overawed
His malice, and with rapine sweet bereaved
His fierceness of the fierce intent it brought:
That space the Evilone abstracted stood
From his own evil, and for the time remained
Stupidly good of enmity disarmed,
Of guile, of hate, of envy, of revenge:
But the hot Hell that always in him burns,
Though in mid Heaven, soon ended his delight,
And tortures him now more, the more he sees
Of pleasure, not for him ordained: then soon
Fierce hate he recollects, and all his thoughts
Of mischief, gratulating, thus excites.
Thoughts, whither have ye led me! with what sweet
Compulsion thus transported, to forget
What hither brought us! hate, not lovenor hope
Of Paradise for Hell, hope here to taste
Of pleasure but all pleasure to destroy,
Save what is in destroying other joy
To me is lost.  Then, let me not let pass
Occasion which now smiles behold alone
The woman, opportune to all attempts,
Her husband, for I view far round, not nigh,
Whose higher intellectual more I shun,
And strength, of courage haughty, and of limb
Heroick built, though of terrestrial mould
Foe not informidable! exempt from wound,
I not so much hath Hell debased, and pain
Enfeebled me, to what I was in Heaven.
She fair, divinely fair, fit love for Gods!
Not terrible, though terrour be in love
And beauty, not approached by stronger hate,
Hate stronger, under show of love well feigned
The way which to her ruin now I tend.
So spake the enemy of mankind, enclosed
In serpent, inmate bad! and toward Eve
Addressed his way: not with indented wave,
Prone on the ground, as since but on his rear,
Circular base of rising folds, that towered
Fold above fold, a surging maze! his head
Crested aloft, and carbuncle his eyes
With burnished neck of verdant gold, erect
Amidst his circling spires, that on the grass
Floated redundant: pleasing was his shape
And lovely never since of serpentkind
Lovelier, not those that in Illyria changed,
Hermione and Cadmus, or the god
In Epidaurus nor to which transformed
Ammonian Jove, or Capitoline, was seen
He with Olympias this with her who bore
Scipio, the highth of Rome.  With tract oblique
At first, as one who sought access, but feared
To interrupt, sidelong he works his way.
As when a ship, by skilful steersmen wrought
Nigh rivers mouth or foreland, where the wind
Veers oft, as oft so steers, and shifts her sail:
So varied he, and of his tortuous train
Curled many a wanton wreath in sight of Eve,
To lure her eye she, busied, heard the sound
Of rusling leaves, but minded not, as used
To such disport before her through the field,
From every beast more duteous at her call,
Than at Circean call the herd disguised.
He, bolder now, uncalled before her stood,
But as in gaze admiring: oft he bowed
His turret crest, and sleek enamelled neck,
Fawning and licked the ground whereon she trod.
His gentle dumb expression turned at length
The eye of Eve to mark his play he, glad
Of her attention gained, with serpenttongue
Organick, or impulse of vocal air,
His fraudulent temptation thus began.
Wonder not, sovran Mistress, if perhaps
Thou canst, who art sole wonder! much less arm
Thy looks, the Heaven of mildness, with disdain,
Displeased that I approach thee thus, and gaze
Insatiate I thus singlenor have feared
Thy awful brow, more awful thus retired.
Fairest resemblance of thy Maker fair,
Thee all things living gaze on, all things thine
By gift, and thy celestial beauty adore
With ravishment beheld! there best beheld,
Where universally admired but here
In this enclosure wild, these beasts among,
Beholders rude, and shallow to discern
Half what in thee is fair, one man except,
Who sees thee? and what is one? who should be seen
A Goddess among Gods, adored and served
By Angels numberless, thy daily train.
So glozed the Tempter, and his proem tuned:
Into the heart of Eve his words made way,
Though at the voice much marvelling at length,
Not unamazed, she thus in answer spake.
What may this mean? language of man pronounced
By tongue of brute, and human sense expressed?
The first, at least, of these I thought denied
To beasts whom God, on their creationday,
Created mute to all articulate sound:
The latter I demur for in their looks
Much reason, and in their actions, oft appears.
Thee, Serpent, subtlest beast of all the field
I knew, but not with human voice endued
Redouble then this miracle, and say,
How camest thou speakable of mute, and how
To me so friendly grown above the rest
Of brutal kind, that daily are in sight?
Say, for such wonder claims attention due.
To whom the guileful Tempter thus replied.
Empress of this fair world, resplendent Eve!
Easy to me it is to tell thee all
What thou commandest and right thou shouldst be obeyed:
I was at first as other beasts that graze
The trodden herb, of abject thoughts and low,
As was my food nor aught but food discerned
Or sex, and apprehended nothing high:
Till, on a day roving the field, I chanced
A goodly tree far distant to behold
Loaden with fruit of fairest colours mixed,
Ruddy and gold: I nearer drew to gaze
When from the boughs a savoury odour blown,
Grateful to appetite, more pleased my sense
Than smell of sweetest fennel, or the teats
Of ewe or goat dropping with milk at even,
Unsucked of lamb or kid, that tend their play.
To satisfy the sharp desire I had
Of tasting those fair apples, I resolved
Not to defer hunger and thirst at once,
Powerful persuaders, quickened at the scent
Of that alluring fruit, urged me so keen.
About the mossy trunk I wound me soon
For, high from ground, the branches would require
Thy utmost reach or Adams: Round the tree
All other beasts that saw, with like desire
Longing and envying stood, but could not reach.
Amid the tree now got, where plenty hung
Tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill
I spared not for, such pleasure till that hour,
At feed or fountain, never had I found.
Sated at length, ere long I might perceive
Strange alteration in me, to degree
Of reason in my inward powers and speech
Wanted not long though to this shape retained.
Thenceforth to speculations high or deep
I turned my thoughts, and with capacious mind
Considered all things visible in Heaven,
Or Earth, or Middle all things fair and good:
But all that fair and good in thy divine
Semblance, and in thy beautys heavenly ray,
United I beheld no fair to thine
Equivalent or second! which compelled
Me thus, though importune perhaps, to come
And gaze, and worship thee of right declared
Sovran of creatures, universal Dame!
So talked the spirited sly Snake and Eve,
Yet more amazed, unwary thus replied.
Serpent, thy overpraising leaves in doubt
The virtue of that fruit, in thee first proved:
But say, where grows the tree? from hence how far?
For many are the trees of God that grow
In Paradise, and various, yet unknown
To us in such abundance lies our choice,
As leaves a greater store of fruit untouched,
Still hanging incorruptible, till men
Grow up to their provision, and more hands
Help to disburden Nature of her birth.
To whom the wily Adder, blithe and glad.
Empress, the way is ready, and not long
Beyond a row of myrtles, on a flat,
Fast by a fountain, one small thicket past
Of blowing myrrh and balm: if thou accept
My conduct, I can bring thee thither soon
Lead then, said Eve.  He, leading, swiftly rolled
In tangles, and made intricate seem straight,
To mischief swift.  Hope elevates, and joy
Brightens his crest as when a wandering fire,
Compact of unctuous vapour, which the night
Condenses, and the cold environs round,
Kindled through agitation to a flame,
Which oft, they say, some evil Spirit attends,
Hovering and blazing with delusive light,
Misleads the amazed nightwanderer from his way
To bogs and mires, and oft through pond or pool
There swallowed up and lost, from succour far.
So glistered the dire Snake, and into fraud
Led Eve, our credulous mother, to the tree
Of prohibition, root of all our woe
Which when she saw, thus to her guide she spake.
Serpent, we might have spared our coming hither,
Fruitless to me, though fruit be here to excess,
The credit of whose virtue rest with thee
Wonderous indeed, if cause of such effects.
But of this tree we may not taste nor touch
God so commanded, and left that command
Sole daughter of his voice the rest, we live
Law to ourselves our reason is our law.
To whom the Tempter guilefully replied.
Indeed! hath God then said that of the fruit
Of all these gardentrees ye shall not eat,
Yet Lords declared of all in earth or air?
To whom thus Eve, yet sinless.  Of the fruit
Of each tree in the garden we may eat
But of the fruit of this fair tree amidst
The garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat
Thereof, nor shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
She scarce had said, though brief, when now more bold
The Tempter, but with show of zeal and love
To Man, and indignation at his wrong,
New part puts on and, as to passion moved,
Fluctuates disturbed, yet comely and in act
Raised, as of some great matter to begin.
As when of old some orator renowned,
In Athens or free Rome, where eloquence
Flourished, since mute! to some great cause addressed,
Stood in himself collected while each part,
Motion, each act, won audience ere the tongue
Sometimes in highth began, as no delay
Of preface brooking, through his zeal of right:
So standing, moving, or to highth up grown,
The Tempter, all impassioned, thus began.
O sacred, wise, and wisdomgiving Plant,
Mother of science! now I feel thy power
Within me clear not only to discern
Things in their causes, but to trace the ways
Of highest agents, deemed however wise.
Queen of this universe! do not believe
Those rigid threats of death: ye shall not die:
How should you? by the fruit? it gives you life
To knowledge by the threatener? look on me,
Me, who have touched and tasted yet both live,
And life more perfect have attained than Fate
Meant me, by venturing higher than my lot.
Shall that be shut to Man, which to the Beast
Is open? or will God incense his ire
For such a petty trespass? and not praise
Rather your dauntless virtue, whom the pain
Of death denounced, whatever thing death be,
Deterred not from achieving what might lead
To happier life, knowledge of good and evil
Of good, how just? of evil, if what is evil
Be real, why not known, since easier shunned?
God therefore cannot hurt ye, and be just
Not just, not God not feared then, nor obeyed:
Your fear itself of death removes the fear.
Why then was this forbid?  Why, but to awe
Why, but to keep ye low and ignorant,
His worshippers?  He knows that in the day
Ye eat thereof, your eyes that seem so clear,
Yet are but dim, shall perfectly be then
Opened and cleared, and ye shall be as Gods,
Knowing both good and evil, as they know.
That ye shall be as Gods, since I as Man,
Internal Man, is but proportion meet
I, of brute, human ye, of human, Gods.
So ye shall die perhaps, by putting off
Human, to put on Gods death to be wished,
Though threatened, which no worse than this can bring.
And what are Gods, that Man may not become
As they, participating Godlike food?
The Gods are first, and that advantage use
On our belief, that all from them proceeds:
I question it for this fair earth I see,
Warmed by the sun, producing every kind
Them, nothing: if they all things, who enclosed
Knowledge of good and evil in this tree,
That whoso eats thereof, forthwith attains
Wisdom without their leave? and wherein lies
The offence, that Man should thus attain to know?
What can your knowledge hurt him, or this tree
Impart against his will, if all be his?
Or is it envy? and can envy dwell
In heavenly breasts?  These, these, and many more
Causes import your need of this fair fruit.
Goddess humane, reach then, and freely taste!
He ended and his words, replete with guile,
Into her heart too easy entrance won:
Fixed on the fruit she gazed, which to behold
Might tempt alone and in her ears the sound
Yet rung of his persuasive words, impregned
With reason, to her seeming, and with truth:
Mean while the hour of noon drew on, and waked
An eager appetite, raised by the smell
So savoury of that fruit, which with desire,
Inclinable now grown to touch or taste,
Solicited her longing eye yet first
Pausing a while, thus to herself she mused.
Great are thy virtues, doubtless, best of fruits,
Though kept from man, and worthy to be admired
Whose taste, too long forborn, at first assay
Gave elocution to the mute, and taught
The tongue not made for speech to speak thy praise:
Thy praise he also, who forbids thy use,
Conceals not from us, naming thee the tree
Of knowledge, knowledge both of good and evil
Forbids us then to taste! but his forbidding
Commends thee more, while it infers the good
By thee communicated, and our want:
For good unknown sure is not had or, had
And yet unknown, is as not had at all.
In plain then, what forbids he but to know,
Forbids us good, forbids us to be wise?
Such prohibitions bind not.  But, if death
Bind us with afterbands, what profits then
Our inward freedom?  In the day we eat
Of this fair fruit, our doom is, we shall die!
How dies the Serpent? he hath eaten and lives,
And knows, and speaks, and reasons, and discerns,
Irrational till then.  For us alone
Was death invented? or to us denied
This intellectual food, for beasts reserved?
For beasts it seems: yet that one beast which first
Hath tasted envies not, but brings with joy
The good befallen him, author unsuspect,
Friendly to man, far from deceit or guile.
What fear I then? rather, what know to fear
Under this ignorance of good and evil,
Of God or death, of law or penalty?
Here grows the cure of all, this fruit divine,
Fair to the eye, inviting to the taste,
Of virtue to make wise:  What hinders then
To reach, and feed at once both body and mind?
So saying, her rash hand in evil hour
Forth reaching to the fruit, she plucked, she eat!
Earth felt the wound and Nature from her seat,
Sighing through all her works, gave signs of woe,
That all was lost.  Back to the thicket slunk
The guilty Serpent and well mightfor Eve,
Intent now wholly on her taste, nought else
Regarded such delight till then, as seemed,
In fruit she never tasted, whether true
Or fancied so, through expectation high
Of knowledge not was Godhead from her thought.
Greedily she ingorged without restraint,
And knew not eating death:  Satiate at length,
And hightened as with wine, jocund and boon,
Thus to herself she pleasingly began.
O sovran, virtuous, precious of all trees
In Paradise! of operation blest
To sapience, hitherto obscured, infamed.
And thy fair fruit let hang, as to no end
Created but henceforth my early care,
Not without song, each morning, and due praise,
Shall tend thee, and the fertile burden ease
Of thy full branches offered free to all
Till, dieted by thee, I grow mature
In knowledge, as the Gods, who all things know
Though others envy what they cannot give:
For, had the gift been theirs, it had not here
Thus grown.  Experience, next, to thee I owe,
Best guide not following thee, I had remained
In ignorance thou openest wisdoms way,
And givest access, though secret she retire.
And I perhaps am secret: Heaven is high,
High, and remote to see from thence distinct
Each thing on Earth and other care perhaps
May have diverted from continual watch
Our great Forbidder, safe with all his spies
About him.  But to Adam in what sort
Shall I appear? shall I to him make known
As yet my change, and give him to partake
Full happiness with me, or rather not,
But keeps the odds of knowledge in my power
Without copartner? so to add what wants
In female sex, the more to draw his love,
And render me more equal and perhaps,
A thing not undesirable, sometime
Superiour for, inferiour, who is free
This may be well:  But what if God have seen,
And death ensue? then I shall be no more!
And Adam, wedded to another Eve,
Shall live with her enjoying, I extinct
A death to think!  Confirmed then I resolve,
Adam shall share with me in bliss or woe:
So dear I love him, that with him all deaths
I could endure, without him live no life.
So saying, from the tree her step she turned
But first low reverence done, as to the Power
That dwelt within, whose presence had infused
Into the plant sciential sap, derived
From nectar, drink of Gods.  Adam the while,
Waiting desirous her return, had wove
Of choicest flowers a garland, to adorn
Her tresses, and her rural labours crown
As reapers oft are wont their harvestqueen.
Great joy he promised to his thoughts, and new
Solace in her return, so long delayed:
Yet oft his heart, divine of something ill,
Misgave him he the faltering measure felt
And forth to meet her went, the way she took
That morn when first they parted: by the tree
Of knowledge he must pass there he her met,
Scarce from the tree returning in her hand
A bough of fairest fruit, that downy smiled,
New gathered, and ambrosial smell diffused.
To him she hasted in her face excuse
Came prologue, and apology too prompt
Which, with bland words at will, she thus addressed.
Hast thou not wondered, Adam, at my stay?
Thee I have missed, and thought it long, deprived
Thy presence agony of love till now
Not felt, nor shall be twice for never more
Mean I to try, what rash untried I sought,
The pain of absence from thy sight.  But strange
Hath been the cause, and wonderful to hear:
This tree is not, as we are told, a tree
Of danger tasted, nor to evil unknown
Opening the way, but of divine effect
To open eyes, and make them Gods who taste
And hath been tasted such:  The serpent wise,
Or not restrained as we, or not obeying,
Hath eaten of the fruit and is become,
Not dead, as we are threatened, but thenceforth
Endued with human voice and human sense,
Reasoning to admiration and with me
Persuasively hath so prevailed, that I
Have also tasted, and have also found
The effects to correspond opener mine eyes,
Dim erst, dilated spirits, ampler heart,
And growing up to Godhead which for thee
Chiefly I sought, without thee can despise.
For bliss, as thou hast part, to me is bliss
Tedious, unshared with thee, and odious soon.
Thou therefore also taste, that equal lot
May join us, equal joy, as equal love
Lest, thou not tasting, different degree
Disjoin us, and I then too late renounce
Deity for thee, when Fate will not permit.
Thus Eve with countenance blithe her story told
But in her cheek distemper flushing glowed.
On the other side Adam, soon as he heard
The fatal trespass done by Eve, amazed,
Astonied stood and blank, while horrour chill
Ran through his veins, and all his joints relaxed
From his slack hand the garland wreathed for Eve
Down dropt, and all the faded roses shed:
Speechless he stood and pale, till thus at length
First to himself he inward silence broke.
O fairest of Creation, last and best
Of all Gods works, Creature in whom excelled
Whatever can to sight or thought be formed,
Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet!
How art thou lost! how on a sudden lost,
Defaced, deflowered, and now to death devote!
Rather, how hast thou yielded to transgress
The strict forbiddance, how to violate
The sacred fruit forbidden!  Some cursed fraud
Of enemy hath beguiled thee, yet unknown,
And me with thee hath ruined for with thee
Certain my resolution is to die:
How can I live without thee! how forego
Thy sweet converse, and love so dearly joined,
To live again in these wild woods forlorn!
Should God create another Eve, and I
Another rib afford, yet loss of thee
Would never from my heart: no, no!I feel
The link of Nature draw me: flesh of flesh,
Bone of my bone thou art, and from thy state
Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe.
So having said, as one from sad dismay
Recomforted, and after thoughts disturbed
Submitting to what seemed remediless,
Thus in calm mood his words to Eve he turned.
Bold deed thou hast presumed, adventurous Eve,
And peril great provoked, who thus hast dared,
Had it been only coveting to eye
That sacred fruit, sacred to abstinence,
Much more to taste it under ban to touch.
But past who can recall, or done undo?
Not God Omnipotent, nor Fate yet so
Perhaps thou shalt not die, perhaps the fact
Is not so heinous now, foretasted fruit,
Profaned first by the serpent, by him first
Made common, and unhallowed, ere our taste
Nor yet on him found deadly yet he lives
Lives, as thou saidst, and gains to live, as Man,
Higher degree of life inducement strong
To us, as likely tasting to attain
Proportional ascent which cannot be
But to be Gods, or Angels, demiGods.
Nor can I think that God, Creator wise,
Though threatening, will in earnest so destroy
Us his prime creatures, dignified so high,
Set over all his works which in our fall,
For us created, needs with us must fail,
Dependant made so God shall uncreate,
Be frustrate, do, undo, and labour lose
Not well conceived of God, who, though his power
Creation could repeat, yet would be loth
Us to abolish, lest the Adversary
Triumph, and say "Fickle their state whom God
"Most favours who can please him long? Me first
"He ruined, now Mankind whom will he next?"
Matter of scorn, not to be given the Foe.
However I with thee have fixed my lot,
Certain to undergo like doom:  If death
Consort with thee, death is to me as life
So forcible within my heart I feel
The bond of Nature draw me to my own
My own in thee, for what thou art is mine
Our state cannot be severed we are one,
One flesh to lose thee were to lose myself.
So Adam and thus Eve to him replied.
O glorious trial of exceeding love,
Illustrious evidence, example high!
Engaging me to emulate but, short
Of thy perfection, how shall I attain,
Adam, from whose dear side I boast me sprung,
And gladly of our union hear thee speak,
One heart, one soul in both whereof good proof
This day affords, declaring thee resolved,
Rather than death, or aught than death more dread,
Shall separate us, linked in love so dear,
To undergo with me one guilt, one crime,
If any be, of tasting this fair fruit
Whose virtue for of good still good proceeds,
Direct, or by occasion, hath presented
This happy trial of thy love, which else
So eminently never had been known?
Were it I thought death menaced would ensue
This my attempt, I would sustain alone
The worst, and not persuade thee, rather die
Deserted, than oblige thee with a fact
Pernicious to thy peace chiefly assured
Remarkably so late of thy so true,
So faithful, love unequalled: but I feel
Far otherwise the event not death, but life
Augmented, opened eyes, new hopes, new joys,
Taste so divine, that what of sweet before
Hath touched my sense, flat seems to this, and harsh.
On my experience, Adam, freely taste,
And fear of death deliver to the winds.
So saying, she embraced him, and for joy
Tenderly wept much won, that he his love
Had so ennobled, as of choice to incur
Divine displeasure for her sake, or death.
In recompence for such compliance bad
Such recompence best merits from the bough
She gave him of that fair enticing fruit
With liberal hand: he scrupled not to eat,
Against his better knowledge not deceived,
But fondly overcome with female charm.
Earth trembled from her entrails, as again
In pangs and Nature gave a second groan
Sky loured and, muttering thunder, some sad drops
Wept at completing of the mortal sin
Original: while Adam took no thought,
Eating his fill nor Eve to iterate
Her former trespass feared, the more to sooth
Him with her loved society that now,
As with new wine intoxicated both,
They swim in mirth, and fancy that they feel
Divinity within them breeding wings,
Wherewith to scorn the earth:  But that false fruit
Far other operation first displayed,
Carnal desire inflaming he on Eve
Began to cast lascivious eyes she him
As wantonly repaid in lust they burn:
Till Adam thus gan Eve to dalliance move.
Eve, now I see thou art exact of taste,
And elegant, of sapience no small part
Since to each meaning savour we apply,
And palate call judicious I the praise
Yield thee, so well this day thou hast purveyed.
Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstained
From this delightful fruit, nor known till now
True relish, tasting if such pleasure be
In things to us forbidden, it might be wished,
For this one tree had been forbidden ten.
But come, so well refreshed, now let us play,
As meet is, after such delicious fare
For never did thy beauty, since the day
I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorned
With all perfections, so inflame my sense
With ardour to enjoy thee, fairer now
Than ever bounty of this virtuous tree!
So said he, and forbore not glance or toy
Of amorous intent well understood
Of Eve, whose eye darted contagious fire.
Her hand he seised and to a shady bank,
Thick overhead with verdant roof imbowered,
He led her nothing loth flowers were the couch,
Pansies, and violets, and asphodel,
And hyacinth  Earths freshest softest lap.
There they their fill of love and loves disport
Took largely, of their mutual guilt the seal,
The solace of their sin till dewy sleep
Oppressed them, wearied with their amorous play,
Soon as the force of that fallacious fruit,
That with exhilarating vapour bland
About their spirits had played, and inmost powers
Made err, was now exhaled and grosser sleep,
Bred of unkindly fumes, with conscious dreams
Incumbered, now had left them up they rose
As from unrest and, each the other viewing,
Soon found their eyes how opened, and their minds
How darkened innocence, that as a veil
Had shadowed them from knowing ill, was gone
Just confidence, and native righteousness,
And honour, from about them, naked left
To guilty Shame he covered, but his robe
Uncovered more.  So rose the Danite strong,
Herculean Samson, from the harlotlap
Of Philistean Dalilah, and waked
Shorn of his strength.  They destitute and bare
Of all their virtue:  Silent, and in face
Confounded, long they sat, as strucken mute:
Till Adam, though not less than Eve abashed,
At length gave utterance to these words constrained.
O Eve, in evil hour thou didst give ear
To that false worm, of whomsoever taught
To counterfeit Mans voice true in our fall,
False in our promised rising since our eyes
Opened we find indeed, and find we know
Both good and evil good lost, and evil got
Bad fruit of knowledge, if this be to know
Which leaves us naked thus, of honour void,
Of innocence, of faith, of purity,
Our wonted ornaments now soiled and stained,
And in our faces evident the signs
Of foul concupiscence whence evil store
Even shame, the last of evils of the first
Be sure then.How shall I behold the face
Henceforth of God or Angel, erst with joy
And rapture so oft beheld?  Those heavenly shapes
Will dazzle now this earthly with their blaze
Insufferably bright.  O! might I here
In solitude live savage in some glade
Obscured, where highest woods, impenetrable
To star or sunlight, spread their umbrage broad
And brown as evening:  Cover me, ye Pines!
Ye Cedars, with innumerable boughs
Hide me, where I may never see them more!
But let us now, as in bad plight, devise
What best may for the present serve to hide
The parts of each from other, that seem most
To shame obnoxious, and unseemliest seen
Some tree, whose broad smooth leaves together sewed,
And girded on our loins, may cover round
Those middle parts that this new comer, Shame,
There sit not, and reproach us as unclean.
So counselled he, and both together went
Into the thickest wood there soon they chose
The figtree not that kind for fruit renowned,
But such as at this day, to Indians known,
In Malabar or Decan spreads her arms
Branching so broad and long, that in the ground
The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow
About the mother tree, a pillared shade
High overarched, and echoing walks between:
There oft the Indian herdsman, shunning heat,
Shelters in cool, and tends his pasturing herds
At loopholes cut through thickest shade:  Those leaves
They gathered, broad as Amazonian targe
And, with what skill they had, together sewed,
To gird their waist vain covering, if to hide
Their guilt and dreaded shame!  O, how unlike
To that first naked glory!  Such of late
Columbus found the American, so girt
With feathered cincture naked else, and wild
Among the trees on isles and woody shores.
Thus fenced, and, as they thought, their shame in part
Covered, but not at rest or ease of mind,
They sat them down to weep nor only tears
Rained at their eyes, but high winds worse within
Began to rise, high passions, anger, hate,
Mistrust, suspicion, discord and shook sore
Their inward state of mind, calm region once
And full of peace, now tost and turbulent:
For Understanding ruled not, and the Will
Heard not her lore both in subjection now
To sensual Appetite, who from beneath
Usurping over sovran Reason claimed
Superiour sway: From thus distempered breast,
Adam, estranged in look and altered style,
Speech intermitted thus to Eve renewed.
Would thou hadst hearkened to my words, and staid
With me, as I besought thee, when that strange
Desire of wandering, this unhappy morn,
I know not whence possessed thee we had then
Remained still happy not, as now, despoiled
Of all our good shamed, naked, miserable!
Let none henceforth seek needless cause to approve
The faith they owe when earnestly they seek
Such proof, conclude, they then begin to fail.
To whom, soon moved with touch of blame, thus Eve.
What words have passed thy lips, Adam severe!
Imputest thou that to my default, or will
Of wandering, as thou callest it, which who knows
But might as ill have happened thou being by,
Or to thyself perhaps?  Hadst thou been there,
Or here the attempt, thou couldst not have discerned
Fraud in the Serpent, speaking as he spake
No ground of enmity between us known,
Why he should mean me ill, or seek to harm.
Was I to have never parted from thy side?
As good have grown there still a lifeless rib.
Being as I am, why didst not thou, the head,
Command me absolutely not to go,
Going into such danger, as thou saidst?
Too facile then, thou didst not much gainsay
Nay, didst permit, approve, and fair dismiss.
Hadst thou been firm and fixed in thy dissent,
Neither had I transgressed, nor thou with me.
To whom, then first incensed, Adam replied.
Is this the love, is this the recompence
Of mine to thee, ingrateful Eve! expressed
Immutable, when thou wert lost, not I
Who might have lived, and joyed immortal bliss,
Yet willingly chose rather death with thee?
And am I now upbraided as the cause
Of thy transgressing?  Not enough severe,
It seems, in thy restraint:  What could I more
I warned thee, I admonished thee, foretold
The danger, and the lurking enemy
That lay in wait beyond this, had been force
And force upon free will hath here no place.
But confidence then bore thee on secure
Either to meet no danger, or to find
Matter of glorious trial and perhaps
I also erred, in overmuch admiring
What seemed in thee so perfect, that I thought
No evil durst attempt thee but I rue
The errour now, which is become my crime,
And thou the accuser.  Thus it shall befall
Him, who, to worth in women overtrusting,
Lets her will rule: restraint she will not brook
And, left to herself, if evil thence ensue,
She first his weak indulgence will accuse.
Thus they in mutual accusation spent
The fruitless hours, but neither selfcondemning
And of their vain contest appeared no end.



Book X


Mean while the heinous and despiteful act
Of Satan, done in Paradise and how
He, in the serpent, had perverted Eve,
Her husband she, to taste the fatal fruit,
Was known in Heaven for what can scape the eye
Of God allseeing, or deceive his heart
Omniscient? who, in all things wise and just,
Hindered not Satan to attempt the mind
Of Man, with strength entire and free will armed,
Complete to have discovered and repulsed
Whatever wiles of foe or seeming friend.
For still they knew, and ought to have still remembered,
The high injunction, not to taste that fruit,
Whoever tempted which they not obeying,
Incurred what could they less? the penalty
And, manifold in sin, deserved to fall.
Up into Heaven from Paradise in haste
The angelick guards ascended, mute, and sad,
For Man for of his state by this they knew,
Much wondering how the subtle Fiend had stolen
Entrance unseen.  Soon as the unwelcome news
From Earth arrived at Heavengate, displeased
All were who heard dim sadness did not spare
That time celestial visages, yet, mixed
With pity, violated not their bliss.
About the newarrived, in multitudes
The ethereal people ran, to hear and know
How all befel:  They towards the throne supreme,
Accountable, made haste, to make appear,
With righteous plea, their utmost vigilance
And easily approved when the Most High
Eternal Father, from his secret cloud,
Amidst in thunder uttered thus his voice.
Assembled Angels, and ye Powers returned
From unsuccessful charge be not dismayed,
Nor troubled at these tidings from the earth,
Which your sincerest care could not prevent
Foretold so lately what would come to pass,
When first this tempter crossed the gulf from Hell.
I told ye then he should prevail, and speed
On his bad errand Man should be seduced,
And flattered out of all, believing lies
Against his Maker no decree of mine
Concurring to necessitate his fall,
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse
His free will, to her own inclining left
In even scale.  But fallen he is and now
What rests, but that the mortal sentence pass
On his transgression,death denounced that day?
Which he presumes already vain and void,
Because not yet inflicted, as he feared,
By some immediate stroke but soon shall find
Forbearance no acquittance, ere day end.
Justice shall not return as bounty scorned.
But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee,
Vicegerent Son?  To thee I have transferred
All judgement, whether in Heaven, or Earth, or Hell.
Easy it may be seen that I intend
Mercy colleague with justice, sending thee
Mans friend, his Mediator, his designed
Both ransom and Redeemer voluntary,
And destined Man himself to judge Man fallen.
So spake the Father and, unfolding bright
Toward the right hand his glory, on the Son
Blazed forth unclouded Deity: He full
Resplendent all his Father manifest
Expressed, and thus divinely answered mild.
Father Eternal, thine is to decree
Mine, both in Heaven and Earth, to do thy will
Supreme that thou in me, thy Son beloved,
Mayest ever rest well pleased.  I go to judge
On earth these thy transgressours but thou knowest,
Whoever judged, the worst on me must light,
When time shall be for so I undertook
Before thee and, not repenting, this obtain
Of right, that I may mitigate their doom
On me derived yet I shall temper so
Justice with mercy, as may illustrate most
Them fully satisfied, and thee appease.
Attendance none shall need, nor train, where none
Are to behold the judgement, but the judged,
Those two the third best absent is condemned,
Convict by flight, and rebel to all law:
Conviction to the serpent none belongs.
Thus saying, from his radiant seat he rose
Of high collateral glory: Him Thrones, and Powers,
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant,
Accompanied to Heavengate from whence
Eden, and all the coast, in prospect lay.
Down he descended straight the speed of Gods
Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes winged.
Now was the sun in western cadence low
From noon, and gentle airs, due at their hour,
To fan the earth now waked, and usher in
The evening cool when he, from wrath more cool,
Came the mild Judge, and Intercessour both,
To sentence Man:  The voice of God they heard
Now walking in the garden, by soft winds
Brought to their ears, while day declined they heard,
And from his presence hid themselves among
The thickest trees, both man and wife till God,
Approaching, thus to Adam called aloud.
Where art thou, Adam, wont with joy to meet
My coming seen far off?  I miss thee here,
Not pleased, thus entertained with solitude,
Where obvious duty ere while appeared unsought:
Or come I less conspicuous, or what change
Absents thee, or what chance detains?Come forth!
He came and with him Eve, more loth, though first
To offend discountenanced both, and discomposed
Love was not in their looks, either to God,
Or to each other but apparent guilt,
And shame, and perturbation, and despair,
Anger, and obstinacy, and hate, and guile.
Whence Adam, faltering long, thus answered brief.
I heard thee in the garden, and of thy voice
Afraid, being naked, hid myself.  To whom
The gracious Judge without revile replied.
My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not feared,
But still rejoiced how is it now become
So dreadful to thee?  That thou art naked, who
Hath told thee?  Hast thou eaten of the tree,
Whereof I gave thee charge thou shouldst not eat?
To whom thus Adam sore beset replied.
O Heaven! in evil strait this day I stand
Before my Judge either to undergo
Myself the total crime, or to accuse
My other self, the partner of my life
Whose failing, while her faith to me remains,
I should conceal, and not expose to blame
By my complaint: but strict necessity
Subdues me, and calamitous constraint
Lest on my head both sin and punishment,
However insupportable, be all
Devolved though should I hold my peace, yet thou
Wouldst easily detect what I conceal.
This Woman, whom thou madest to be my help,
And gavest me as thy perfect gift, so good,
So fit, so acceptable, so divine,
That from her hand I could suspect no ill,
And what she did, whatever in itself,
Her doing seemed to justify the deed
She gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
To whom the Sovran Presence thus replied.
Was she thy God, that her thou didst obey
Before his voice? or was she made thy guide,
Superiour, or but equal, that to her
Thou didst resign thy manhood, and the place
Wherein God set thee above her made of thee,
And for thee, whose perfection far excelled
Hers in all real dignity?  Adorned
She was indeed, and lovely, to attract
Thy love, not thy subjection and her gifts
Were such, as under government well seemed
Unseemly to bear rule which was thy part
And person, hadst thou known thyself aright.
So having said, he thus to Eve in few.
Say, Woman, what is this which thou hast done?
To whom sad Eve, with shame nigh overwhelmed,
Confessing soon, yet not before her Judge
Bold or loquacious, thus abashed replied.
The Serpent me beguiled, and I did eat.
Which when the Lord God heard, without delay
To judgement he proceeded on the accused
Serpent, though brute unable to transfer
The guilt on him, who made him instrument
Of mischief, and polluted from the end
Of his creation justly then accursed,
As vitiated in nature:  More to know
Concerned not Man, since he no further knew
Nor altered his offence yet God at last
To Satan first in sin his doom applied,
Though in mysterious terms, judged as then best:
And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall.
Because thou hast done this, thou art accursed
Above all cattle, each beast of the field
Upon thy belly groveling thou shalt go,
And dust shalt eat all the days of thy life.
Between thee and the woman I will put
Enmity, and between thine and her seed
Her seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel.
So spake this oracle, then verified
When Jesus, Son of Mary, second Eve,
Saw Satan fall, like lightning, down from Heaven,
Prince of the air then, rising from his grave
Spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphed
In open show and, with ascension bright,
Captivity led captive through the air,
The realm itself of Satan, long usurped
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet
Even he, who now foretold his fatal bruise
And to the Woman thus his sentence turned.
Thy sorrow I will greatly multiply
By thy conception children thou shalt bring
In sorrow forth and to thy husbands will
Thine shall submit he over thee shall rule.
On Adam last thus judgement he pronounced.
Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife,
And eaten of the tree, concerning which
I charged thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat thereof:
Cursed is the ground for thy sake thou in sorrow
Shalt eat thereof, all the days of thy life
Thorns also and thistles it shall bring thee forth
Unbid and thou shalt eat the herb of the field
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,
Till thou return unto the ground for thou
Out of the ground wast taken, know thy birth,
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust return.
So judged he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent
And the instant stroke of death, denounced that day,
Removed far off then, pitying how they stood
Before him naked to the air, that now
Must suffer change, disdained not to begin
Thenceforth the form of servant to assume
As when he washed his servants feet so now,
As father of his family, he clad
Their nakedness with skins of beasts, or slain,
Or as the snake with youthful coat repaid
And thought not much to clothe his enemies
Nor he their outward only with the skins
Of beasts, but inward nakedness, much more.
Opprobrious, with his robe of righteousness,
Arraying, covered from his Fathers sight.
To him with swift ascent he up returned,
Into his blissful bosom reassumed
In glory, as of old to him appeased
All, though allknowing, what had passed with Man
Recounted, mixing intercession sweet.
Mean while, ere thus was sinned and judged on Earth,
Within the gates of Hell sat Sin and Death,
In counterview within the gates, that now
Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame
Far into Chaos, since the Fiend passed through,
Sin opening who thus now to Death began.
O Son, why sit we here each other viewing
Idly, while Satan, our great author, thrives
In other worlds, and happier seat provides
For us, his offspring dear?  It cannot be
But that success attends him if mishap,
Ere this he had returned, with fury driven
By his avengers since no place like this
Can fit his punishment, or their revenge.
Methinks I feel new strength within me rise,
Wings growing, and dominion given me large
Beyond this deep whatever draws me on,
Or sympathy, or some connatural force,
Powerful at greatest distance to unite,
With secret amity, things of like kind,
By secretest conveyance.  Thou, my shade
Inseparable, must with me along
For Death from Sin no power can separate.
But, lest the difficulty of passing back
Stay his return perhaps over this gulf
Impassable, impervious let us try
Adventurous work, yet to thy power and mine
Not unagreeable, to found a path
Over this main from Hell to that new world,
Where Satan now prevails a monument
Of merit high to all the infernal host,
Easing their passage hence, for intercourse,
Or transmigration, as their lot shall lead.
Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn
By this newfelt attraction and instinct.
Whom thus the meager Shadow answered soon.
Go, whither Fate, and inclination strong,
Leads thee I shall not lag behind, nor err
The way, thou leading such a scent I draw
Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste
The savour of death from all things there that live:
Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest
Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid.
So saying, with delight he snuffed the smell
Of mortal change on earth.  As when a flock
Of ravenous fowl, though many a league remote,
Against the day of battle, to a field,
Where armies lie encamped, come flying, lured
With scent of living carcasses designed
For death, the following day, in bloody fight:
So scented the grim Feature, and upturned
His nostril wide into the murky air
Sagacious of his quarry from so far.
Then both from out Hellgates, into the waste
Wide anarchy of Chaos, damp and dark,
Flew diverse and with power their power was great
Hovering upon the waters, what they met
Solid or slimy, as in raging sea
Tost up and down, together crouded drove,
From each side shoaling towards the mouth of Hell
As when two polar winds, blowing adverse
Upon the Cronian sea, together drive
Mountains of ice, that stop the imagined way
Beyond Petsora eastward, to the rich
Cathaian coast.  The aggregated soil
Death with his mace petrifick, cold and dry,
As with a trident, smote and fixed as firm
As Delos, floating once the rest his look
Bound with Gorgonian rigour not to move
And with Asphaltick slime, broad as the gate,
Deep to the roots of Hell the gathered beach
They fastened, and the mole immense wrought on
Over the foaming deep higharched, a bridge
Of length prodigious, joining to the wall
Immoveable of this now fenceless world,
Forfeit to Death from hence a passage broad,
Smooth, easy, inoffensive, down to Hell.
So, if great things to small may be compared,
Xerxes, the liberty of Greece to yoke,
From Susa, his Memnonian palace high,
Came to the sea: and, over Hellespont
Bridging his way, Europe with Asia joined,
And scourged with many a stroke the indignant waves.
Now had they brought the work by wonderous art
Pontifical, a ridge of pendant rock,
Over the vexed abyss, following the track
Of Satan to the selfsame place where he
First lighted from his wing, and landed safe
From out of Chaos, to the outside bare
Of this round world:  With pins of adamant
And chains they made all fast, too fast they made
And durable!  And now in little space
The confines met of empyrean Heaven,
And of this World and, on the left hand, Hell
With long reach interposed three several ways
In sight, to each of these three places led.
And now their way to Earth they had descried,
To Paradise first tending when, behold!
Satan, in likeness of an Angel bright,
Betwixt the Centaur and the Scorpion steering
His zenith, while the sun in Aries rose:
Disguised he came but those his children dear
Their parent soon discerned, though in disguise.
He, after Eve seduced, unminded slunk
Into the wood fast by and, changing shape,
To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act
By Eve, though all unweeting, seconded
Upon her husband saw their shame that sought
Vain covertures but when he saw descend
The Son of God to judge them, terrified
He fled not hoping to escape, but shun
The present fearing, guilty, what his wrath
Might suddenly inflict that past, returned
By night, and listening where the hapless pair
Sat in their sad discourse, and various plaint,
Thence gathered his own doom which understood
Not instant, but of future time, with joy
And tidings fraught, to Hell he now returned
And at the brink of Chaos, near the foot
Of this new wonderous pontifice, unhoped
Met, who to meet him came, his offspring dear.
Great joy was at their meeting, and at sight
Of that stupendious bridge his joy encreased.
Long he admiring stood, till Sin, his fair
Enchanting daughter, thus the silence broke.
O Parent, these are thy magnifick deeds,
Thy trophies! which thou viewest as not thine own
Thou art their author, and prime architect:
For I no sooner in my heart divined,
My heart, which by a secret harmony
Still moves with thine, joined in connexion sweet,
That thou on earth hadst prospered, which thy looks
Now also evidence, but straight I felt,
Though distant from thee worlds between, yet felt,
That I must after thee, with this thy son
Such fatal consequence unites us three!
Hell could no longer hold us in our bounds,
Nor this unvoyageable gulf obscure
Detain from following thy illustrious track.
Thou hast achieved our liberty, confined
Within Hellgates till now thou us impowered
To fortify thus far, and overlay,
With this portentous bridge, the dark abyss.
Thine now is all this world thy virtue hath won
What thy hands builded not thy wisdom gained
With odds what war hath lost, and fully avenged
Our foil in Heaven here thou shalt monarch reign,
There didst not there let him still victor sway,
As battle hath adjudged from this new world
Retiring, by his own doom alienated
And henceforth monarchy with thee divide
Of all things, parted by the empyreal bounds,
His quadrature, from thy orbicular world
Or try thee now more dangerous to his throne.
Whom thus the Prince of darkness answered glad.
Fair Daughter, and thou Son and Grandchild both
High proof ye now have given to be the race
Of Satan for I glory in the name,
Antagonist of Heavens Almighty King,
Amply have merited of me, of all
The infernal empire, that so near Heavens door
Triumphal with triumphal act have met,
Mine, with this glorious work and made one realm,
Hell and this world, one realm, one continent
Of easy thoroughfare.  Therefore, while I
Descend through darkness, on your road with ease,
To my associate Powers, them to acquaint
With these successes, and with them rejoice
You two this way, among these numerous orbs,
All yours, right down to Paradise descend
There dwell, and reign in bliss thence on the earth
Dominion exercise and in the air,
Chiefly on Man, sole lord of all declared
Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill.
My substitutes I send ye, and create
Plenipotent on earth, of matchless might
Issuing from me: on your joint vigour now
My hold of this new kingdom all depends,
Through Sin to Death exposed by my exploit.
If your joint power prevail, the affairs of Hell
No detriment need fear go, and be strong!
So saying he dismissed them they with speed
Their course through thickest constellations held,
Spreading their bane the blasted stars looked wan,
And planets, planetstruck, real eclipse
Then suffered.  The other way Satan went down
The causey to Hellgate:  On either side
Disparted Chaos overbuilt exclaimed,
And with rebounding surge the bars assailed,
That scorned his indignation:  Through the gate,
Wide open and unguarded, Satan passed,
And all about found desolate for those,
Appointed to sit there, had left their charge,
Flown to the upper world the rest were all
Far to the inland retired, about the walls
Of Pandemonium city and proud seat
Of Lucifer, so by allusion called
Of that bright star to Satan paragoned
There kept their watch the legions, while the Grand
In council sat, solicitous what chance
Might intercept their emperour sent so he
Departing gave command, and they observed.
As when the Tartar from his Russian foe,
By Astracan, over the snowy plains,
Retires or Bactrin Sophi, from the horns
Of Turkish crescent, leaves all waste beyond
The realm of Aladule, in his retreat
To Tauris or Casbeen:  So these, the late
Heavenbanished host, left desart utmost Hell
Many a dark league, reduced in careful watch
Round their metropolis and now expecting
Each hour their great adventurer, from the search
Of foreign worlds:  He through the midst unmarked,
In show plebeian Angel militant
Of lowest order, passed and from the door
Of that Plutonian hall, invisible
Ascended his high throne which, under state
Of richest texture spread, at the upper end
Was placed in regal lustre.  Down a while
He sat, and round about him saw unseen:
At last, as from a cloud, his fulgent head
And shape starbright appeared, or brighter clad
With what permissive glory since his fall
Was left him, or false glitter:  All amazed
At that so sudden blaze the Stygian throng
Bent their aspect, and whom they wished beheld,
Their mighty Chief returned: loud was the acclaim:
Forth rushed in haste the great consulting peers,
Raised from their dark Divan, and with like joy
Congratulant approached him who with hand
Silence, and with these words attention, won.
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers
For in possession such, not only of right,
I call ye, and declare ye now returned
Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth
Triumphant out of this infernal pit
Abominable, accursed, the house of woe,
And dungeon of our tyrant:  Now possess,
As Lords, a spacious world, to our native Heaven
Little inferiour, by my adventure hard
With peril great achieved.  Long were to tell
What I have done what sufferedwith what pain
Voyaged th unreal, vast, unbounded deep
Of horrible confusion over which
By Sin and Death a broad way now is paved,
To expedite your glorious march but I
Toiled out my uncouth passage, forced to ride
The untractable abyss, plunged in the womb
Of unoriginal Night and Chaos wild
That, jealous of their secrets, fiercely opposed
My journey strange, with clamorous uproar
Protesting Fate supreme thence how I found
The new created world, which fame in Heaven
Long had foretold, a fabrick wonderful
Of absolute perfection! therein Man
Placed in a Paradise, by our exile
Made happy:  Him by fraud I have seduced
From his Creator and, the more to encrease
Your wonder, with an apple he, thereat
Offended, worth your laughter! hath given up
Both his beloved Man, and all his world,
To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us,
Without our hazard, labour, or alarm
To range in, and to dwell, and over Man
To rule, as over all he should have ruled.
True is, me also he hath judged, or rather
Me not, but the brute serpent in whose shape
Man I deceived: that which to me belongs,
Is enmity which he will put between
Me and mankind I am to bruise his heel
His seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head:
A world who would not purchase with a bruise,
Or much more grievous pain?Ye have the account
Of my performance:  What remains, ye Gods,
But up, and enter now into full bliss?
So having said, a while he stood, expecting
Their universal shout, and high applause,
To fill his ear when, contrary, he hears
On all sides, from innumerable tongues,
A dismal universal hiss, the sound
Of publick scorn he wondered, but not long
Had leisure, wondering at himself now more,
His visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare
His arms clung to his ribs his legs entwining
Each other, till supplanted down he fell
A monstrous serpent on his belly prone,
Reluctant, but in vain a greater power
Now ruled him, punished in the shape he sinned,
According to his doom: he would have spoke,
But hiss for hiss returned with forked tongue
To forked tongue for now were all transformed
Alike, to serpents all, as accessories
To his bold riot:  Dreadful was the din
Of hissing through the hall, thick swarming now
With complicated monsters head and tail,
Scorpion, and Asp, and Amphisbaena dire,
Cerastes horned, Hydrus, and Elops drear,
And Dipsas not so thick swarmed once the soil
Bedropt with blood of Gorgon, or the isle
Ophiusa, but still greatest he the midst,
Now Dragon grown, larger than whom the sun
Ingendered in the Pythian vale or slime,
Huge Python, and his power no less he seemed
Above the rest still to retain they all
Him followed, issuing forth to the open field,
Where all yet left of that revolted rout,
Heavenfallen, in station stood or just array
Sublime with expectation when to see
In triumph issuing forth their glorious Chief
They saw, but other sight instead! a croud
Of ugly serpents horrour on them fell,
And horrid sympathy for, what they saw,
They felt themselves, now changing down their arms,
Down fell both spear and shield down they as fast
And the dire hiss renewed, and the dire form
Catched, by contagion like in punishment,
As in their crime.  Thus was the applause they meant,
Turned to exploding hiss, triumph to shame
Cast on themselves from their own mouths.  There stood
A grove hard by, sprung up with this their change,
His will who reigns above, to aggravate
Their penance, laden with fair fruit, like that
Which grew in Paradise, the bait of Eve
Used by the Tempter: on that prospect strange
Their earnest eyes they fixed, imagining
For one forbidden tree a multitude
Now risen, to work them further woe or shame
Yet, parched with scalding thirst and hunger fierce,
Though to delude them sent, could not abstain
But on they rolled in heaps, and, up the trees
Climbing, sat thicker than the snaky locks
That curled Megaera: greedily they plucked
The fruitage fair to sight, like that which grew
Near that bituminous lake where Sodom flamed
This more delusive, not the touch, but taste
Deceived they, fondly thinking to allay
Their appetite with gust, instead of fruit
Chewed bitter ashes, which the offended taste
With spattering noise rejected: oft they assayed,
Hunger and thirst constraining drugged as oft,
With hatefullest disrelish writhed their jaws,
With soot and cinders filled so oft they fell
Into the same illusion, not as Man
Whom they triumphed once lapsed.  Thus were they plagued
And worn with famine, long and ceaseless hiss,
Till their lost shape, permitted, they resumed
Yearly enjoined, some say, to undergo,
This annual humbling certain numbered days,
To dash their pride, and joy, for Man seduced.
However, some tradition they dispersed
Among the Heathen, of their purchase got,
And fabled how the Serpent, whom they called
Ophion, with Eurynome, the wide
Encroaching Eve perhaps, had first the rule
Of high Olympus thence by Saturn driven
And Ops, ere yet Dictaean Jove was born.
Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair
Too soon arrived Sin, there in power before,
Once actual now in body, and to dwell
Habitual habitant behind her Death,
Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet
On his pale horse: to whom Sin thus began.
Second of Satan sprung, allconquering Death!
What thinkest thou of our empire now, though earned
With travel difficult, not better far
Than still at Hells dark threshold to have sat watch,
Unnamed, undreaded, and thyself half starved?
Whom thus the Sinborn monster answered soon.
To me, who with eternal famine pine,
Alike is Hell, or Paradise, or Heaven
There best, where most with ravine I may meet
Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems
To stuff this maw, this vast unhidebound corps.
To whom the incestuous mother thus replied.
Thou therefore on these herbs, and fruits, and flowers,
Feed first on each beast next, and fish, and fowl
No homely morsels! and, whatever thing
The sithe of Time mows down, devour unspared
Till I, in Man residing, through the race,
His thoughts, his looks, words, actions, all infect
And season him thy last and sweetest prey.
This said, they both betook them several ways,
Both to destroy, or unimmortal make
All kinds, and for destruction to mature
Sooner or later which the Almighty seeing,
From his transcendent seat the Saints among,
To those bright Orders uttered thus his voice.
See, with what heat these dogs of Hell advance
To waste and havock yonder world, which I
So fair and good created and had still
Kept in that state, had not the folly of Man
Let in these wasteful furies, who impute
Folly to me so doth the Prince of Hell
And his adherents, that with so much ease
I suffer them to enter and possess
A place so heavenly and, conniving, seem
To gratify my scornful enemies,
That laugh, as if, transported with some fit
Of passion, I to them had quitted all,
At random yielded up to their misrule
And know not that I called, and drew them thither,
My Hellhounds, to lick up the draff and filth
Which Mans polluting sin with taint hath shed
On what was pure til, crammed and gorged, nigh burst
With sucked and glutted offal, at one sling
Of thy victorious arm, wellpleasing Son,
Both Sin, and Death, and yawning Grave, at last,
Through Chaos hurled, obstruct the mouth of Hell
For ever, and seal up his ravenous jaws.
Then Heaven and Earth renewed shall be made pure
To sanctity, that shall receive no stain:
Till then, the curse pronounced on both precedes.
He ended, and the heavenly audience loud
Sung Halleluiah, as the sound of seas,
Through multitude that sung:  Just are thy ways,
Righteous are thy decrees on all thy works
Who can extenuate thee?  Next, to the Son,
Destined Restorer of mankind, by whom
New Heaven and Earth shall to the ages rise,
Or down from Heaven descend.Such was their song
While the Creator, calling forth by name
His mighty Angels, gave them several charge,
As sorted best with present things.  The sun
Had first his precept so to move, so shine,
As might affect the earth with cold and heat
Scarce tolerable and from the north to call
Decrepit winter from the south to bring
Solstitial summers heat.  To the blanc moon
Her office they prescribed to the other five
Their planetary motions, and aspects,
In sextile, square, and trine, and opposite,
Of noxious efficacy, and when to join
In synod unbenign and taught the fixed
Their influence malignant when to shower,
Which of them rising with the sun, or falling,
Should prove tempestuous:  To the winds they set
Their corners, when with bluster to confound
Sea, air, and shore the thunder when to roll
With terrour through the dark aereal hall.
Some say, he bid his Angels turn ascanse
The poles of earth, twice ten degrees and more,
From the suns axle they with labour pushed
Oblique the centrick globe:  Some say, the sun
Was bid turn reins from the equinoctial road
Like distant breadth to Taurus with the seven
Atlantick Sisters, and the Spartan Twins,
Up to the Tropick Crab: thence down amain
By Leo, and the Virgin, and the Scales,
As deep as Capricorn to bring in change
Of seasons to each clime else had the spring
Perpetual smiled on earth with vernant flowers,
Equal in days and nights, except to those
Beyond the polar circles to them day
Had unbenighted shone, while the low sun,
To recompense his distance, in their sight
Had rounded still the horizon, and not known
Or east or west which had forbid the snow
From cold Estotiland, and south as far
Beneath Magellan.  At that tasted fruit
The sun, as from Thyestean banquet, turned
His course intended else, how had the world
Inhabited, though sinless, more than now,
Avoided pinching cold and scorching heat?
These changes in the Heavens, though slow, produced
Like change on sea and land sideral blast,
Vapour, and mist, and exhalation hot,
Corrupt and pestilent:  Now from the north
Of Norumbega, and the Samoed shore,
Bursting their brazen dungeon, armed with ice,
And snow, and hail, and stormy gust and flaw,
Boreas, and Caecias, and Argestes loud,
And Thrascias, rend the woods, and seas upturn
With adverse blast upturns them from the south
Notus, and Afer black with thunderous clouds
From Serraliona thwart of these, as fierce,
Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent winds,
Eurus and Zephyr, with their lateral noise,
Sirocco and Libecchio.  Thus began
Outrage from lifeless things but Discord first,
Daughter of Sin, among the irrational
Death introduced, through fierce antipathy:
Beast now with beast gan war, and fowl with fowl,
And fish with fish to graze the herb all leaving,
Devoured each other nor stood much in awe
Of Man, but fled him or, with countenance grim,
Glared on him passing.  These were from without
The growing miseries, which Adam saw
Already in part, though hid in gloomiest shade,
To sorrow abandoned, but worse felt within
And, in a troubled sea of passion tost,
Thus to disburden sought with sad complaint.
O miserable of happy!  Is this the end
Of this new glorious world, and me so late
The glory of that glory, who now become
Accursed, of blessed? hide me from the face
Of God, whom to behold was then my highth
Of happiness!Yet well, if here would end
The misery I deserved it, and would bear
My own deservings but this will not serve:
All that I eat or drink, or shall beget,
Is propagated curse.  O voice, once heard
Delightfully, Encrease and multiply
Now death to hear! for what can I encrease,
Or multiply, but curses on my head?
Who of all ages to succeed, but, feeling
The evil on him brought by me, will curse
My head?  Ill fare our ancestor impure,
For this we may thank Adam! but his thanks
Shall be the execration: so, besides
Mine own that bide upon me, all from me
Shall with a fierce reflux on me rebound
On me, as on their natural center, light
Heavy, though in their place.  O fleeting joys
Of Paradise, dear bought with lasting woes!
Did I request thee, Maker, from my clay
To mould me Man? did I solicit thee
From darkness to promote me, or here place
In this delicious garden?  As my will
Concurred not to my being, it were but right
And equal to reduce me to my dust
Desirous to resign and render back
All I received unable to perform
Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold
The good I sought not.  To the loss of that,
Sufficient penalty, why hast thou added
The sense of endless woes?  Inexplicable
Why am I mocked with death, and lengthened out
To deathless pain?  How gladly would I meet
Mortality my sentence, and be earth
Insensible!  How glad would lay me down
As in my mothers lap!  There I should rest,
And sleep secure his dreadful voice no more
Would thunder in my ears no fear of worse
To me, and to my offspring, would torment me
With cruel expectation.  Yet one doubt
Pursues me still, lest all I cannot die
Lest that pure breath of life, the spirit of Man
Which God inspired, cannot together perish
With this corporeal clod then, in the grave,
Or in some other dismal place, who knows
But I shall die a living death?  O thought
Horrid, if true!  Yet why? It was but breath
Of life that sinned what dies but what had life
And sin?  The body properly had neither,
All of me then shall die: let this appease
The doubt, since human reach no further knows.
For though the Lord of all be infinite,
Is his wrath also?  Be it, Man is not so,
But mortal doomed.  How can he exercise
Wrath without end on Man, whom death must end?
Can he make deathless death?  That were to make
Strange contradiction, which to God himself
Impossible is held as argument
Of weakness, not of power.  Will he draw out,
For angers sake, finite to infinite,
In punished Man, to satisfy his rigour,
Satisfied never?  That were to extend
His sentence beyond dust and Natures law
By which all causes else, according still
To the reception of their matter, act
Not to the extent of their own sphere.  But say
That death be not one stroke, as I supposed,
Bereaving sense, but endless misery
From this day onward which I feel begun
Both in me, and without me and so last
To perpetuityAy me!that fear
Comes thundering back with dreadful revolution
On my defenceless head both Death and I
Am found eternal, and incorporate both
Nor I on my part single in me all
Posterity stands cursed:  Fair patrimony
That I must leave ye, Sons!  O, were I able
To waste it all myself, and leave ye none!
So disinherited, how would you bless
Me, now your curse!  Ah, why should all mankind,
For one mans fault, thus guiltless be condemned,
It guiltless?  But from me what can proceed,
But all corrupt both mind and will depraved
Not to do only, but to will the same
With me?  How can they then acquitted stand
In sight of God?  Him, after all disputes,
Forced I absolve: all my evasions vain,
And reasonings, though through mazes, lead me still
But to my own conviction: first and last
On me, me only, as the source and spring
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due
So might the wrath!  Fond wish!couldst thou support
That burden, heavier than the earth to bear
Than all the world much heavier, though divided
With that bad Woman?  Thus, what thou desirest,
And what thou fearest, alike destroys all hope
Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable
Beyond all past example and future
To Satan only like both crime and doom.
O Conscience! into what abyss of fears
And horrours hast thou driven me out of which
I find no way, from deep to deeper plunged!
Thus Adam to himself lamented loud,
Through the still night not now, as ere Man fell,
Wholesome, and cool, and mild, but with black air
Accompanied with damps, and dreadful gloom
Which to his evil conscience represented
All things with double terrour:  On the ground
Outstretched he lay, on the cold ground and oft
Cursed his creation  Death as oft accused
Of tardy execution, since denounced
The day of his offence.  Why comes not Death,
Said he, with one thriceacceptable stroke
To end me?  Shall Truth fail to keep her word,
Justice Divine not hasten to be just?
But Death comes not at call Justice Divine
Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries,
O woods, O fountains, hillocks, dales, and bowers!
With other echo late I taught your shades
To answer, and resound far other song.
Whom thus afflicted when sad Eve beheld,
Desolate where she sat, approaching nigh,
Soft words to his fierce passion she assayed:
But her with stern regard he thus repelled.
Out of my sight, thou Serpent!  That name best
Befits thee with him leagued, thyself as false
And hateful nothing wants, but that thy shape,
Like his, and colour serpentine, may show
Thy inward fraud to warn all creatures from thee
Henceforth lest that too heavenly form, pretended
To hellish falshood, snare them!  But for thee
I had persisted happy had not thy pride
And wandering vanity, when least was safe,
Rejected my forewarning, and disdained
Not to be trusted longing to be seen,
Though by the Devil himself him overweening
To overreach but, with the serpent meeting,
Fooled and beguiled by him thou, I by thee
To trust thee from my side imagined wise,
Constant, mature, proof against all assaults
And understood not all was but a show,
Rather than solid virtue all but a rib
Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears,
More to the part sinister, from me drawn
Well if thrown out, as supernumerary
To my just number found.  O! why did God,
Creator wise, that peopled highest Heaven
With Spirits masculine, create at last
This novelty on earth, this fair defect
Of nature, and not fill the world at once
With Men, as Angels, without feminine
Or find some other way to generate
Mankind?  This mischief had not been befallen,
And more that shall befall innumerable
Disturbances on earth through female snares,
And strait conjunction with this sex: for either
He never shall find out fit mate, but such
As some misfortune brings him, or mistake
Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain
Through her perverseness, but shall see her gained
By a far worse or, if she love, withheld
By parents or his happiest choice too late
Shall meet, already linked and wedlockbound
To a fell adversary, his hate or shame:
Which infinite calamity shall cause
To human life, and houshold peace confound.
He added not, and from her turned but Eve,
Not so repulsed, with tears that ceased not flowing
And tresses all disordered, at his feet
Fell humble and, embracing them, besought
His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint.
Forsake me not thus, Adam! witness Heaven
What love sincere, and reverence in my heart
I bear thee, and unweeting have offended,
Unhappily deceived!  Thy suppliant
I beg, and clasp thy knees bereave me not,
Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid,
Thy counsel, in this uttermost distress,
My only strength and stay:  Forlorn of thee,
Whither shall I betake me, where subsist?
While yet we live, scarce one short hour perhaps,
Between us two let there be peace both joining,
As joined in injuries, one enmity
Against a foe by doom express assigned us,
That cruel Serpent:  On me exercise not
Thy hatred for this misery befallen
On me already lost, me than thyself
More miserable!  Both have sinnedbut thou
Against God only I against God and thee
And to the place of judgement will return,
There with my cries importune Heaven that all
The sentence, from thy head removed, may light
On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe
Me, me only, just object of his ire!
She ended weeping and her lowly plight,
Immoveable, till peace obtained from fault
Acknowledged and deplored, in Adam wrought
Commiseration:  Soon his heart relented
Towards her, his life so late, and sole delight,
Now at his feet submissive in distress
Creature so fair his reconcilement seeking,
His counsel, whom she had displeased, his aid:
As one disarmed, his anger all he lost,
And thus with peaceful words upraised her soon.
Unwary, and too desirous, as before,
So now of what thou knowest not, who desirest
The punishment all on thyself alas!
Bear thine own first, ill able to sustain
His full wrath, whose thou feelest as yet least part,
And my displeasure bearest so ill.  If prayers
Could alter high decrees, I to that place
Would speed before thee, and be louder heard,
That on my head all might be visited
Thy frailty and infirmer sex forgiven,
To me committed, and by me exposed.
But riselet us no more contend, nor blame
Each other, blamed enough elsewhere but strive
In offices of love, how we may lighten
Each others burden, in our share of woe
Since this days death denounced, if aught I see,
Will prove no sudden, but a slowpaced evil
A long days dying, to augment our pain
And to our seed O hapless seed! derived.
To whom thus Eve, recovering heart, replied.
Adam, by sad experiment I know
How little weight my words with thee can find,
Found so erroneous thence by just event
Found so unfortunate:  Nevertheless,
Restored by thee, vile as I am, to place
Of new acceptance, hopeful to regain
Thy love, the sole contentment of my heart
Living or dying, from thee I will not hide
What thoughts in my unquiet breast are risen,
Tending to some relief of our extremes,
Or end though sharp and sad, yet tolerable,
As in our evils, and of easier choice.
If care of our descent perplex us most,
Which must be born to certain woe, devoured
By Death at last and miserable it is
To be to others cause of misery,
Our own begotten, and of our loins to bring
Into this cursed world a woeful race,
That after wretched life must be at last
Food for so foul a monster in thy power
It lies, yet ere conception to prevent
The race unblest, to being yet unbegot.
Childless thou art, childless remain: so Death
Shall be deceived his glut, and with us two
Be forced to satisfy his ravenous maw.
But if thou judge it hard and difficult,
Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain
From loves due rights, nuptial embraces sweet
And with desire to languish without hope,
Before the present object languishing
With like desire which would be misery
And torment less than none of what we dread
Then, both ourselves and seed at once to free
From what we fear for both, let us make short, 
Let us seek Death  or, he not found, supply
With our own hands his office on ourselves:
Why stand we longer shivering under fears,
That show no end but death, and have the power,
Of many ways to die the shortest choosing,
Destruction with destruction to destroy? 
She ended here, or vehement despair
Broke off the rest: so much of death her thoughts
Had entertained, as dyed her cheeks with pale.
But Adam, with such counsel nothing swayed,
To better hopes his more attentive mind
Labouring had raised and thus to Eve replied.
Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems
To argue in thee something more sublime
And excellent, than what thy mind contemns
But selfdestruction therefore sought, refutes
That excellence thought in thee and implies,
Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret
For loss of life and pleasure overloved.
Or if thou covet death, as utmost end
Of misery, so thinking to evade
The penalty pronounced doubt not but God
Hath wiselier armed his vengeful ire, than so
To be forestalled much more I fear lest death,
So snatched, will not exempt us from the pain
We are by doom to pay rather, such acts
Of contumacy will provoke the Highest
To make death in us live:  Then let us seek
Some safer resolution, which methinks
I have in view, calling to mind with heed
Part of our sentence, that thy seed shall bruise
The Serpents head piteous amends! unless
Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand foe,
Satan who, in the serpent, hath contrived
Against us this deceit:  To crush his head
Would be revenge indeed! which will be lost
By death brought on ourselves, or childless days
Resolved, as thou proposest so our foe
Shal scape his punishment ordained, and we
Instead shall double ours upon our heads.
No more be mentioned then of violence
Against ourselves and wilful barrenness,
That cuts us off from hope and savours only
Rancour and pride, impatience and despite,
Reluctance against God and his just yoke
Laid on our necks.  Remember with what mild
And gracious temper he both heard, and judged,
Without wrath or reviling we expected
Immediate dissolution, which we thought
Was meant by death that day when lo!to thee
Pains only in childbearing were foretold,
And bringing forth soon recompensed with joy,
Fruit of thy womb:  On me the curse aslope
Glanced on the ground with labour I must earn
My bread what harm? Idleness had been worse
My labour will sustain me and, lest cold
Or heat should injure us, his timely care
Hath, unbesought, provided and his hands
Clothed us unworthy, pitying while he judged
How much more, if we pray him, will his ear
Be open, and his heart to pity incline,
And teach us further by what means to shun
The inclement seasons, rain, ice, hail, and snow!
Which now the sky, with various face, begins
To show us in this mountain while the winds
Blow moist and keen, shattering the graceful locks
Of these fair spreading trees which bids us seek
Some better shroud, some better warmth to cherish
Our limbs benummed, ere this diurnal star
Leave cold the night, how we his gathered beams
Reflected may with matter sere foment
Or, by collision of two bodies, grind
The air attrite to fire as late the clouds
Justling, or pushed with winds, rude in their shock,
Tine the slant lightning whose thwart flame, driven down
Kindles the gummy bark of fir or pine
And sends a comfortable heat from far,
Which might supply the sun:  Such fire to use,
And what may else be remedy or cure
To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought,
He will instruct us praying, and of grace
Beseeching him so as we need not fear
To pass commodiously this life, sustained
By him with many comforts, till we end
In dust, our final rest and native home.
What better can we do, than, to the place
Repairing where he judged us, prostrate fall
Before him reverent and there confess
Humbly our faults, and pardon beg with tears
Watering the ground, and with our sighs the air
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek



Book XI


Undoubtedly he will relent, and turn
From his displeasure in whose look serene,
When angry most he seemed and most severe,
What else but favour, grace, and mercy, shone?
So spake our father penitent nor Eve
Felt less remorse: they, forthwith to the place
Repairing where he judged them, prostrate fell
Before him reverent and both confessed
Humbly their faults, and pardon begged with tears
Watering the ground, and with their sighs the air
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek.
Thus they, in lowliest plight, repentant stood
Praying for from the mercyseat above
Prevenient grace descending had removed
The stony from their hearts, and made new flesh
Regenerate grow instead that sighs now breathed
Unutterable which the Spirit of prayer
Inspired, and winged for Heaven with speedier flight
Than loudest oratory:  Yet their port
Not of mean suitors nor important less
Seemed their petition, than when the ancient pair
In fables old, less ancient yet than these,
Deucalion and chaste Pyrrha, to restore
The race of mankind drowned, before the shrine
Of Themis stood devout.  To Heaven their prayers
Flew up, nor missed the way, by envious winds
Blown vagabond or frustrate: in they passed
Dimensionless through heavenly doors then clad
With incense, where the golden altar fumed,
By their great intercessour, came in sight
Before the Fathers throne: them the glad Son
Presenting, thus to intercede began.
See Father, what firstfruits on earth are sprung
From thy implanted grace in Man these sighs
And prayers, which in this golden censer mixed
With incense, I thy priest before thee bring
Fruits of more pleasing savour, from thy seed
Sown with contrition in his heart, than those
Which, his own hand manuring, all the trees
Of Paradise could have produced, ere fallen
From innocence.  Now therefore, bend thine ear
To supplication hear his sighs, though mute
Unskilful with what words to pray, let me
Interpret for him me, his advocate
And propitiation all his works on me,
Good, or not good, ingraft my merit those
Shall perfect, and for these my death shall pay.
Accept me and, in me, from these receive
The smell of peace toward mankind: let him live
Before thee reconciled, at least his days
Numbered, though sad till death, his doom, which I
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse,
To better life shall yield him: where with me
All my redeemed may dwell in joy and bliss
Made one with me, as I with thee am one.
To whom the Father, without cloud, serene.
All thy request for Man, accepted Son,
Obtain all thy request was my decree:
But, longer in that Paradise to dwell,
The law I gave to Nature him forbids:
Those pure immortal elements, that know,
No gross, no unharmonious mixture foul,
Eject him, tainted now and purge him off,
As a distemper, gross, to air as gross,
And mortal food as may dispose him best
For dissolution wrought by sin, that first
Distempered all things, and of incorrupt
Corrupted.  I, at first, with two fair gifts
Created him endowed with happiness,
And immortality: that fondly lost,
This other served but to eternize woe
Till I provided death: so death becomes
His final remedy and, after life,
Tried in sharp tribulation, and refined
By faith and faithful works, to second life,
Waked in the renovation of the just,
Resigns him up with Heaven and Earth renewed.
But let us call to synod all the Blest,
Through Heavens wide bounds: from them I will not hide
My judgements how with mankind I proceed,
As how with peccant Angels late they saw,
And in their state, though firm, stood more confirmed.
He ended, and the Son gave signal high
To the bright minister that watched he blew
His trumpet, heard in Oreb since perhaps
When God descended, and perhaps once more
To sound at general doom.  The angelick blast
Filled all the regions: from their blisful bowers
Of amarantine shade, fountain or spring,
By the waters of life, whereer they sat
In fellowships of joy, the sons of light
Hasted, resorting to the summons high
And took their seats till from his throne supreme
The Almighty thus pronounced his sovran will.
O Sons, like one of us Man is become
To know both good and evil, since his taste
Of that defended fruit but let him boast
His knowledge of good lost, and evil got
Happier! had it sufficed him to have known
Good by itself, and evil not at all.
He sorrows now, repents, and prays contrite,
My motions in him longer than they move,
His heart I know, how variable and vain,
Selfleft.  Lest therefore his now bolder hand
Reach also of the tree of life, and eat,
And live for ever, dream at least to live
For ever, to remove him I decree,
And send him from the garden forth to till
The ground whence he was taken, fitter soil.
Michael, this my behest have thou in charge
Take to thee from among the Cherubim
Thy choice of flaming warriours, lest the Fiend,
Or in behalf of Man, or to invade
Vacant possession, some new trouble raise:
Haste thee, and from the Paradise of God
Without remorse drive out the sinful pair
From hallowed ground the unholy and denounce
To them, and to their progeny, from thence
Perpetual banishment.  Yet, lest they faint
At the sad sentence rigorously urged,
For I behold them softened, and with tears
Bewailing their excess, all terrour hide.
If patiently thy bidding they obey,
Dismiss them not disconsolate reveal
To Adam what shall come in future days,
As I shall thee enlighten intermix
My covenant in the Womans seed renewed
So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace:
And on the east side of the garden place,
Where entrance up from Eden easiest climbs,
Cherubick watch and of a sword the flame
Widewaving all approach far off to fright,
And guard all passage to the tree of life:
Lest Paradise a receptacle prove
To Spirits foul, and all my trees their prey
With whose stolen fruit Man once more to delude.
He ceased and the archangelick Power prepared
For swift descent with him the cohort bright
Of watchful Cherubim: four faces each
Had, like a double Janus all their shape
Spangled with eyes more numerous than those
Of Argus, and more wakeful than to drouse,
Charmed with Arcadian pipe, the pastoral reed
Of Hermes, or his opiate rod.  Mean while,
To resalute the world with sacred light,
Leucothea waked and with fresh dews imbalmed
The earth when Adam and first matron Eve
Had ended now their orisons, and found
Strength added from above new hope to spring
Out of despair joy, but with fear yet linked
Which thus to Eve his welcome words renewed.
Eve, easily my faith admit, that all
The good which we enjoy from Heaven descends
But, that from us aught should ascend to Heaven
So prevalent as to concern the mind
Of God highblest, or to incline his will,
Hard to belief may seem yet this will prayer
Or one short sigh of human breath, upborne
Even to the seat of God.  For since I sought
By prayer the offended Deity to appease
Kneeled, and before him humbled all my heart
Methought I saw him placable and mild,
Bending his ear persuasion in me grew
That I was heard with favour peace returned
Home to my breast, and to my memory
His promise, that thy seed shall bruise our foe
Which, then not minded in dismay, yet now
Assures me that the bitterness of death
Is past, and we shall live.  Whence hail to thee,
Eve rightly called, mother of all mankind,
Mother of all things living, since by thee
Man is to live and all things live for Man.
To whom thus Eve with sad demeanour meek.
Illworthy I such title should belong
To me transgressour who, for thee ordained
A help, became thy snare to me reproach
Rather belongs, distrust, and all dispraise:
But infinite in pardon was my Judge,
That I, who first brought death on all, am graced
The source of life next favourable thou,
Who highly thus to entitle me vouchsafst,
Far other name deserving.  But the field
To labour calls us, now with sweat imposed,
Though after sleepless night for see!the morn,
All unconcerned with our unrest, begins
Her rosy progress smiling: let us forth
I never from thy side henceforth to stray,
Whereer our days work lies, though now enjoined
Laborious, till day droop while here we dwell,
What can be toilsome in these pleasant walks?
Here let us live, though in fallen state, content.
So spake, so wished much humbled Eve but Fate
Subscribed not:  Nature first gave signs, impressed
On bird, beast, air air suddenly eclipsed,
After short blush of morn nigh in her sight
The bird of Jove, stooped from his aery tour,
Two birds of gayest plume before him drove
Down from a hill the beast that reigns in woods,
First hunter then, pursued a gentle brace,
Goodliest of all the forest, hart and hind
Direct to the eastern gate was bent their flight.
Adam observed, and with his eye the chase
Pursuing, not unmoved, to Eve thus spake.
O Eve, some further change awaits us nigh,
Which Heaven, by these mute signs in Nature, shows
Forerunners of his purpose or to warn
Us, haply too secure, of our discharge
From penalty, because from death released
Some days: how long, and what till then our life,
Who knows? or more than this, that we are dust,
And thither must return, and be no more?
Why else this double object in our sight
Of flight pursued in the air, and oer the ground,
One way the selfsame hour? why in the east
Darkness ere days midcourse, and morninglight
More orient in yon western cloud, that draws
Oer the blue firmament a radiant white,
And slow descends with something heavenly fraught?
He erred not for by this the heavenly bands
Down from a sky of jasper lighted now
In Paradise, and on a hill made halt
A glorious apparition, had not doubt
And carnal fear that day dimmed Adams eye.
Not that more glorious, when the Angels met
Jacob in Mahanaim, where he saw
The field pavilioned with his guardians bright
Nor that, which on the flaming mount appeared
In Dothan, covered with a camp of fire,
Against the Syrian king, who to surprise
One man, assassinlike, had levied war,
War unproclaimed.  The princely Hierarch
In their bright stand there left his Powers, to seise
Possession of the garden he alone,
To find where Adam sheltered, took his way,
Not unperceived of Adam who to Eve,
While the great visitant approached, thus spake.
Eve now expect great tidings, which perhaps
Of us will soon determine, or impose
New laws to be observed for I descry,
From yonder blazing cloud that veils the hill,
One of the heavenly host and, by his gait,
None of the meanest some great Potentate
Or of the Thrones above such majesty
Invests him coming! yet not terrible,
That I should fear nor sociably mild,
As Raphael, that I should much confide
But solemn and sublime whom not to offend,
With reverence I must meet, and thou retire.
He ended: and the ArchAngel soon drew nigh,
Not in his shape celestial, but as man
Clad to meet man over his lucid arms
A military vest of purple flowed,
Livelier than Meliboean, or the grain
Of Sarra, worn by kings and heroes old
In time of truce Iris had dipt the woof
His starry helm unbuckled showed him prime
In manhood where youth ended by his side,
As in a glistering zodiack, hung the sword,
Satans dire dread and in his hand the spear.
Adam bowed low he, kingly, from his state
Inclined not, but his coming thus declared.
Adam, Heavens high behest no preface needs:
Sufficient that thy prayers are heard and Death,
Then due by sentence when thou didst transgress,
Defeated of his seisure many days
Given thee of grace wherein thou mayest repent,
And one bad act with many deeds well done
Mayest cover:  Well may then thy Lord, appeased,
Redeem thee quite from Deaths rapacious claim
But longer in this Paradise to dwell
Permits not: to remove thee I am come,
And send thee from the garden forth to till
The ground whence thou wast taken, fitter soil.
He added not for Adam at the news
Heartstruck with chilling gripe of sorrow stood,
That all his senses bound Eve, who unseen
Yet all had heard, with audible lament
Discovered soon the place of her retire.
O unexpected stroke, worse than of Death!
Must I thus leave thee Paradise? thus leave
Thee, native soil! these happy walks and shades,
Fit haunt of Gods? where I had hope to spend,
Quiet though sad, the respite of that day
That must be mortal to us both.  O flowers,
That never will in other climate grow,
My early visitation, and my last
 t even, which I bred up with tender hand
From the first opening bud, and gave ye names!
Who now shall rear ye to the sun, or rank
Your tribes, and water from the ambrosial fount?
Thee lastly, nuptial bower! by me adorned
With what to sight or smell was sweet! from thee
How shall I part, and whither wander down
Into a lower world to this obscure
And wild? how shall we breathe in other air
Less pure, accustomed to immortal fruits?
Whom thus the Angel interrupted mild.
Lament not, Eve, but patiently resign
What justly thou hast lost, nor set thy heart,
Thus overfond, on that which is not thine:
Thy going is not lonely with thee goes
Thy husband whom to follow thou art bound
Where he abides, think there thy native soil.
Adam, by this from the cold sudden damp
Recovering, and his scattered spirits returned,
To Michael thus his humble words addressed.
Celestial, whether among the Thrones, or named
Of them the highest for such of shape may seem
Prince above princes! gently hast thou told
Thy message, which might else in telling wound,
And in performing end us what besides
Of sorrow, and dejection, and despair,
Our frailty can sustain, thy tidings bring,
Departure from this happy place, our sweet
Recess, and only consolation left
Familiar to our eyes! all places else
Inhospitable appear, and desolate
Nor knowing us, nor known:  And, if by prayer
Incessant I could hope to change the will
Of Him who all things can, I would not cease
To weary him with my assiduous cries:
But prayer against his absolute decree
No more avails than breath against the wind,
Blown stiflRMT YZXP LM SRN GSZG YIVZGSVH RG ULIGS:
GSVIVULIV GL SRH TIVZG YRWWRMT R HFYNRG.
GSRH NLHG ZUUORXGH NV, GSZG, WVKZIGRMT SVMXV,
ZH UILN SRH UZXV R HSZOO YV SRW, WVKIREVW
SRH YOVHHVW XLFMGVMZMXV:  SVIV R XLFOW UIVJFVMG
DRGS DLIHSRK KOZXV YB KOZXV DSVIV SV ELFXSHZUVW
KIVHVMXV WRERMV ZMW GL NB HLMH IVOZGV,
LM GSRH NLFMG SV ZKKVZIVW FMWVI GSRH GIVV
HGLLW ERHRYOV ZNLMT GSVHV KRMVH SRH ELRXV
R SVZIW SVIV DRGS SRN ZG GSRH ULFMGZRM GZOPVW:
HL NZMB TIZGVUFO ZOGZIH R DLFOW IVZI
LU TIZHHB GFIU, ZMW KROV FK VEVIB HGLMV
LU OFHGIV UILN GSV YILLP, RM NVNLIB,
LI NLMFNVMG GL ZTVH ZMW GSVILM
LUUVI HDVVGHNVOORMT TFNH, ZMW UIFRGH, ZMW UOLDVIH:
RM BLMWVI MVGSVI DLIOW DSVIV HSZOO R HVVP
SRH YIRTSG ZKKVZIZMXVH, LI ULLGHGVK GIZXV?
ULI GSLFTS R UOVW SRN ZMTIB, BVG IVXZOOVW
GL ORUV KILOLMTVW ZMW KILNRHVW IZXV, R MLD
TOZWOB YVSLOW GSLFTS YFG SRH FGNLHG HPRIGH
LU TOLIB ZMW UZI LUU SRH HGVKH ZWLIV.
GL DSLN GSFH NRXSZVO DRGS IVTZIW YVMRTM.
ZWZN, GSLF PMLDVHG SVZEVM SRH, ZMW ZOO GSV VZIGS
MLG GSRH ILXP LMOB SRH LNMRKIVHVMXV UROOH
OZMW, HVZ, ZMW ZRI, ZMW VEVIB PRMW GSZG OREVH,
ULNVMGVW YB SRH ERIGFZO KLDVI ZMW DZINVW:
ZOO GSV VZIGS SV TZEV GSVV GL KLHHVHH ZMW IFOV,
ML WVHKRXZYOV TRUG HFINRHV MLG GSVM
SRH KIVHVMXV GL GSVHV MZIILD YLFMWH XLMURMVW
LU KZIZWRHV, LI VWVM: GSRH SZW YVVM
KVISZKH GSB XZKRGZO HVZG, UILN DSVMXV SZW HKIVZW
ZOO TVMVIZGRLMH ZMW SZW SRGSVI XLNV
UILN ZOO GSV VMWH LU GSV VZIGS, GL XVOVYIZGV
ZMW IVEVIVMXV GSVV, GSVRI TIVZG KILTVMRGLI.
YFG GSRH KIVVNRMVMXV GSLF SZHG OLHG, YILFTSG WLDM
GL WDVOO LM VEVM TILFMW MLD DRGS GSB HLMH:
BVG WLFYG MLG YFG RM EZOOVB, ZMW RM KOZRM,
TLW RH, ZH SVIV ZMW DROO YV ULFMW ZORPV
KIVHVMG ZMW LU SRH KIVHVMXV NZMB Z HRTM
HGROO ULOOLDRMT GSVV, HGROO XLNKZHHRMT GSVV ILFMW
DRGS TLLWMVHH ZMW KZGVIMZO OLEV, SRH UZXV
VCKIVHH, ZMW LU SRH HGVKH GSV GIZXP WRERMV.
DSRXS GSZG GSLF NZBVHG YVORVEV, ZMW YV XLMURINVW
VIV GSLF UILN SVMXV WVKZIG PMLD, R ZN HVMG
GL HSLD GSVV DSZG HSZOO XLNV RM UFGFIV WZBH
GL GSVV, ZMW GL GSB LUUHKIRMT: TLLW DRGS YZW
VCKVXG GL SVZI HFKVIMZO TIZXV XLMGVMWRMT
DRGS HRMUFOMVHH LU NVM GSVIVYB GL OVZIM
GIFV KZGRVMXV, ZMW GL GVNKVI QLB DRGS UVZI
ZMW KRLFH HLIILD VJFZOOB RMFIVW
YB NLWVIZGRLM VRGSVI HGZGV GL YVZI,
KILHKVILFH LI ZWEVIHV: HL HSZOG GSLF OVZW
HZUVHG GSB ORUV, ZMW YVHG KIVKZIVW VMWFIV
GSB NLIGZO KZHHZTV DSVM RG XLNVH.ZHXVMW
GSRH SROO OVG VEV ULI R SZEV WIVMXSVW SVI VBVH
SVIV HOVVK YVOLD DSROV GSLF GL ULIVHRTSG DZPVHG
ZH LMXV GSLF HOVKGHG, DSROV HSV GL ORUV DZH ULINVW.
GL DSLN GSFH ZWZN TIZGVUFOOB IVKORVW.
ZHXVMW, R ULOOLD GSVV, HZUV TFRWV, GSV KZGS
GSLF OVZWVHG NV ZMW GL GSV SZMW LU SVZEVM HFYNRG,
SLDVEVI XSZHGVMRMT GL GSV VERO GFIM
NB LYERLFH YIVZHG ZINRMT GL LEVIXLNV
YB HFUUVIRMT, ZMW VZIM IVHG UILN OZYLFI DLM,
RU HL R NZB ZGGZRM.  HL YLGS ZHXVMW
RM GSV ERHRLMH LU TLW.  RG DZH Z SROO,
LU KZIZWRHV GSV SRTSVHG UILN DSLHV GLK
GSV SVNRHKSVIV LU VZIGS, RM XOVZIVHG PVM,
HGIVGXSVW LFG GL GSV ZNKOVHG IVZXS LU KILHKVXG OZB.
MLG SRTSVI GSZG SROO, MLI DRWVI OLLPRMT ILFMW,
DSVIVLM, ULI WRUUVIVMG XZFHV, GSV GVNKGVI HVG
LFI HVXLMW ZWZN, RM GSV DROWVIMVHH
GL HSLD SRN ZOO VZIGSH PRMTWLNH, ZMW GSVRI TOLIB.
SRH VBV NRTSG GSVIV XLNNZMW DSVIVEVI HGLLW
XRGB LU LOW LI NLWVIM UZNV, GSV HVZG
LU NRTSGRVHG VNKRIV, UILN GSV WVHGRMVW DZOOH
LU XZNYZOF, HVZG LU XZGSZRZM XZM,
ZMW HZNZIXSZMW YB LCFH, GVNRIH GSILMV,
GL KZJFRM LU HRMZVZM PRMTH ZMW GSVMXV
GL ZTIZ ZMW OZSLI LU TIVZG NLTFO,
WLDM GL GSV TLOWVM XSVIHLMVHV LI DSVIV
GSV KVIHRZM RM VXYZGZM HZG, LI HRMXV
RM SRHKZSZM LI DSVIV GSV IFHHRZM PHZI
RM NLHXL LI GSV HFOGZM RM YRAZMXV,
GFIXSVHGZMYLIM MLI XLFOW SRH VBV MLG PVM
GSV VNKRIV LU MVTFH GL SRH FGNLHG KLIG
VIXLXL, ZMW GSV OVHH NZIRGRN PRMTH
NLNYZAZ, ZMW JFROLZ, ZMW NVORMW,
ZMW HLUZOZ, GSLFTSG LKSRI, GL GSV IVZON
LU XLMTL, ZMW ZMTLOZ UZIGSVHG HLFGS
LI GSVMXV UILN MRTVI UOLLW GL ZGOZH NLFMG
GSV PRMTWLNH LU ZONZMHLI, UVA ZMW HFH,
NLILXXL, ZMW ZOTRVIH, ZMW GIVNRHVM
LM VFILKV GSVMXV, ZMW DSVIV ILNV DZH GL HDZB
GSV DLIOW: RM HKRIRG KVISZKH SV ZOHL HZD
IRXS NVCRXL, GSV HVZG LU NLMGVAFNV,
ZMW XFHXL RM KVIF, GSV IRXSVI HVZG
LU ZGZYZORKZ ZMW BVG FMHKLROVW
TFRZMZ, DSLHV TIVZG XRGB TVIBLMH HLMH
XZOO VO WLIZWL.  YFG GL MLYOVI HRTSGH
NRXSZVO UILN ZWZNH VBVH GSV URON IVNLEVW,
DSRXS GSZG UZOHV UIFRG GSZG KILNRHVW XOVZIVI HRTSG
SZW YIVW GSVM KFITVW DRGS VFKSIZHB ZMW IFV
GSV ERHFZO MVIEV, ULI SV SZW NFXS GL HVV
ZMW UILN GSV DVOO LU ORUV GSIVV WILKH RMHGROOVW.
HL WVVK GSV KLDVI LU GSVHV RMTIVWRVMGH KRVIXVW,
VEVM GL GSV RMNLHG HVZG LU NVMGZO HRTSG,
GSZG ZWZN, MLD VMULIXVW GL XOLHV SRH VBVH,
HFMP WLDM, ZMW ZOO SRH HKRIRGH YVXZNV VMGIZMXVW
YFG SRN GSV TVMGOV ZMTVO YB GSV SZMW
HLLM IZRHVW, ZMW SRH ZGGVMGRLM GSFH IVXZOOVW.
ZWZN, MLD LKV GSRMV VBVH ZMW URIHG YVSLOW
GSV VUUVXGH, DSRXS GSB LIRTRMZO XIRNV SZGS DILFTSG
RM HLNV GL HKIRMT UILN GSVV DSL MVEVI GLFXSVW
GSV VCXVKGVW GIVV MLI DRGS GSV HMZPV XLMHKRIVW
MLI HRMMVW GSB HRM BVG UILN GSZG HRM WVIREV
XLIIFKGRLM, GL YIRMT ULIGS NLIV ERLOVMG WVVWH.
SRH VBVH SV LKVMVW, ZMW YVSVOW Z URVOW,
KZIG ZIZYOV ZMW GROGS, DSVIVLM DVIV HSVZEVH
MVD IVZKVW GSV LGSVI KZIG HSVVKDZOPH ZMW ULOWH
R GSV NRWHG ZM ZOGZI ZH GSV OZMWNZIP HGLLW,
IFHGRXP, LU TIZHHB HLIW GSRGSVI ZMLM
Z HDVZGB IVZKVI UILN SRH GROOZTV YILFTSG
URIHG UIFRGH, GSV TIVVM VZI, ZMW GSV BVOOLD HSVZU,
FMXFOOVW, ZH XZNV GL SZMW Z HSVKSVIW MVCG,
NLIV NVVP, XZNV DRGS GSV URIHGORMTH LU SRH UOLXP,
XSLRXVHG ZMW YVHG GSVM, HZXIRURXRMT, OZRW
GSV RMDZIWH ZMW GSVRI UZG, DRGS RMXVMHV HGILDVW,
LM GSV XOVUG DLLW, ZMW ZOO WFV IRTSGH KVIULINVW:
SRH LUUVIRMT HLLM KILKRGRLFH URIV UILN SVZEVM
XLMHFNVW DRGS MRNYOV TOZMXV, ZMW TIZGVUFO HGVZN
GSV LGSVIH MLG, ULI SRH DZH MLG HRMXVIV
DSVIVZG SV RMOB IZTVW, ZMW, ZH GSVB GZOPVW,
HNLGV SRN RMGL GSV NRWIRUU DRGS Z HGLMV
GSZG YVZG LFG ORUV SV UVOOZMW, WVZWOB KZOV,
TILZMVW LFG SRH HLFO DRGS TFHSRMT YOLLW VUUFHVW.
NFXS ZG GSZG HRTSG DZH ZWZN RM SRH SVZIG
WRHNZBVW, ZMW GSFH RM SZHGV GL GSV ZMTVO XIRVW.
L GVZXSVI, HLNV TIVZG NRHXSRVU SZGS YVUZOOVM
GL GSZG NVVP NZM, DSL DVOO SZW HZXIRURXVW
RH KRVGB GSFH ZMW KFIV WVELGRLM KZRW?
GL DSLN NRXSZVO GSFH, SV ZOHL NLEVW, IVKORVW.
GSVHV GDL ZIV YIVGSIVM, ZWZN, ZMW GL XLNV
LFG LU GSB OLRMH GSV FMQFHG GSV QFHG SZGS HOZRM,
ULI VMEB GSZG SRH YILGSVIH LUUVIRMT ULFMW
UILN SVZEVM ZXXVKGZMXV YFG GSV YOLLWB UZXG
DROO YV ZEVMTVW ZMW GSV LGSVIH UZRGS, ZKKILEVW,
OLHV ML IVDZIW GSLFTS SVIV GSLF HVV SRN WRV,
ILOORMT RM WFHG ZMW TLIV.  GL DSRXS LFI HRIV.
ZOZH! YLGS ULI GSV WVVW, ZMW ULI GSV XZFHV!
YFG SZEV R MLD HVVM WVZGS?  RH GSRH GSV DZB
R NFHG IVGFIM GL MZGREV WFHG?  L HRTSG
LU GVIILFI, ULFO ZMW FTOB GL YVSLOW,
SLIIRW GL GSRMP, SLD SLIIRYOV GL UVVO!
GL DSLN GSFH NRXSZVO.  WVZGS GSLF SZHG HVVM
RM SRH URIHG HSZKV LM NZM YFG NZMB HSZKVH
LU WVZGS, ZMW NZMB ZIV GSV DZBH GSZG OVZW
GL SRH TIRN XZEV, ZOO WRHNZO BVG GL HVMHV
NLIV GVIIRYOV ZG GSV VMGIZMXV, GSZM DRGSRM.
HLNV, ZH GSLF HZDVHG, YB ERLOVMG HGILPV HSZOO WRV
YB URIV, UOLLW, UZNRMV, YB RMGVNKVIZMXV NLIV
RM NVZGH ZMW WIRMPH, DSRXS LM GSV VZIGS HSZOO YIRMT
WRHVZHVH WRIV, LU DSRXS Z NLMHGILFH XIVD
YVULIV GSVV HSZOO ZKKVZI GSZG GSLF NZBVHG PMLD
DSZG NRHVIB GSV RMZYHGRMVMXV LU VEV
HSZOO YIRMT LM NVM.  RNNVWRZGVOB Z KOZXV
YVULIV SRH VBVH ZKKVZIVW, HZW, MLRHLNV, WZIP
Z OZAZISLFHV RG HVVNVW DSVIVRM DVIV OZRW
MFNYVIH LU ZOO WRHVZHVW ZOO NZOZWRVH
LU TSZHGOB HKZHN, LI IZXPRMT GLIGFIV, JFZONH
LU SVZIGHRXP ZTLMB, ZOO UVEVILFH PRMWH,
XLMEFOHRLMH, VKROVKHRVH, URVIXV XZGZIISH,
RMGVHGRMV HGLMV ZMW FOXVI, XLORXPKZMTH,
WVNLMRZXP KSIVMAB, NLZKRMT NVOZMXSLOB,
ZMW NLLMHGIFXP NZWMVHH, KRMRMT ZGILKSB,
NZIZHNFH, ZMW DRWVDZHGRMT KVHGROVMXV,
WILKHRVH, ZMW ZHGSNZH, ZMW QLRMGIZXPRMT ISVFNH.
WRIV DZH GSV GLHHRMT, WVVK GSV TILZMH WVHKZRI
GVMWVW GSV HRXP YFHRVHG UILN XLFXS GL XLFXS
ZMW LEVI GSVN GIRFNKSZMG WVZGS SRH WZIG
HSLLP, YFG WVOZBVW GL HGIRPV, GSLFTS LUG RMELPVW
DRGS ELDH, ZH GSVRI XSRVU TLLW, ZMW URMZO SLKV.
HRTSG HL WVULIN DSZG SVZIG LU ILXP XLFOW OLMT
WIBVBVW YVSLOW?  ZWZN XLFOW MLG, YFG DVKG,
GSLFTS MLG LU DLNZM YLIM XLNKZHHRLM JFVOOVW
SRH YVHG LU NZM, ZMW TZEV SRN FK GL GVZIH
Z HKZXV, GROO URINVI GSLFTSGH IVHGIZRMVW VCXVHH
ZMW, HXZIXV IVXLEVIRMT DLIWH, SRH KOZRMG IVMVDVW.
L NRHVIZYOV NZMPRMW, GL DSZG UZOO
WVTIZWVW, GL DSZG DIVGXSVW HGZGV IVHVIEVW!
YVGGVI VMW SVIV FMYLIM.  DSB RH ORUV TREVM
GL YV GSFH DIVHGVW UILN FH? IZGSVI, DSB
LYGIFWVW LM FH GSFH? DSL, RU DV PMVD
DSZG DV IVXVREV, DLFOW VRGSVI ML ZXXVKG
ORUV LUUVIVW, LI HLLM YVT GL OZB RG WLDM
TOZW GL YV HL WRHNRHHVW RM KVZXV.  XZM GSFH
GSV RNZTV LU TLW RM NZM, XIVZGVW LMXV
HL TLLWOB ZMW VIVXG, GSLFTS UZFOGB HRMXV,
GL HFXS FMHRTSGOB HFUUVIRMTH YV WVYZHVW
FMWVI RMSFNZM KZRMH?  DSB HSLFOW MLG NZM,
IVGZRMRMT HGROO WRERMV HRNRORGFWV
RM KZIG, UILN HFXS WVULINRGRVH YV UIVV,
ZMW, ULI SRH NZPVIH RNZTV HZPV, VCVNKG?
GSVRI NZPVIH RNZTV, ZMHDVIVW NRXSZVO, GSVM
ULIHLLP GSVN, DSVM GSVNHVOEVH GSVB ERORURVW
GL HVIEV FMTLEVIMVW ZKKVGRGV ZMW GLLP
SRH RNZTV DSLN GSVB HVIEVW, Z YIFGRHS ERXV,
RMWFXGREV NZRMOB GL GSV HRM LU VEV.
GSVIVULIV HL ZYQVXG RH GSVRI KFMRHSNVMG,
WRHURTFIRMT MLG TLWH ORPVMVHH, YFG GSVRI LDM
LI RU SRH ORPVMVHH, YB GSVNHVOEVH WVUZXVW
DSROV GSVB KVIEVIG KFIV MZGFIVH SVZOGSUFO IFOVH
GL OLZGSHLNV HRXPMVHH DLIGSROB, HRMXV GSVB
TLWH RNZTV WRW MLG IVEVIVMXV RM GSVNHVOEVH.
R BRVOW RG QFHG, HZRW ZWZN, ZMW HFYNRG.
YFG RH GSVIV BVG ML LGSVI DZB, YVHRWVH
GSVHV KZRMUFO KZHHZTVH, SLD DV NZB XLNV
GL WVZGS, ZMW NRC DRGS LFI XLMMZGFIZO WFHG?
GSVIV RH, HZRW NRXSZVO, RU GSLF DVOO LYHVIEV
GSV IFOV LU MLG GLL NFXS YB GVNKVIZMXV GZFTSG,
RM DSZG GSLF VZGVHG ZMW WIRMPVHG HVVPRMT UILN GSVMXV
WFV MLFIRHSNVMG, MLG TOFGGLMLFH WVORTSG,
GROO NZMB BVZIH LEVI GSB SVZW IVGFIM:
HL NZBVHG GSLF OREV GROO, ORPV IRKV UIFRG, GSLF WILK
RMGL GSB NLGSVIH OZK LI YV DRGS VZHV
TZGSVIVW, MLI SZIHSOB KOFXPVW ULI WVZGS NZGFIV:
GSRH RH LOW ZTV YFG GSVM, GSLF NFHG LFGOREV
GSB BLFGS, GSB HGIVMTGS, GSB YVZFGB DSRXS DROO XSZMTV
GL DRGSVIVW, DVZP, ZMW TIZB GSB HVMHVH GSVM,
LYGFHV, ZOO GZHGV LU KOVZHFIV NFHG ULIVTL,
GL DSZG GSLF SZHG ZMW, ULI GSV ZRI LU BLFGS,
SLKVUFO ZMW XSVVIUFO, RM GSB YOLLW DROO IVRTM
Z NVOZMXSLOB WZNK LU XLOW ZMW WIB
GL DVRTS GSB HKRIRGH WLDM, ZMW OZHG XLMHFNV
GSV YZON LU ORUV.  GL DSLN LFI ZMXVHGLI.
SVMXVULIGS R UOB MLG WVZGS, MLI DLFOW KILOLMT
ORUV NFXS YVMG IZGSVI, SLD R NZB YV JFRG,
UZRIVHG ZMW VZHRVHG, LU GSRH XFNYILFH XSZITV
DSRXS R NFHG PVVK GROO NB ZKKLRMGVW WZB
LU IVMWVIRMT FK, ZMW KZGRVMGOB ZGGVMW
NB WRHHLOFGRLM.  NRXSZVO IVKORVW.
MLI OLEV GSB ORUV, MLI SZGV YFG DSZG GSLF OREVHG
OREV DVOO SLD OLMT, LI HSLIG, KVINRG GL SVZEVM:
ZMW MLD KIVKZIV GSVV ULI ZMLGSVI HRTSG.
SV OLLPVW, ZMW HZD Z HKZXRLFH KOZRM, DSVIVLM
DVIV GVMGH LU EZIRLFH SFV YB HLNV, DVIV SVIWH
LU XZGGOV TIZARMT LGSVIH, DSVMXV GSV HLFMW
LU RMHGIFNVMGH, GSZG NZWV NVOLWRLFH XSRNV,
DZH SVZIW, LU SZIK ZMW LITZM ZMW, DSL NLEVW
GSVRI HGLKH ZMW XSLIWH, DZH HVVM SRH ELOZMG GLFXS,
RMHGRMXG GSILFTS ZOO KILKLIGRLMH, OLD ZMW SRTS,
UOVW ZMW KFIHFVW GIZMHEVIHV GSV IVHLMZMG UFTFV.
RM LGSVI KZIG HGLLW LMV DSL, ZG GSV ULITV
OZYLFIRMT, GDL NZHHB XOLWH LU RILM ZMW YIZHH
SZW NVOGVW, DSVGSVI ULFMW DSVIV XZHFZO URIV
SZW DZHGVW DLLWH LM NLFMGZRM LI RM EZOV,
WLDM GL GSV EVRMH LU VZIGS GSVMXV TORWRMT SLG
GL HLNV XZEVH NLFGS LI DSVGSVI DZHSVW YB HGIVZN
UILN FMWVITILFMW GSV ORJFRW LIV SV WIZRMVW
RMGL URG NLFOWH KIVKZIVW UILN DSRXS SV ULINVW
URIHG SRH LDM GLLOH GSVM, DSZG NRTSG VOHV YV DILFTSG
UFHRO LI TIZEVM RM NVGZO.  ZUGVI GSVHV,
YFG LM GSV SRGSVI HRWV, Z WRUUVIVMG HLIG
UILN GSV SRTS MVRTSYLFIRMT SROOH, DSRXS DZH GSVRI HVZG,
WLDM GL GSV KOZRM WVHXVMWVW YB GSVRI TFRHV
QFHG NVM GSVB HVVNVW, ZMW ZOO GSVRI HGFWB YVMG
GL DLIHSRK TLW ZIRTSG, ZMW PMLD SRH DLIPH
MLG SRW MLI GSLHV GSRMTH OZHG, DSRXS NRTSG KIVHVIEV
UIVVWLN ZMW KVZXV GL NVM GSVB LM GSV KOZRM
OLMT SZW MLG DZOPVW, DSVM UILN GSV GVMGH, YVSLOW!
Z YVEB LU UZRI DLNVM, IRXSOB TZB
RM TVNH ZMW DZMGLM WIVHH GL GSV SZIK GSVB HFMT
HLUG ZNLILFH WRGGRVH, ZMW RM WZMXV XZNV LM:
GSV NVM, GSLFTS TIZEV, VBVW GSVN ZMW OVG GSVRI VBVH
ILEV DRGSLFG IVRM GROO, RM GSV ZNLILFH MVG
UZHG XZFTSG, GSVB ORPVW ZMW VZXS SRH ORPRMT XSLHV
ZMW MLD LU OLEV GSVB GIVZG, GROO GSV VEVMRMTHGZI,
OLEVH SZIYRMTVI, ZKKVZIVW GSVM, ZOO RM SVZG
GSVB ORTSG GSV MFKGRZO GLIXS, ZMW YRW RMELPV
SBNVM, GSVM URIHG GL NZIIRZTV IRGVH RMELPVW:
DRGS UVZHG ZMW NFHRXP ZOO GSV GVMGH IVHLFMW.
HFXS SZKKB RMGVIERVD, ZMW UZRI VEVMG
LU OLEV ZMW BLFGS MLG OLHG, HLMTH, TZIOZMWH, UOLDVIH,
ZMW XSZINRMT HBNKSLMRVH, ZGGZXSVW GSV SVZIG
LU ZWZN, HLLM RMXORMVW GL ZWNRG WVORTSG,
GSV YVMG LU MZGFIV DSRXS SV GSFH VCKIVHHVW.
GIFV LKVMVI LU NRMV VBVH, KIRNV ZMTVO YOVHG
NFXS YVGGVI HVVNH GSRH ERHRLM, ZMW NLIV SLKV
LU KVZXVUFO WZBH KLIGVMWH, GSZM GSLHV GDL KZHG
GSLHV DVIV LU SZGV ZMW WVZGS, LI KZRM NFXS DLIHV
SVIV MZGFIV HVVNH UFOUROOVW RM ZOO SVI VMWH.
GL DSLN GSFH NRXSZVO.  QFWTV MLG DSZG RH YVHG
YB KOVZHFIV, GSLFTS GL MZGFIV HVVNRMT NVVG
XIVZGVW, ZH GSLF ZIG, GL MLYOVI VMW
SLOB ZMW KFIV, XLMULINRGB WRERMV.
GSLHV GVMGH GSLF HZDVHG HL KOVZHZMG, DVIV GSV GVMGH
LU DRXPVWMVHH, DSVIVRM HSZOO WDVOO SRH IZXV
DSL HOVD SRH YILGSVI HGFWRLFH GSVB ZKKVZI
LU ZIGH GSZG KLORHS ORUV, RMEVMGVIH IZIV
FMNRMWUFO LU GSVRI NZPVI, GSLFTS SRH HKRIRG
GZFTSG GSVN YFG GSVB SRH TRUGH ZXPMLDOVWTVW MLMV.
BVG GSVB Z YVZFGVLFH LUUHKIRMT HSZOO YVTVG
ULI GSZG UZRI UVNZOV GILLK GSLF HZDVHG, GSZG HVVNVW
LU TLWWVHHVH, HL YORGSV, HL HNLLGS, HL TZB,
BVG VNKGB LU ZOO TLLW DSVIVRM XLMHRHGH
DLNZMH WLNVHGRXP SLMLFI ZMW XSRVU KIZRHV
YIVW LMOB ZMW XLNKOVGVW GL GSV GZHGV
LU OFHGUFO ZKKVGVMXV, GL HRMT, GL WZMXV,
GL WIVHH, ZMW GILOO GSV GLMTFV, ZMW ILOO GSV VBV:
GL GSVHV GSZG HLYVI IZXV LU NVM, DSLHV OREVH
IVORTRLFH GRGOVW GSVN GSV HLMH LU TLW,
HSZOO BRVOW FK ZOO GSVRI ERIGFV, ZOO GSVRI UZNV
RTMLYOB, GL GSV GIZRMH ZMW GL GSV HNROVH
LU GSVHV UZRI ZGSVRHGH ZMW MLD HDRN RM QLB,
VIVOLMT GL HDRN ZG OZITV ZMW OZFTS, ULI DSRXS
GSV DLIOW VIVOLMT Z DLIOW LU GVZIH NFHG DVVK.
GL DSLN GSFH ZWZN, LU HSLIG QLB YVIVUG.
L KRGB ZMW HSZNV, GSZG GSVB, DSL GL OREV DVOO
VMGVIVW HL UZRI, HSLFOW GFIM ZHRWV GL GIVZW
KZGSH RMWRIVXG, LI RM GSV NRW DZB UZRMG!
YFG HGROO R HVV GSV GVMLFI LU NZMH DLV
SLOWH LM GSV HZNV, UILN DLNZM GL YVTRM.
UILN NZMH VUUVNRMZGV HOZXPMVHH RG YVTRMH,
HZRW GSV ZMTVO, DSL HSLFOW YVGGVI SLOW SRH KOZXV
YB DRHWLN, ZMW HFKVIRLFI TRUGH IVXVREVW.
YFG MLD KIVKZIV GSVV ULI ZMLGSVI HXVMV.
SV OLLPVW, ZMW HZD DRWV GVIIRGLIB HKIVZW
YVULIV SRN, GLDMH, ZMW IFIZO DLIPH YVGDVVM
XRGRVH LU NVM DRGS OLUGB TZGVH ZMW GLDVIH,
XLMXLFIHV RM ZINH, URVIXV UZXVH GSIVZGVMRMT DZI,
TRZMGH LU NRTSGB YLMV ZMW YLOW VNKIRHV
KZIG DRVOW GSVRI ZINH, KZIG XFIY GSV ULZNRMT HGVVW,
HRMTOV LI RM ZIIZB LU YZGGOV IZMTVW
YLGS SLIHV ZMW ULLG, MLI RWOB NFHGVIRMT HGLLW
LMV DZB Z YZMW HVOVXG UILN ULIZTV WIREVH
Z SVIW LU YVVEVH, UZRI LCVM ZMW UZRI PRMV,
UILN Z UZG NVZWLD TILFMW LI UOVVXB UOLXP,
VDVH ZMW GSVRI YOVZGRMT OZNYH LEVI GSV KOZRM,
GSVRI YLLGB HXZIXV DRGS ORUV GSV HSVKSVIWH UOB,
YFG XZOO RM ZRW, DSRXS NZPVH Z YOLLWB UIZB
DRGS XIFVO GLFIMZNVMG GSV HJFZWILMH QLRM
DSVIV XZGGOV KZHGFIVW OZGV, MLD HXZGGVIVW ORVH
DRGS XZIXZHHVH ZMW ZINH GSV VMHZMTFRMVW URVOW,
WVHVIGVW:  LGSVIH GL Z XRGB HGILMT
OZB HRVTV, VMXZNKVW YB YZGGVIB, HXZOV, ZMW NRMV,
ZHHZFOGRMT LGSVIH UILN GSV DZOO WVUVMW
DRGS WZIG ZMW QZEVORM, HGLMVH, ZMW HFOKSFILFH URIV
LM VZXS SZMW HOZFTSGVI, ZMW TRTZMGRXP WVVWH.
RM LGSVI KZIG GSV HXVKGVIVW SVIZOWH XZOO
GL XLFMXRO, RM GSV XRGBTZGVH ZMLM
TIZBSVZWVW NVM ZMW TIZEV, DRGS DZIIRLFIH NRCVW,
ZHHVNYOV, ZMW SZIZMTFVH ZIV SVZIW YFG HLLM,
RM UZXGRLFH LKKLHRGRLM GROO ZG OZHG,
LU NRWWOV ZTV LMV IRHRMT, VNRMVMG
RM DRHV WVKLIG, HKZPV NFXS LU IRTSG ZMW DILMT,
LU QFHGRXV, LI IVORTRLM, GIFGS, ZMW KVZXV,
ZMW QFWTVNVMG UILN ZYLEV: SRN LOW ZMW BLFMT
VCKOLWVW, ZMW SZW HVRAVW DRGS ERLOVMG SZMWH,
SZW MLG Z XOLFW WVHXVMWRMT HMZGXSVW SRN GSVMXV
FMHVVM ZNRW GSV GSILMT: HL ERLOVMXV
KILXVVWVW, ZMW LKKIVHHRLM, ZMW HDLIWOZD,
GSILFTS ZOO GSV KOZRM, ZMW IVUFTV MLMV DZH ULFMW.
ZWZN DZH ZOO RM GVZIH, ZMW GL SRH TFRWV
OZNVMGRMT GFIMVW UFOO HZW L!DSZG ZIV GSVHV,
WVZGSH NRMRHGVIH, MLG NVM? DSL GSFH WVZO WVZGS
RMSFNZMOB GL NVM, ZMW NFOGRKOB
GVM GSLFHZMWULOW GSV HRM LU SRN DSL HOVD
SRH YILGSVI: ULI LU DSLN HFXS NZHHZXIV
NZPV GSVB, YFG LU GSVRI YIVGSIVM NVM LU NVM
YFG DSL DZH GSZG QFHG NZM, DSLN SZW MLG SVZEVM
IVHXFVW, SZW RM SRH IRTSGVLFHMVHH YVVM OLHG?
GL DSLN GSFH NRXSZVO.  GSVHV ZIV GSV KILWFXG
LU GSLHV ROONZGVW NZIIRZTVH GSLF HZDVHG
DSVIV TLLW DRGS YZW DVIV NZGXSVW, DSL LU GSVNHVOEVH
ZYSLI GL QLRM ZMW, YB RNKIFWVMXV NRCVW,
KILWFXV KILWRTRLFH YRIGSH LU YLWB LI NRMW.
HFXS DVIV GSVHV TRZMGH, NVM LU SRTS IVMLDM
ULI RM GSLHV WZBH NRTSG LMOB HSZOO YV ZWNRIVW,
ZMW EZOLFI ZMW SVILRXP ERIGFV XZOOVW
GL LEVIXLNV RM YZGGOV, ZMW HFYWFV
MZGRLMH, ZMW YIRMT SLNV HKLROH DRGS RMURMRGV
NZMHOZFTSGVI, HSZOO YV SVOW GSV SRTSVHG KRGXS
LU SFNZM TOLIB ZMW ULI TOLIB WLMV
LU GIRFNKS, GL YV HGBOVW TIVZG XLMJFVILFIH
KZGILMH LU NZMPRMW, TLWH, ZMW HLMH LU TLWH
WVHGILBVIH IRTSGORVI XZOOVW, ZMW KOZTFVH LU NVM.
GSFH UZNV HSZOO YV ZXSRVEVW, IVMLDM LM VZIGS
ZMW DSZG NLHG NVIRGH UZNV, RM HROVMXV SRW.
YFG SV, GSV HVEVMGS UILN GSVV, DSLN GSLF YVSVOWHG
GSV LMOB IRTSGVLFH RM Z DLIOW KIVEVIHV,
ZMW GSVIVULIV SZGVW, GSVIVULIV HL YVHVG
DRGS ULVH, ULI WZIRMT HRMTOV GL YV QFHG,
ZMW FGGVI LWRLFH GIFGS, GSZG TLW DLFOW XLNV
GL QFWTV GSVN DRGS SRH HZRMGH SRN GSV NLHG SRTS
IZKG RM Z YZONB XOLFW DRGS DRMTVW HGVVWH
WRW, ZH GSLF HZDVHG, IVXVREV, GL DZOP DRGS TLW
SRTS RM HZOEZGRLM ZMW GSV XORNVH LU YORHH,
VCVNKG UILN WVZGS GL HSLD GSVV DSZG IVDZIW
ZDZRGH GSV TLLW GSV IVHG DSZG KFMRHSNVMG
DSRXS MLD WRIVXG GSRMV VBVH ZMW HLLM YVSLOW.
SV OLLPVW, ZMW HZD GSV UZXV LU GSRMTH JFRGV XSZMTVW
GSV YIZAVM GSILZG LU DZI SZW XVZHVW GL ILZI
ZOO MLD DZH GFIMVW GL QLOORGB ZMW TZNV,
GL OFCFIB ZMW IRLG, UVZHG ZMW WZMXV
NZIIBRMT LI KILHGRGFGRMT, ZH YVUVO,
IZKV LI ZWFOGVIB, DSVIV KZHHRMT UZRI
ZOOFIVW GSVN GSVMXV UILN XFKH GL XRERO YILROH.
ZG OVMTGS Z IVEVIVMW HRIV ZNLMT GSVN XZNV,
ZMW LU GSVRI WLRMTH TIVZG WRHORPV WVXOZIVW,
ZMW GVHGRURVW ZTZRMHG GSVRI DZBH SV LUG
UIVJFVMGVW GSVRI ZHHVNYORVH, DSVIVHL NVG,
GIRFNKSH LI UVHGREZOH ZMW GL GSVN KIVZXSVW
XLMEVIHRLM ZMW IVKVMGZMXV, ZH GL HLFOH
RM KIRHLM, FMWVI QFWTVNVMGH RNNRMVMG:
YFG ZOO RM EZRM: DSRXS DSVM SV HZD, SV XVZHVW
XLMGVMWRMT, ZMW IVNLEVW SRH GVMGH UZI LUU
GSVM, UILN GSV NLFMGZRM SVDRMT GRNYVI GZOO,
YVTZM GL YFROW Z EVHHVO LU SFTV YFOP
NVZHFIVW YB XFYRG, OVMTGS, ZMW YIVZWGS, ZMW SRTSGS
HNVZIVW ILFMW DRGS KRGXS ZMW RM GSV HRWV Z WLLI
XLMGIREVW ZMW LU KILERHRLMH OZRW RM OZITV,
ULI NZM ZMW YVZHG: DSVM OL, Z DLMWVI HGIZMTV!
LU VEVIB YVZHG, ZMW YRIW, ZMW RMHVXG HNZOO,
XZNV HVEVMH, ZMW KZRIH ZMW VMGVIVW RM ZH GZFTSG
GSVRI LIWVI: OZHG GSV HRIV ZMW SRH GSIVV HLMH,
DRGS GSVRI ULFI DREVH ZMW TLW NZWV UZHG GSV WLLI.
NVZM DSROV GSV HLFGSDRMW ILHV, ZMW, DRGS YOZXP DRMTH
DRWVSLEVIRMT, ZOO GSV XOLFWH GLTVGSVI WILEV
UILN FMWVI SVZEVM GSV SROOH GL GSVRI HFKKOB
EZKLFI, ZMW VCSZOZGRLM WFHP ZMW NLRHG,
HVMG FK ZNZRM ZMW MLD GSV GSRXPVMVW HPB
ORPV Z WZIP XRVORMT HGLLW WLDM IFHSVW GSV IZRM
RNKVGFLFH ZMW XLMGRMFVW, GROO GSV VZIGS
ML NLIV DZH HVVM: GSV UOLZGRMT EVHHVO HDFN
FKORUGVW, ZMW HVXFIV DRGS YVZPVW KILD
ILWV GROGRMT LVI GSV DZEVH ZOO WDVOORMTH VOHV
UOLLW LEVIDSVONVW, ZMW GSVN DRGS ZOO GSVRI KLNK
WVVK FMWVI DZGVI ILOOVW HVZ XLEVIVW HVZ,
HVZ DRGSLFG HSLIV ZMW RM GSVRI KZOZXVH,
DSVIV OFCFIB OZGV IVRTMVW, HVZNLMHGVIH DSVOKVW
ZMW HGZYOVW LU NZMPRMW, HL MFNVILFH OZGV,
ZOO OVUG, RM LMV HNZOO YLGGLN HDFN RNYZIPVW.
SLD WRWHG GSLF TIRVEV GSVM, ZWZN, GL YVSLOW
GSV VMW LU ZOO GSB LUUHKIRMT, VMW HL HZW,
WVKLKFOZGRLM!  GSVV ZMLGSVI UOLLW,
LU GVZIH ZMW HLIILD Z UOLLW, GSVV ZOHL WILDMVW,
ZMW HFMP GSVV ZH GSB HLMH GROO, TVMGOB IVZIVW
YB GSV ZMTVO, LM GSB UVVG GSLF HGLLWVHG ZG OZHG,
GSLFTS XLNULIGOVHH ZH DSVM Z UZGSVI NLFIMH
SRH XSROWIVM, ZOO RM ERVD WVHGILBVW ZG LMXV
ZMW HXZIXV GL GSV ZMTVO FGGVIWHG GSFH GSB KOZRMG.
L ERHRLMH ROO ULIVHVVM!  YVGGVI SZW R
OREVW RTMLIZMG LU UFGFIV! HL SZW YLIMV
NB KZIG LU VERO LMOB, VZXS WZBH OLG
VMLFTS GL YVZI GSLHV MLD, GSZG DVIV WRHKVMHVW
GSV YFIWVM LU NZMB ZTVH, LM NV ORTSG
ZG LMXV, YB NB ULIVPMLDOVWTV TZRMRMT YRIGS
ZYLIGREV, GL GLINVMG NV VIV GSVRI YVRMT,
DRGS GSLFTSG GSZG GSVB NFHG YV.  OVG ML NZM HVVP
SVMXVULIGS GL YV ULIVGLOW, DSZG HSZOO YVUZOO
SRN LI SRH XSROWIVM VERO SV NZB YV HFIV,
DSRXS MVRGSVI SRH ULIVPMLDRMT XZM KIVEVMG
ZMW SV GSV UFGFIV VERO HSZOO ML OVHH
RM ZKKIVSVMHRLM GSZM RM HFYHGZMXV UVVO,
TIRVELFH GL YVZI: YFG GSZG XZIV MLD RH KZHG,
NZM RH MLG DSLN GL DZIM: GSLHV UVD VHXZKVW
UZNRMV ZMW ZMTFRHS DROO ZG OZHG XLMHFNV,
DZMWVIRMT GSZG DZGVIB WVHZIG:  R SZW SLKV,
DSVM ERLOVMXV DZH XVZHVW, ZMW DZI LM VZIGS,
ZOO DLFOW SZEV GSVM TLMV DVOO KVZXV DLFOW SZEV XILDMVW
DRGS OVMTGS LU SZKKB WZBH GSV IZXV LU NZM
YFG R DZH UZI WVXVREVW ULI MLD R HVV
KVZXV GL XLIIFKG ML OVHH GSZM DZI GL DZHGV.
SLD XLNVH RG GSFH? FMULOW, XVOVHGRZO TFRWV,
ZMW DSVGSVI SVIV GSV IZXV LU NZM DROO VMW.
GL DSLN GSFH NRXSZVO.  GSLHV, DSLN OZHG GSLF HZDVHG
RM GIRFNKS ZMW OFCFIRLFH DVZOGS, ZIV GSVB
URIHG HVVM RM ZXGH LU KILDVHH VNRMVMG
ZMW TIVZG VCKOLRGH, YFG LU GIFV ERIGFV ELRW
DSL, SZERMT HKROG NFXS YOLLW, ZMW WLMV NFXS DZHG
HFYWFRMT MZGRLMH, ZMW ZXSRVEVW GSVIVYB
UZNV RM GSV DLIOW, SRTS GRGOVH, ZMW IRXS KIVB
HSZOO XSZMTV GSVRI XLFIHV GL KOVZHFIV, VZHV, ZMW HOLGS,
HFIUVRG, ZMW OFHG GROO DZMGLMMVHH ZMW KIRWV
IZRHV LFG LU UIRVMWHSRK SLHGROV WVVWH RM KVZXV.
GSV XLMJFVIVW ZOHL, ZMW VMHOZEVW YB DZI,
HSZOO, DRGS GSVRI UIVVWLN OLHG, ZOO ERIGFV OLHV
ZMW UVZI LU TLW UILN DSLN GSVRI KRVGB UVRTMVW
RM HSZIK XLMGVHG LU YZGGOV ULFMW ML ZRW
ZTZRMHG RMEZWVIH GSVIVULIV, XLLOVW RM AVZO,
GSVMXVULIGS HSZOO KIZXGRXV SLD GL OREV HVXFIV,
DLIOWOB LI WRHHLOFGV, LM DSZG GSVRI OLIWH
HSZOO OVZEV GSVN GL VMQLB ULI GSV VZIGS HSZOO YVZI
NLIV GSZM VMLFTS, GSZG GVNKVIZMXV NZB YV GIRVW:
HL ZOO HSZOO GFIM WVTVMVIZGV, ZOO WVKIZEVW
QFHGRXV ZMW GVNKVIZMXV, GIFGS ZMW UZRGS, ULITLG
LMV NZM VCXVKG, GSV LMOB HLM LU ORTSG
RM Z WZIP ZTV, ZTZRMHG VCZNKOV TLLW,
ZTZRMHG ZOOFIVNVMG, XFHGLN, ZMW Z DLIOW
LUUVMWVW: UVZIOVHH LU IVKILZXS ZMW HXLIM,
GSV TIZMWXSROW, DRGS GDVOEV HLMH VMXIVZHVW, WVKZIGH
UILN XZMZZM, GL Z OZMW SVIVZUGVI XZOOVW
VTBKG, WRERWVW YB GSV IREVI MROV
HVV DSVIV RG UOLDH, WRHTLITRMT ZG HVEVM NLFGSH
RMGL GSV HVZ:  GL HLQLFIM RM GSZG OZMW
SV XLNVH, RMERGVW YB Z BLFMTVI HLM
RM GRNV LU WVZIGS Z HLM, DSLHV DLIGSB WVVWH
IZRHV SRN GL YV GSV HVXLMW RM GSZG IVZON
LU KSZIZLS:  GSVIV SV WRVH, ZMW OVZEVH SRH IZXV
TILDRMT RMGL Z MZGRLM, ZMW MLD TILDM
HFHKVXGVW GL Z HVJFVMG PRMT, DSL HVVPH
GL HGLK GSVRI LEVITILDGS, ZH RMNZGV TFVHGH
LI ERLOVMXV, SV LU GSVRI DRXPVW DZBH
HSZOO GSVN ZWNLMRHS ZMW YVULIV GSVN HVG
GSV KZGSH LU IRTSGVLFHMVHH, SLD NFXS NLIV HZUV
ZMW UFOO LU KVZXV WVMLFMXRMT DIZGS GL XLNV
LM GSVRI RNKVMRGVMXV ZMW HSZOO IVGFIM
LU GSVN WVIRWVW, YFG LU TLW LYHVIEVW
GSV LMV QFHG NZM ZOREV YB SRH XLNNZMW
HSZOO YFROW Z DLMWVILFH ZIP, ZH GSLF YVSVOWHG,
GL HZEV SRNHVOU, ZMW SLFHSLOW, UILN ZNRWHG
Z DLIOW WVELGV GL FMREVIHZO DIZXP.
ML HLLMVI SV, DRGS GSVN LU NZM ZMW YVZHG
HVOVXG ULI ORUV, HSZOO RM GSV ZIP YV OLWTVW,
ZMW HSVOGVIVW ILFMW YFG ZOO GSV XZGZIZXGH
LU SVZEVM HVG LKVM LM GSV VZIGS HSZOO KLFI
IZRM, WZB ZMW MRTSG ZOO ULFMGZRMH LU GSV WVVK,
YILPV FK, HSZOO SVZEV GSV LXVZM GL FHFIK
YVBLMW ZOO YLFMWH GROO RMFMWZGRLM IRHV
ZYLEV GSV SRTSVHG SROOH:  GSVM HSZOO GSRH NLFMG
LU KZIZWRHV YB NRTSG LU DZEVH YV NLEVW
LFG LU SRH KOZXV, KFHSVW YB GSV SLIMVW UOLLW,
DRGS ZOO SRH EVIWFIV HKLROVW, ZMW GIVVH ZWIRUG,
WLDM GSV TIVZG IREVI GL GSV LKVMRMT TFOU,
ZMW GSVIV GZPV ILLG ZM RHOZMW HZOG ZMW YZIV,
GSV SZFMG LU HVZOH, ZMW LIXH, ZMW HVZNVDH XOZMT:
GL GVZXS GSVV GSZG TLW ZGGIRYFGVH GL KOZXV
ML HZMXGRGB, RU MLMV YV GSRGSVI YILFTSG
YB NVM DSL GSVIV UIVJFVMG, LI GSVIVRM WDVOO.
ZMW MLD, DSZG UFIGSVI HSZOO VMHFV, YVSLOW.
SV OLLPVW, ZMW HZD GSV ZIP SFOO LM GSV UOLLW,
DSRXS MLD ZYZGVW ULI GSV XOLFWH DVIV UOVW,
WIREVM YB Z PVVM MLIGSDRMW, GSZG, YOLDRMT WIB,
DIRMPOVW GSV UZXV LU WVOFTV, ZH WVXZBVW
ZMW GSV XOVZI HFM LM SRH DRWV DZGVIB TOZHH
TZAVW SLG, ZMW LU GSV UIVHS DZEV OZITVOB WIVD,
ZH ZUGVI GSRIHG DSRXS NZWV GSVRI UOLDRMT HSIRMP
UILN HGZMWRMT OZPV GL GIRKKRMT VYY, GSZG HGLOV
DRGS HLUG ULLG GLDZIWH GSV WVVK DSL MLD SZW HGLKG
SRH HOFXVH, ZH GSV SVZEVM SRH DRMWLDH HSFG.
GSV ZIP ML NLIV MLD UOLZGH, YFG HVVNH LM TILFMW,
UZHG LM GSV GLK LU HLNV SRTS NLFMGZRM URCVW.
ZMW MLD GSV GLKH LU SROOH, ZH ILXPH, ZKKVZI
DRGS XOZNLFI GSVMXV GSV IZKRW XFIIVMGH WIREV,
GLDZIWH GSV IVGIVZGRMT HVZ, GSVRI UFIRLFH GRWV.
ULIGSDRGS UILN LFG GSV ZIP Z IZEVM UORVH,
ZMW ZUGVI SRN, GSV HFIVI NVHHVMTVI,
Z WLEV HVMG ULIGS LMXV ZMW ZTZRM GL HKB
TIVVM GIVV LI TILFMW, DSVIVLM SRH ULLG NZB ORTSG:
GSV HVXLMW GRNV IVGFIMRMT, RM SRH YROO
ZM LOREVOVZU SV YIRMTH, KZXRURXP HRTM:
ZMLM WIB TILFMW ZKKVZIH, ZMW UILN SRH ZIP
GSV ZMXRVMG HRIV WVHXVMWH, DRGS ZOO SRH GIZRM
GSVM DRGS FKORUGVW SZMWH, ZMW VBVH WVELFG,
TIZGVUFO GL SVZEVM, LEVI SRH SVZW YVSLOWH
Z WVDB XOLFW, ZMW RM GSV XOLFW Z YLD
XLMHKRXFLFH DRGS GSIVV ORUGVW XLOLFIH TZB,
YVGLPVMRMT KVZXV UILN TLW, ZMW XLEVMZMG MVD.
DSVIVZG GSV SVZIG LU ZWZN, VIHG HL HZW,
TIVZGOB IVQLRXVW ZMW GSFH SRH QLB YILPV ULIGS.
L GSLF, DSL UFGFIV GSRMTH XZMHG IVKIVHVMG
ZH KIVHVMG, SVZEVMOB RMHGIFXGVI!  R IVEREV
ZG GSRH OZHG HRTSG ZHHFIVW GSZG NZM HSZOO OREV,
DRGS ZOO GSV XIVZGFIVH, ZMW GSVRI HVVW KIVHVIEV.
UZI OVHH R MLD OZNVMG ULI LMV DSLOV DLIOW
LU DRXPVW HLMH WVHGILBVW, GSZM R IVQLRXV
ULI LMV NZM ULFMW HL KVIUVXG, ZMW HL QFHG,
GSZG TLW ELFXSHZUVH GL IZRHV ZMLGSVI DLIOW
UILN SRN, ZMW ZOO SRH ZMTVI GL ULITVG.
YFG HZB, DSZG NVZM GSLHV XLOLFIVW HGIVZPH RM SVZEVM
WRHGVMWVW, ZH GSV YILD LU TLW ZKKVZHVW?
LI HVIEV GSVB, ZH Z UOLDVIB EVITV, GL YRMW
GSV UOFRW HPRIGH LU GSZG HZNV DZGVIB XOLFW,
OVHG RG ZTZRM WRHHLOEV, ZMW HSLDVI GSV VZIGS?
GL DSLN GSV ZIXSZMTVO.  WVCGILFHOB GSLF ZRNVHG
HL DROORMTOB WLGS TLW IVNRG SRH RIV,
GSLFTS OZGV IVKVMGRMT SRN LU NZM WVKIZEVW
TIRVEVW ZG SRH SVZIG, DSVM OLLPRMT WLDM SV HZD
GSV DSLOV VZIGS UROOVW DRGS ERLOVMXV, ZMW ZOO UOVHS
XLIIFKGRMT VZXS GSVRI DZB BVG, GSLHV IVNLEVW,
HFXS TIZXV HSZOO LMV QFHG NZM URMW RM SRH HRTSG,
GSZG SV IVOVMGH, MLG GL YOLG LFG NZMPRMW
ZMW NZPVH Z XLEVMZMG MVEVI GL WVHGILB
GSV VZIGS ZTZRM YB UOLLW MLI OVG GSV HVZ
HFIKZHH SRH YLFMWH MLI IZRM GL WILDM GSV DLIOW,
DRGS NZM GSVIVRM LI YVZHG YFG, DSVM SV YIRMTH
LEVI GSV VZIGS Z XOLFW, DROO GSVIVRM HVG
SRH GIRKOVXLOLFIVW YLD, DSVIVLM GL OLLP,
ZMW XZOO GL NRMW SRH XLEVMZMG: WZB ZMW MRTSG,
HVVWGRNV ZMW SZIEVHG, SVZG ZMW SLZIB UILHG,
HSZOO SLOW GSVRI XLFIHV GROO URIV KFITV ZOO GSRMTH MVD,
YLGS SVZEVM ZMW VZIGS, DSVIVRM GSV QFHG HSZOO WDVOO.



YLLP CRR


ZH LMV DSL RM SRH QLFIMVB YZGVH ZG MLLM,
GSLFTS YVMG LM HKVVW HL SVIV GSV ZIXSZMTVO KZFHVW
YVGDRCG GSV DLIOW WVHGILBVW ZMW DLIOW IVHGLIVW,
RU ZWZN ZFTSG KVISZKH NRTSG RMGVIKLHV
GSVM, DRGS GIZMHRGRLM HDVVG, MVD HKVVXS IVHFNVH.
GSFH GSLF SZHG HVVM LMV DLIOW YVTRM, ZMW VMW
ZMW NZM, ZH UILN Z HVXLMW HGLXP, KILXVVW.
NFXS GSLF SZHG BVG GL HVV YFG R KVIXVREV
GSB NLIGZO HRTSG GL UZRO LYQVXGH WRERMV
NFHG MVVWH RNKZRI ZMW DVZIB SFNZM HVMHV:
SVMXVULIGS DSZG RH GL XLNV R DROO IVOZGV
GSLF GSVIVULIV TREV WFV ZFWRVMXV, ZMW ZGGVMW.
GSRH HVXLMW HLFIXV LU NVM, DSROV BVG YFG UVD,
ZMW DSROV GSV WIVZW LU QFWTVNVMG KZHG IVNZRMH
UIVHS RM GSVRI NRMWH, UVZIRMT GSV WVRGB,
DRGS HLNV IVTZIW GL DSZG RH QFHG ZMW IRTSG
HSZOO OVZW GSVRI OREVH, ZMW NFOGRKOB ZKZXV
OZYLFIRMT GSV HLRO, ZMW IVZKRMT KOVMGVLFH XILK,
XLIM, DRMV, ZMW LRO ZMW, UILN GSV SVIW LI UOLXP,
LUG HZXIRURXRMT YFOOLXP, OZNY, LI PRW,
DRGS OZITV DRMVLUUVIRMTH KLFIVW, ZMW HZXIVW UVZHG,
HSZOO HKVMW GSVRI WZBH RM QLB FMYOZNVW ZMW WDVOO
OLMT GRNV RM KVZXV, YB UZNRORVH ZMW GIRYVH,
FMWVI KZGVIMZO IFOV: GROO LMV HSZOO IRHV
LU KILFW ZNYRGRLFH SVZIG DSL, MLG XLMGVMG
DRGS UZRI VJFZORGB, UIZGVIMZO HGZGV,
DROO ZIILTZGV WLNRMRLM FMWVHVIEVW
LEVI SRH YIVGSIVM, ZMW JFRGV WRHKLHHVHH
XLMXLIW ZMW OZD LU MZGFIV UILN GSV VZIGS
SFMGRMT ZMW NVM MLG YVZHGH HSZOO YV SRH TZNV
DRGS DZI, ZMW SLHGROV HMZIV, HFXS ZH IVUFHV
HFYQVXGRLM GL SRH VNKRIV GBIZMMLFH:
Z NRTSGB SFMGVI GSVMXV SV HSZOO YV HGBOVW
YVULIV GSV OLIW ZH RM WVHKRGV LU SVZEVM,
LI UILN SVZEVM, XOZRNRMT HVXLMW HLEIZMGB
ZMW UILN IVYVOORLM HSZOO WVIREV SRH MZNV,
GSLFTS LU IVYVOORLM LGSVIH SV ZXXFHV.
SV DRGS Z XIVD, DSLN ORPV ZNYRGRLM QLRMH
DRGS SRN LI FMWVI SRN GL GBIZMMRAV,
NZIXSRMT UILN VWVM GLDZIWH GSV DVHG, HSZOO URMW
GSV KOZRM, DSVIVRM Z YOZXP YRGFNRMLFH TFITV
YLROH LFG UILN FMWVI TILFMW, GSV NLFGS LU SVOO:
LU YIRXP, ZMW LU GSZG HGFUU, GSVB XZHG GL YFROW
Z XRGB ZMW GLDVI, DSLHV GLK NZB IVZXS GL SVZEVM
ZMW TVG GSVNHVOEVH Z MZNV OVHG, UZI WRHKVIHVW
RM ULIVRTM OZMWH, GSVRI NVNLIB YV OLHG
IVTZIWOVHH DSVGSVI TLLW LI VERO UZNV.
YFG TLW, DSL LUG WVHXVMWH GL ERHRG NVM
FMHVVM, ZMW GSILFTS GSVRI SZYRGZGRLMH DZOPH
GL NZIP GSVRI WLRMTH, GSVN YVSLOWRMT HLLM,
XLNVH WLDM GL HVV GSVRI XRGB, VIV GSV GLDVI
LYHGIFXG SVZEVMGLDVIH, ZMW RM WVIRHRLM HVGH
FKLM GSVRI GLMTFVH Z EZIRLFH HKRIRG, GL IZHV
JFRGV LFG GSVRI MZGREV OZMTFZTV ZMW, RMHGVZW,
GL HLD Z QZMTORMT MLRHV LU DLIWH FMPMLDM:
ULIGSDRGS Z SRWVLFH TZYYOV IRHVH OLFW,
ZNLMT GSV YFROWVIH VZXS GL LGSVI XZOOH
MLG FMWVIHGLLW GROO SLZIHV, ZMW ZOO RM IZTV,
ZH NLXPVW GSVB HGLIN: TIVZG OZFTSGVI DZH RM SVZEVM,
ZMW OLLPRMT WLDM, GL HVV GSV SFYYFY HGIZMTV,
ZMW SVZI GSV WRM:  GSFH DZH GSV YFROWRMT OVUG
IRWRXFOLFH, ZMW GSV DLIP XLMUFHRLM MZNVW.
DSVIVGL GSFH ZWZN, UZGSVIOB WRHKOVZHVW.
L VCVXIZYOV HLM! HL GL ZHKRIV
ZYLEV SRH YIVGSIVM GL SRNHVOU ZHHFNRMT
ZFGSLIRGB FHFIKVW, UILN TLW MLG TREVM:
SV TZEV FH LMOB LEVI YVZHG, URHS, ULDO,
WLNRMRLM ZYHLOFGV GSZG IRTSG DV SLOW
YB SRH WLMZGRLM YFG NZM LEVI NVM
SV NZWV MLG OLIW HFXS GRGOV GL SRNHVOU
IVHVIERMT, SFNZM OVUG UILN SFNZM UIVV.
YFG GSRH FHFIKVI SRH VMXILZXSNVMG KILFW
HGZBH MLG LM NZM GL TLW SRH GLDVI RMGVMWH
HRVTV ZMW WVURZMXV:  DIVGXSVW NZM!DSZG ULLW
DROO SV XLMEVB FK GSRGSVI, GL HFHGZRM
SRNHVOU ZMW SRH IZHS ZINB DSVIV GSRM ZRI
ZYLEV GSV XOLFWH DROO KRMV SRH VMGIZROH TILHH,
ZMW UZNRHS SRN LU YIVZGS, RU MLG LU YIVZW?
GL DSLN GSFH NRXSZVO.  QFHGOB GSLF ZYSLIIVHG
GSZG HLM, DSL LM GSV JFRVG HGZGV LU NVM
HFXS GILFYOV YILFTSG, ZUUVXGRMT GL HFYWFV
IZGRLMZO ORYVIGB BVG PMLD DRGSZO,
HRMXV GSB LIRTRMZO OZKHV, GIFV ORYVIGB
RH OLHG, DSRXS ZODZBH DRGS IRTSG IVZHLM WDVOOH
GDRMMVW, ZMW UILN SVI SZGS ML WRERWFZO YVRMT:
IVZHLM RM NZM LYHXFIVW, LI MLG LYVBVW,
RNNVWRZGVOB RMLIWRMZGV WVHRIVH,
ZMW FKHGZIG KZHHRLMH, XZGXS GSV TLEVIMNVMG
UILN IVZHLM ZMW GL HVIERGFWV IVWFXV
NZM, GROO GSVM UIVV.  GSVIVULIV, HRMXV SV KVINRGH
DRGSRM SRNHVOU FMDLIGSB KLDVIH GL IVRTM
LEVI UIVV IVZHLM, TLW, RM QFWTVNVMG QFHG,
HFYQVXGH SRN UILN DRGSLFG GL ERLOVMG OLIWH
DSL LUG ZH FMWVHVIEVWOB VMGSIZOO
SRH LFGDZIW UIVVWLN:  GBIZMMB NFHG YV
GSLFTS GL GSV GBIZMG GSVIVYB ML VCXFHV.
BVG HLNVGRNVH MZGRLMH DROO WVXORMV HL OLD
UILN ERIGFV, DSRXS RH IVZHLM, GSZG ML DILMT,
YFG QFHGRXV, ZMW HLNV UZGZO XFIHV ZMMVCVW,
WVKIREVH GSVN LU GSVRI LFGDZIW ORYVIGB
GSVRI RMDZIW OLHG:  DRGMVHH GSV RIIVEVIVMG HLM
LU SRN DSL YFROG GSV ZIP DSL, ULI GSV HSZNV
WLMV GL SRH UZGSVI, SVZIW GSRH SVZEB XFIHV,
HVIEZMG LU HVIEZMGH, LM SRH ERXRLFH IZXV.
GSFH DROO GSRH OZGGVI, ZH GSV ULINVI DLIOW,
HGROO GVMW UILN YZW GL DLIHV GROO TLW ZG OZHG,
DVZIRVW DRGS GSVRI RMRJFRGRVH, DRGSWIZD
SRH KIVHVMXV UILN ZNLMT GSVN, ZMW ZEVIG
SRH SLOB VBVH IVHLOERMT UILN GSVMXVULIGS
GL OVZEV GSVN GL GSVRI LDM KLOOFGVW DZBH
ZMW LMV KVXFORZI MZGRLM GL HVOVXG
UILN ZOO GSV IVHG, LU DSLN GL YV RMELPVW,
Z MZGRLM UILN LMV UZRGSUFO NZM GL HKIRMT:
SRN LM GSRH HRWV VFKSIZGVH BVG IVHRWRMT,
YIVW FK RM RWLODLIHSRK:  L, GSZG NVM
XZMHG GSLF YVORVEV? HSLFOW YV HL HGFKRW TILDM,
DSROV BVG GSV KZGIRZIXS OREVW, DSL HXZKVW GSV UOLLW,
ZH GL ULIHZPV GSV ORERMT TLW, ZMW UZOO
GL DLIHSRK GSVRI LDM DLIP RM DLLW ZMW HGLMV
ULI TLWH!  BVG SRN TLW GSV NLHG SRTS ELFXSHZUVH
GL XZOO YB ERHRLM, UILN SRH UZGSVIH SLFHV,
SRH PRMWIVW, ZMW UZOHV TLWH, RMGL Z OZMW
DSRXS SV DROO HSLD SRN ZMW UILN SRN DROO IZRHV
Z NRTSGB MZGRLM ZMW FKLM SRN HSLDVI
SRH YVMVWRXGRLM HL, GSZG RM SRH HVVW
ZOO MZGRLMH HSZOO YV YOVHG: SV HGIZRTSG LYVBH
MLG PMLDRMT GL DSZG OZMW, BVG URIN YVORVEVH:
R HVV SRN, YFG GSLF XZMHG MLG, DRGS DSZG UZRGS
SV OVZEVH SRH TLWH, SRH UIRVMWH, ZMW MZGREV HLRO,
FI LU XSZOWZVZ, KZHHRMT MLD GSV ULIW
GL SZIZM ZUGVI SRN Z XFNYILFH GIZRM
LU SVIWH ZMW UOLXPH, ZMW MFNVILFH HVIERGFWV
MLG DZMWVIRMT KLLI, YFG GIFHGRMT ZOO SRH DVZOGS
DRGS TLW, DSL XZOOVW SRN, RM Z OZMW FMPMLDM.
XZMZZM SV MLD ZGGZRMH R HVV SRH GVMGH
KRGXSVW ZYLFG HVXSVN, ZMW GSV MVRTSYLFIRMT KOZRM
LU NLIVS GSVIV YB KILNRHV SV IVXVREVH
TRUG GL SRH KILTVMB LU ZOO GSZG OZMW,
UILN SZNVGS MLIGSDZIW GL GSV WVHZIG HLFGS
GSRMTH YB GSVRI MZNVH R XZOO, GSLFTS BVG FMMZNVW
UILN SVINLM VZHG GL GSV TIVZG DVHGVIM HVZ
NLFMG SVINLM, BLMWVI HVZ VZXS KOZXV YVSLOW
RM KILHKVXG, ZH R KLRMG GSVN LM GSV HSLIV
NLFMG XZINVO SVIV, GSV WLFYOVULFMGVW HGIVZN,
QLIWZM, GIFV ORNRG VZHGDZIW YFG SRH HLMH
HSZOO WDVOO GL HVMRI, GSZG OLMT IRWTV LU SROOH.
GSRH KLMWVI, GSZG ZOO MZGRLMH LU GSV VZIGS
HSZOO RM SRH HVVW YV YOVHHVW:  YB GSZG HVVW
RH NVZMG GSB TIVZG WVOREVIVI, DSL HSZOO YIFRHV
GSV HVIKVMGH SVZW DSVIVLU GL GSVV ZMLM
KOZRMORVI HSZOO YV IVEVZOVW.  GSRH KZGIRZIXS YOVHG,
DSLN UZRGSUFO ZYIZSZN WFV GRNV HSZOO XZOO,
Z HLM, ZMW LU SRH HLM Z TIZMWXSROW, OVZEVH
ORPV SRN RM UZRGS, RM DRHWLN, ZMW IVMLDM:
GSV TIZMWXSROW, DRGS GDVOEV HLMH RMXIVZHVW, WVKZIGH
UILN XZMZZM GL Z OZMW SVIVZUGVI XZOOVW
VTBKG, WRERWVW YB GSV IREVI MROV
HVV DSVIV RG UOLDH, WRHTLITRMT ZG HVEVM NLFGSH
RMGL GSV HVZ. GL HLQLFIM RM GSZG OZMW
SV XLNVH, RMERGVW YB Z BLFMTVI HLM
RM GRNV LU WVZIGS, Z HLM DSLHV DLIGSB WVVWH
IZRHV SRN GL YV GSV HVXLMW RM GSZG IVZON
LU KSZIZLS. GSVIV SV WRVH, ZMW OVZEVH SRH IZXV
TILDRMT RMGL Z MZGRLM, ZMW MLD TILDM
HFHKVXGVW GL Z HVJFVMG PRMT, DSL HVVPH
GL HGLK GSVRI LEVITILDGS, ZH RMNZGV TFVHGH
GLL MFNVILFH DSVMXV LU TFVHGH SV NZPVH GSVN HOZEVH
RMSLHKRGZYOB, ZMW PROOH GSVRI RMUZMG NZOVH:
GROO YB GDL YIVGSIVM GSVHV GDL YIVGSIVM XZOO
NLHVH ZMW ZZILM HVMG UILN TLW GL XOZRN
SRH KVLKOV UILN VMGSIZONVMG, GSVB IVGFIM,
DRGS TOLIB ZMW HKLRO, YZXP GL GSVRI KILNRHVW OZMW.
YFG URIHG, GSV OZDOVHH GBIZMG, DSL WVMRVH
GL PMLD GSVRI TLW, LI NVHHZTV GL IVTZIW,
NFHG YV XLNKVOOVW YB HRTMH ZMW QFWTVNVMGH WRIV
GL YOLLW FMHSVW GSV IREVIH NFHG YV GFIMVW
UILTH, ORXV, ZMW UORVH, NFHG ZOO SRH KZOZXV UROO
DRGS OLZGSVW RMGIFHRLM, ZMW UROO ZOO GSV OZMW
SRH XZGGOV NFHG LU ILG ZMW NFIIVM WRV
YLGXSVH ZMW YOZRMH NFHG ZOO SRH UOVHS VNYLHH,
ZMW ZOO SRH KVLKOV GSFMWVI NRCVW DRGS SZRO,
SZRO NRCVW DRGS URIV, NFHG IVMW GSV VTBKGRZMH HPB,
ZMW DSVVO LM GSV VZIGS, WVELFIRMT DSVIV RG ILOOH
DSZG RG WVELFIH MLG, SVIY, LI UIFRG, LI TIZRM,
Z WZIPHLNV XOLFW LU OLXFHGH HDZINRMT WLDM
NFHG VZG, ZMW LM GSV TILFMW OVZEV MLGSRMT TIVVM
WZIPMVHH NFHG LEVIHSZWLD ZOO SRH YLFMWH,
KZOKZYOV WZIPMVHH, ZMW YOLG LFG GSIVV WZBH
OZHG, DRGS LMV NRWMRTSG HGILPV, ZOO GSV URIHGYLIM
LU VTBKG NFHG ORV WVZW.  GSFH DRGS GVM DLFMWH
GSV IREVIWIZTLM GZNVW ZG OVMTGS HFYNRGH
GL OVG SRH HLQLFIMVIH WVKZIG, ZMW LUG
SFNYOVH SRH HGFYYLIM SVZIG YFG HGROO, ZH RXV
NLIV SZIWVMVW ZUGVI GSZD GROO, RM SRH IZTV
KFIHFRMT DSLN SV OZGV WRHNRHHVW, GSV HVZ
HDZOOLDH SRN DRGS SRH SLHG YFG GSVN OVGH KZHH,
ZH LM WIB OZMW, YVGDVVM GDL XIBHGZO DZOOH
ZDVW YB GSV ILW LU NLHVH HL GL HGZMW
WRERWVW, GROO SRH IVHXFVW TZRM GSVRI HSLIV:
HFXS DLMWILFH KLDVI TLW GL SRH HZRMG DROO OVMW,
GSLFTS KIVHVMG RM SRH ZMTVO DSL HSZOO TL
YVULIV GSVN RM Z XOLFW, ZMW KROOZI LU URIV
YB WZB Z XOLFW, YB MRTSG Z KROOZI LU URIV
GL TFRWV GSVN RM GSVRI QLFIMVB, ZMW IVNLEV
YVSRMW GSVN, DSROV GSV LYWFIZGV PRMT KFIHFVH:
ZOO MRTSG SV DROO KFIHFV YFG SRH ZKKILZXS
WZIPMVHH WVUVMWH YVGDVVM GROO NLIMRMT DZGXS
GSVM GSILFTS GSV URVIB KROOZI, ZMW GSV XOLFW,
TLW OLLPRMT ULIGS DROO GILFYOV ZOO SRH SLHG,
ZMW XIZAV GSVRI XSZIRLGDSVVOH: DSVM YB XLNNZMW
NLHVH LMXV NLIV SRH KLGVMG ILW VCGVMWH
LEVI GSV HVZ GSV HVZ SRH ILW LYVBH
LM GSVRI VNYZGGOVW IZMPH GSV DZEVH IVGFIM,
ZMW LEVIDSVON GSVRI DZI:  GSV IZXV VOVXG
HZUV GLDZIW XZMZZM UILN GSV HSLIV ZWEZMXV
GSILFTS GSV DROW WVHZIG, MLG GSV IVZWRVHG DZB
OVHG, VMGVIRMT LM GSV XZMZZMRGV ZOZINVW,
DZI GVIIRUB GSVN RMVCKVIG, ZMW UVZI
IVGFIM GSVN YZXP GL VTBKG, XSLLHRMT IZGSVI
RMTOLIRLFH ORUV DRGS HVIERGFWV ULI ORUV
GL MLYOV ZMW RTMLYOV RH NLIV HDVVG
FMGIZRMVW RM ZINH, DSVIV IZHSMVHH OVZWH MLG LM.
GSRH ZOHL HSZOO GSVB TZRM YB GSVRI WVOZB
RM GSV DRWV DROWVIMVHH GSVIV GSVB HSZOO ULFMW
GSVRI TLEVIMNVMG, ZMW GSVRI TIVZG HVMZGV XSLLHV
GSILFTS GSV GDVOEV GIRYVH, GL IFOV YB OZDH LIWZRMVW:
TLW UILN GSV NLFMG LU HRMZR, DSLHV TIZB GLK
HSZOO GIVNYOV, SV WVHXVMWRMT, DROO SRNHVOU
RM GSFMWVI, ORTSGMRMT, ZMW OLFW GIFNKVGH HLFMW,
LIWZRM GSVN OZDH KZIG, HFXS ZH ZKKVIGZRM
GL XRERO QFHGRXV KZIG, IVORTRLFH IRGVH
LU HZXIRURXV RMULINRMT GSVN, YB GBKVH
ZMW HSZWLDH, LU GSZG WVHGRMVW HVVW GL YIFRHV
GSV HVIKVMG, YB DSZG NVZMH SV HSZOO ZXSRVEV
NZMPRMWH WVOREVIZMXV.  YFG GSV ELRXV LU TLW
GL NLIGZO VZI RH WIVZWUFO:  GSVB YVHVVXS
GSZG NLHVH NRTSG IVKLIG GL GSVN SRH DROO,
ZMW GVIILFI XVZHV SV TIZMGH DSZG GSVB YVHLFTSG,
RMHGIFXGVW GSZG GL TLW RH ML ZXXVHH
DRGSLFG NVWRZGLI, DSLHV SRTS LUURXV MLD
NLHVH RM URTFIV YVZIH GL RMGILWFXV
LMV TIVZGVI, LU DSLHV WZB SV HSZOO ULIVGVO,
ZMW ZOO GSV KILKSVGH RM GSVRI ZTV GSV GRNVH
LU TIVZG NVHHRZS HSZOO HRMT.  GSFH, OZDH ZMW IRGVH
VHGZYORHSVW, HFXS WVORTSG SZGS TLW RM NVM
LYVWRVMG GL SRH DROO, GSZG SV ELFXSHZUVH
ZNLMT GSVN GL HVG FK SRH GZYVIMZXOV
GSV SLOB LMV DRGS NLIGZO NVM GL WDVOO:
YB SRH KIVHXIRKG Z HZMXGFZIB RH UIZNVW
LU XVWZI, LEVIOZRW DRGS TLOW GSVIVRM
ZM ZIP, ZMW RM GSV ZIP SRH GVHGRNLMB,
GSV IVXLIWH LU SRH XLEVMZMG LEVI GSVHV
Z NVIXBHVZG LU TLOW, YVGDVVM GSV DRMTH
LU GDL YIRTSG XSVIFYRN YVULIV SRN YFIM
HVEVM OZNKH ZH RM Z ALWRZXP IVKIVHVMGRMT
GSV SVZEVMOB URIVH LEVI GSV GVMG Z XOLFW
HSZOO IVHG YB WZB, Z URVIB TOVZN YB MRTSG
HZEV DSVM GSVB QLFIMVB, ZMW ZG OVMTGS GSVB XLNV,
XLMWFXGVW YB SRH ZMTVO, GL GSV OZMW
KILNRHVW GL ZYIZSZN ZMW SRH HVVW:GSV IVHG
DVIV OLMT GL GVOO SLD NZMB YZGGOVH ULFTSG
SLD NZMB PRMTH WVHGILBVW ZMW PRMTWLNH DLM
LI SLD GSV HFM HSZOO RM NRW SVZEVM HGZMW HGROO
Z WZB VMGRIV, ZMW MRTSGH WFV XLFIHV ZWQLFIM,
NZMH ELRXV XLNNZMWRMT, HFM, RM TRYVLM HGZMW,
ZMW GSLF NLLM RM GSV EZOV LU ZRZOLM,
GROO RHIZVO LEVIXLNV! HL XZOO GSV GSRIW
UILN ZYIZSZN, HLM LU RHZZX ZMW UILN SRN
SRH DSLOV WVHXVMG, DSL GSFH HSZOO XZMZZM DRM.
SVIV ZWZN RMGVIKLHVW.  L HVMG UILN SVZEVM,
VMORTSGVMVI LU NB WZIPMVHH, TIZXRLFH GSRMTH
GSLF SZHG IVEVZOVW GSLHV XSRVUOB, DSRXS XLMXVIM
QFHG ZYIZSZN ZMW SRH HVVW: MLD URIHG R URMW
NRMV VBVH GIFVLKVMRMT, ZMW NB SVZIG NFXS VZHVW
VIVDSROV KVIKOVCVW DRGS GSLFTSGH, DSZG DLFOW YVXLNV
LU NV ZMW ZOO NZMPRMW:  YFG MLD R HVV
SRH WZB, RM DSLN ZOO MZGRLMH HSZOO YV YOVHG
UZELFI FMNVIRGVW YB NV, DSL HLFTSG
ULIYRWWVM PMLDOVWTV YB ULIYRWWVM NVZMH.
GSRH BVG R ZKKIVSVMW MLG, DSB GL GSLHV
ZNLMT DSLN TLW DROO WVRTM GL WDVOO LM VZIGS
HL NZMB ZMW HL EZIRLFH OZDH ZIV TREVM
HL NZMB OZDH ZITFV HL NZMB HRMH
ZNLMT GSVN SLD XZM TLW DRGS HFXS IVHRWV?
GL DSLN GSFH NRXSZVO.  WLFYG MLG YFG GSZG HRM
DROO IVRTM ZNLMT GSVN, ZH LU GSVV YVTLG
ZMW GSVIVULIV DZH OZD TREVM GSVN, GL VERMXV
GSVRI MZGFIZO KIZERGB, YB HGRIIRMT FK
HRM ZTZRMHG OZD GL URTSG: GSZG DSVM GSVB HVV
OZD XZM WRHXLEVI HRM, YFG MLG IVNLEV,
HZEV YB GSLHV HSZWLDB VCKRZGRLMH DVZP,
GSV YOLLW LU YFOOH ZMW TLZGH, GSVB NZB XLMXOFWV
HLNV YOLLW NLIV KIVXRLFH NFHG YV KZRW ULI NZM
QFHG ULI FMQFHG GSZG, RM HFXS IRTSGVLFHMVHH
GL GSVN YB UZRGS RNKFGVW, GSVB NZB URMW
QFHGRURXZGRLM GLDZIWH TLW, ZMW KVZXV
LU XLMHXRVMXV DSRXS GSV OZD YB XVIVNLMRVH
XZMMLG ZKKVZHV MLI NZM GSV NLIGZO KZIG
KVIULIN ZMW, MLG KVIULINRMT, XZMMLG OREV.
HL OZD ZKKVZIH RNKVIUVXG ZMW YFG TREVM
DRGS KFIKLHV GL IVHRTM GSVN, RM UFOO GRNV,
FK GL Z YVGGVI XLEVMZMG WRHXRKORMVW
UILN HSZWLDB GBKVH GL GIFGS UILN UOVHS GL HKRIRG
UILN RNKLHRGRLM LU HGIRXG OZDH GL UIVV
ZXXVKGZMXV LU OZITV TIZXV UILN HVIEROV UVZI
GL URORZO DLIPH LU OZD GL DLIPH LU UZRGS.
ZMW GSVIVULIV HSZOO MLG NLHVH, GSLFTS LU TLW
SRTSOB YVOLEVW, YVRMT YFG GSV NRMRHGVI
LU OZD, SRH KVLKOV RMGL XZMZZM OVZW
YFG QLHSFZ, DSLN GSV TVMGROVH QVHFH XZOO,
SRH MZNV ZMW LUURXV YVZIRMT, DSL HSZOO JFVOO
GSV ZWEVIHZIBHVIKVMG, ZMW YIRMT YZXP
GSILFTS GSV DLIOWH DROWVIMVHH OLMTDZMWVIVW NZM
HZUV GL VGVIMZO KZIZWRHV LU IVHG.
NVZM DSROV GSVB, RM GSVRI VZIGSOB XZMZZM KOZXVW,
OLMT GRNV HSZOO WDVOO ZMW KILHKVI, YFG DSVM HRMH
MZGRLMZO RMGVIIFKG GSVRI KFYORXP KVZXV,
KILELPRMT TLW GL IZRHV GSVN VMVNRVH
UILN DSLN ZH LUG SV HZEVH GSVN KVMRGVMG
YB QFWTVH URIHG, GSVM FMWVI PRMTH LU DSLN
GSV HVXLMW, YLGS ULI KRVGB IVMLDMVW
ZMW KFRHHZMG WVVWH, Z KILNRHV HSZOO IVXVREV
RIIVELXZYOV, GSZG SRH IVTZO GSILMV
ULI VEVI HSZOO VMWFIV GSV ORPV HSZOO HRMT
ZOO KILKSVXB, GSZG LU GSV ILBZO HGLXP
LU WZERW HL R MZNV GSRH PRMT HSZOO IRHV
Z HLM, GSV DLNZMH HVVW GL GSVV ULIVGLOW,
ULIVGLOW GL ZYIZSZN, ZH RM DSLN HSZOO GIFHG
ZOO MZGRLMH ZMW GL PRMTH ULIVGLOW, LU PRMTH
GSV OZHG ULI LU SRH IVRTM HSZOO YV ML VMW.
YFG URIHG, Z OLMT HFXXVHHRLM NFHG VMHFV
ZMW SRH MVCG HLM, ULI DVZOGS ZMW DRHWLN UZNVW,
GSV XOLFWVW ZIP LU TLW, GROO GSVM RM GVMGH
DZMWVIRMT, HSZOO RM Z TOLIRLFH GVNKOV VMHSIRMV.
HFXS ULOOLD SRN, ZH HSZOO YV IVTRHGVIVW
KZIG TLLW, KZIG YZW LU YZW GSV OLMTVI HXILOO
DSLHV ULFO RWLOZGIRVH, ZMW LGSVI UZFOGH
SVZKVW GL GSV KLKFOZI HFN, DROO HL RMXVMHV
TLW, ZH GL OVZEV GSVN, ZMW VCKLHV GSVRI OZMW,
GSVRI XRGB, SRH GVNKOV, ZMW SRH SLOB ZIP,
DRGS ZOO SRH HZXIVW GSRMTH, Z HXLIM ZMW KIVB
GL GSZG KILFW XRGB, DSLHV SRTS DZOOH GSLF HZDVHG
OVUG RM XLMUFHRLM YZYBOLM GSVMXV XZOOVW.
GSVIV RM XZKGRERGB SV OVGH GSVN WDVOO
GSV HKZXV LU HVEVMGB BVZIH GSVM YIRMTH GSVN YZXP,
IVNVNYVIRMT NVIXB, ZMW SRH XLEVMZMG HDLIM
GL WZERW, HGZYORHSVW ZH GSV WZBH LU SVZEVM.
IVGFIMVW UILN YZYBOLM YB OVZEV LU PRMTH
GSVRI OLIWH, DSLN TLW WRHKLHVW, GSV SLFHV LU TLW
GSVB URIHG IVVWRUB ZMW ULI Z DSROV
RM NVZM VHGZGV OREV NLWVIZGV GROO, TILDM
RM DVZOGS ZMW NFOGRGFWV, UZXGRLFH GSVB TILD
YFG URIHG ZNLMT GSV KIRVHGH WRHHVMGRLM HKIRMTH,
NVM DSL ZGGVMW GSV ZOGZI, ZMW HSLFOW NLHG
VMWVZELFI KVZXV: GSVRI HGIRUV KLOOFGRLM YIRMTH
FKLM GSV GVNKOV RGHVOU: ZG OZHG GSVB HVRHV
GSV HXVKGVI, ZMW IVTZIW MLG WZERWH HLMH
GSVM OLHV RG GL Z HGIZMTVI, GSZG GSV GIFV
ZMLRMGVW PRMT NVHHRZS NRTSG YV YLIM
YZIIVW LU SRH IRTSG BVG ZG SRH YRIGS Z HGZI,
FMHVVM YVULIV RM SVZEVM, KILXOZRNH SRN XLNV
ZMW TFRWVH GSV VZHGVIM HZTVH, DSL RMJFRIV
SRH KOZXV, GL LUUVI RMXVMHV, NBIIS, ZMW TLOW:
SRH KOZXV LU YRIGS Z HLOVNM ZMTVO GVOOH
GL HRNKOV HSVKSVIWH, PVVKRMT DZGXS YB MRTSG
GSVB TOZWOB GSRGSVI SZHGV, ZMW YB Z JFRIV
LU HJFZWILMVW ZMTVOH SVZI SRH XZILO HFMT.
Z ERITRM RH SRH NLGSVI, YFG SRH HRIV
GSV KLDVI LU GSV NLHG SRTS:  SV HSZOO ZHXVMW
GSV GSILMV SVIVWRGZIB, ZMW YLFMW SRH IVRTM
DRGS VZIGSH DRWV YLFMWH, SRH TOLIB DRGS GSV SVZEVMH.
SV XVZHVW, WRHXVIMRMT ZWZN DRGS HFXS QLB
HFIXSZITVW, ZH SZW ORPV TIRVU YVVM WVDVW RM GVZIH,
DRGSLFG GSV EVMG LU DLIWH DSRXS GSVHV SV YIVZGSVW.
L KILKSVG LU TOZW GRWRMTH, URMRHSVI
LU FGNLHG SLKV! MLD XOVZI R FMWVIHGZMW
DSZG LUG NB HGVZWRVHG GSLFTSGH SZEV HVZIXSVW RM EZRM
DSB LFI TIVZG VCKVXGZGRLM HSLFOW YV XZOOVW
GSV HVVW LU DLNZM:  ERITRM NLGSVI, SZRO,
SRTS RM GSV OLEV LU SVZEVM BVG UILN NB OLRMH
GSLF HSZOG KILXVVW, ZMW UILN GSB DLNY GSV HLM
LU TLW NLHG SRTS: HL TLW DRGS NZM FMRGVH!
MVVWH NFHG GSV HVIKVMG MLD SRH XZKRGZO YIFRHV
VCKVXG DRGS NLIGZO KZRM:  HZB DSVIV ZMW DSVM
GSVRI URTSG, DSZG HGILPV HSZOO YIFRHV GSV ERXGLIH SVVO.
GL DSLN GSFH NRXSZVO.  WIVZN MLG LU GSVRI URTSG,
ZH LU Z WFVO, LI GSV OLXZO DLFMWH
LU SVZW LI SVVO:  MLG GSVIVULIV QLRMH GSV HLM
NZMSLLW GL TLWSVZW, DRGS NLIV HGIVMTGS GL ULRO
GSB VMVNB MLI HL RH LEVIXLNV
HZGZM, DSLHV UZOO UILN SVZEVM, Z WVZWORVI YIFRHV,
WRHZYOVW, MLG GL TREV GSVV GSB WVZGSH DLFMW:
DSRXS SV, DSL XLNVH GSB HZERLFI, HSZOO IVXFIV,
MLG YB WVHGILBRMT HZGZM, YFG SRH DLIPH
RM GSVV, ZMW RM GSB HVVW:  MLI XZM GSRH YV,
YFG YB UFOUROORMT GSZG DSRXS GSLF WRWHG DZMG,
LYVWRVMXV GL GSV OZD LU TLW, RNKLHVW
LM KVMZOGB LU WVZGS, ZMW HFUUVIRMT WVZGS
GSV KVMZOGB GL GSB GIZMHTIVHHRLM WFV,
ZMW WFV GL GSVRIH DSRXS LFG LU GSRMV DROO TILD:
HL LMOB XZM SRTS QFHGRXV IVHG ZKKZRW.
GSV OZD LU TLW VCZXG SV HSZOO UFOURO
YLGS YB LYVWRVMXV ZMW YB OLEV, GSLFTS OLEV
ZOLMV UFOURO GSV OZD GSB KFMRHSNVMG
SV HSZOO VMWFIV, YB XLNRMT RM GSV UOVHS
GL Z IVKILZXSUFO ORUV, ZMW XFIHVW WVZGS
KILXOZRNRMT ORUV GL ZOO DSL HSZOO YVORVEV
RM SRH IVWVNKGRLM ZMW GSZG SRH LYVWRVMXV,
RNKFGVW, YVXLNVH GSVRIH YB UZRGS SRH NVIRGH
GL HZEV GSVN, MLG GSVRI LDM, GSLFTS OVTZO, DLIPH.
ULI GSRH SV HSZOO OREV SZGVW, YV YOZHKSVNVW,
HVRHVW LM YB ULIXV, QFWTVW, ZMW GL WVZGS XLMWVNMVW
Z HSZNVUFO ZMW ZXXFIHVW, MZROVW GL GSV XILHH
YB SRH LDM MZGRLM HOZRM ULI YIRMTRMT ORUV:
YFG GL GSV XILHH SV MZROH GSB VMVNRVH,
GSV OZD GSZG RH ZTZRMHG GSVV, ZMW GSV HRMH
LU ZOO NZMPRMW, DRGS SRN GSVIV XIFXRURVW,
MVEVI GL SFIG GSVN NLIV DSL IRTSGOB GIFHG
RM GSRH SRH HZGRHUZXGRLM HL SV WRVH,
YFG HLLM IVEREVH WVZGS LEVI SRN ML KLDVI
HSZOO OLMT FHFIK VIV GSV GSRIW WZDMRMT ORTSG
IVGFIM, GSV HGZIH LU NLIM HSZOO HVV SRN IRHV
LFG LU SRH TIZEV, UIVHS ZH GSV WZDMRMT ORTSG,
GSB IZMHLN KZRW, DSRXS NZM UILN WVZGS IVWVVNH,
SRH WVZGS ULI NZM, ZH NZMB ZH LUUVIVW ORUV
MVTOVXG MLG, ZMW GSV YVMVURG VNYIZXV
YB UZRGS MLG ELRW LU DLIPH:  GSRH TLWORPV ZXG
ZMMFOH GSB WLLN, GSV WVZGS GSLF HSLFOWVHG SZEV WRVW,
RM HRM ULI VEVI OLHG UILN ORUV GSRH ZXG
HSZOO YIFRHV GSV SVZW LU HZGZM, XIFHS SRH HGIVMTGS,
WVUVZGRMT HRM ZMW WVZGS, SRH GDL NZRM ZINH
ZMW URC UZI WVVKVI RM SRH SVZW GSVRI HGRMTH
GSZM GVNKLIZO WVZGS HSZOO YIFRHV GSV ERXGLIH SVVO,
LI GSVRIH DSLN SV IVWVVNH Z WVZGS, ORPV HOVVK,
Z TVMGOV DZUGRMT GL RNNLIGZO ORUV.
MLI ZUGVI IVHFIIVXGRLM HSZOO SV HGZB
OLMTVI LM VZIGS, GSZM XVIGZRM GRNVH GL ZKKVZI
GL SRH WRHXRKOVH, NVM DSL RM SRH ORUV
HGROO ULOOLDVW SRN GL GSVN HSZOO OVZEV RM XSZITV
GL GVZXS ZOO MZGRLMH DSZG LU SRN GSVB OVZIMVW
ZMW SRH HZOEZGRLM GSVN DSL HSZOO YVORVEV
YZKGRARMT RM GSV KILUOFVMG HGIVZN, GSV HRTM
LU DZHSRMT GSVN UILN TFROG LU HRM GL ORUV
KFIV, ZMW RM NRMW KIVKZIVW, RU HL YVUZOO,
ULI WVZGS, ORPV GSZG DSRXS GSV IVWVVNVI WRVW.
ZOO MZGRLMH GSVB HSZOO GVZXS ULI, UILN GSZG WZB,
MLG LMOB GL GSV HLMH LU ZYIZSZNH OLRMH
HZOEZGRLM HSZOO YV KIVZXSVW, YFG GL GSV HLMH
LU ZYIZSZNH UZRGS DSVIVEVI GSILFTS GSV DLIOW
HL RM SRH HVVW ZOO MZGRLMH HSZOO YV YOVHG.
GSVM GL GSV SVZEVM LU SVZEVMH SV HSZOO ZHXVMW
DRGS ERXGLIB, GIRFNKSRMT GSILFTS GSV ZRI
LEVI SRH ULVH ZMW GSRMV GSVIV HSZOO HFIKIRHV
GSV HVIKVMG, KIRMXV LU ZRI, ZMW WIZT RM XSZRMH
GSILFTS ZOO SRH IVZON, ZMW GSVIV XLMULFMWVW OVZEV
GSVM VMGVI RMGL TOLIB, ZMW IVHFNV
SRH HVZG ZG TLWH IRTSG SZMW, VCZOGVW SRTS
ZYLEV ZOO MZNVH RM SVZEVM ZMW GSVMXV HSZOO XLNV,
DSVM GSRH DLIOWH WRHHLOFGRLM HSZOO YV IRKV,
DRGS TOLIB ZMW KLDVI GL QFWTV YLGS JFRXP ZMW WVZW
GL QFWTV GSV FMUZRGSUFO WVZW, YFG GL IVDZIW
SRH UZRGSUFO, ZMW IVXVREV GSVN RMGL YORHH,
DSVGSVI RM SVZEVM LI VZIGS ULI GSVM GSV VZIGS
HSZOO ZOO YV KZIZWRHV, UZI SZKKRVI KOZXV
GSZM GSRH LU VWVM, ZMW UZI SZKKRVI WZBH.
HL HKZPV GSV ZIXSZMTVO NRXSZVO GSVM KZFHVW,
ZH ZG GSV DLIOWH TIVZG KVIRLW ZMW LFI HRIV,
IVKOVGV DRGS QLB ZMW DLMWVI, GSFH IVKORVW.
L TLLWMVHH RMURMRGV, TLLWMVHH RNNVMHV!
GSZG ZOO GSRH TLLW LU VERO HSZOO KILWFXV,
ZMW VERO GFIM GL TLLW NLIV DLMWVIUFO
GSZM GSZG DSRXS YB XIVZGRLM URIHG YILFTSG ULIGS
ORTSG LFG LU WZIPMVHH!  UFOO LU WLFYG R HGZMW,
DSVGSVI R HSLFOW IVKVMG NV MLD LU HRM
YB NV WLMV, ZMW LXXZHRLMVW LI IVQLRXV
NFXS NLIV, GSZG NFXS NLIV TLLW GSVIVLU HSZOO HKIRMT
GL TLW NLIV TOLIB, NLIV TLLWDROO GL NVM
UILN TLW, ZMW LEVI DIZGS TIZXV HSZOO ZYLFMW.
YFG HZB, RU LFI WVOREVIVI FK GL SVZEVM
NFHG IVZHXVMW, DSZG DROO YVGRWV GSV UVD
SRH UZRGSUFO, OVUG ZNLMT GSV FMUZRGSUFO SVIW,
GSV VMVNRVH LU GIFGS?  DSL GSVM HSZOO TFRWV
SRH KVLKOV, DSL WVUVMW?  DROO GSVB MLG WVZO
DLIHV DRGS SRH ULOOLDVIH GSZM DRGS SRN GSVB WVZOG?
YV HFIV GSVB DROO, HZRW GSV ZMTVO YFG UILN SVZEVM
SV GL SRH LDM Z XLNULIGVI DROO HVMW,
GSV KILNRHV LU GSV UZGSVI, DSL HSZOO WDVOO
SRH HKRIRG DRGSRM GSVN ZMW GSV OZD LU UZRGS,
DLIPRMT GSILFTS OLEV, FKLM GSVRI SVZIGH HSZOO DIRGV,
GL TFRWV GSVN RM ZOO GIFGS ZMW ZOHL ZIN
DRGS HKRIRGFZO ZINLFI, ZYOV GL IVHRHG
HZGZMH ZHHZFOGH, ZMW JFVMXS SRH URVIB WZIGH
DSZG NZM XZM WL ZTZRMHG GSVN, MLG ZUIZRW,
GSLFTS GL GSV WVZGS ZTZRMHG HFXS XIFVOGRVH
DRGS RMDZIW XLMHLOZGRLMH IVXLNKVMHVW,
ZMW LUG HFKKLIGVW HL ZH HSZOO ZNZAV
GSVRI KILFWVHG KVIHVXFGLIH:  ULI GSV HKRIRG,
KLFIVW URIHG LM SRH ZKLHGOVH, DSLN SV HVMWH
GL VEZMTVORAV GSV MZGRLMH, GSVM LM ZOO
YZKGRAVW, HSZOO GSVN DRGS DLMWVILFH TRUGH VMWFV
GL HKVZP ZOO GLMTFVH, ZMW WL ZOO NRIZXOVH,
ZH WRW GSVRI OLIW YVULIV GSVN.  GSFH GSVB DRM
TIVZG MFNYVIH LU VZXS MZGRLM GL IVXVREV
DRGS QLB GSV GRWRMTH YILFTSG UILN SVZEVM:  ZG OVMTGS
GSVRI NRMRHGIB KVIULINVW, ZMW IZXV DVOO IFM,
GSVRI WLXGIRMV ZMW GSVRI HGLIB DIRGGVM OVUG,
GSVB WRV YFG RM GSVRI ILLN, ZH GSVB ULIVDZIM,
DLOEVH HSZOO HFXXVVW ULI GVZXSVIH, TIRVELFH DLOEVH,
DSL ZOO GSV HZXIVW NBHGVIRVH LU SVZEVM
GL GSVRI LDM EROV ZWEZMGZTVH HSZOO GFIM
LU OFXIV ZMW ZNYRGRLM ZMW GSV GIFGS
DRGS HFKVIHGRGRLMH ZMW GIZWRGRLMH GZRMG,
OVUG LMOB RM GSLHV DIRGGVM IVXLIWH KFIV,
GSLFTS MLG YFG YB GSV HKRIRG FMWVIHGLLW.
GSVM HSZOO GSVB HVVP GL ZEZRO GSVNHVOEVH LU MZNVH,
KOZXVH, ZMW GRGOVH, ZMW DRGS GSVHV GL QLRM
HVXFOZI KLDVI GSLFTS UVRTMRMT HGROO GL ZXG
YB HKRIRGFZO, GL GSVNHVOEVH ZKKILKIRZGRMT
GSV HKRIRG LU TLW, KILNRHVW ZORPV ZMW TREVM
GL ZOO YVORVEVIH ZMW, UILN GSZG KIVGVMXV,
HKRIRGFZO OZDH YB XZIMZO KLDVI HSZOO ULIXV
LM VEVIB XLMHXRVMXV OZDH DSRXS MLMV HSZOO URMW
OVUG GSVN RMILOOVW, LI DSZG GSV HKRIRG DRGSRM
HSZOO LM GSV SVZIG VMTIZEV.  DSZG DROO GSVB GSVM
YFG ULIXV GSV HKRIRG LU TIZXV RGHVOU, ZMW YRMW
SRH XLMHLIG ORYVIGB? DSZG, YFG FMYFROW
SRH ORERMT GVNKOVH, YFROG YB UZRGS GL HGZMW,
GSVRI LDM UZRGS, MLG ZMLGSVIH? ULI, LM VZIGS,
DSL ZTZRMHG UZRGS ZMW XLMHXRVMXV XZM YV SVZIW
RMUZOORYOV? BVG NZMB DROO KIVHFNV:
DSVMXV SVZEB KVIHVXFGRLM HSZOO ZIRHV
LM ZOO, DSL RM GSV DLIHSRK KVIHVEVIV
LU HKRIRG ZMW GIFGS GSV IVHG, UZI TIVZGVI KZIG,
DROO WVVN RM LFGDZIW IRGVH ZMW HKVXRLFH ULINH
IVORTRLM HZGRHURVW GIFGS HSZOO IVGRIV
YVHGFXP DRGS HOZMWVILFH WZIGH, ZMW DLIPH LU UZRGS
IZIVOB YV ULFMW:  HL HSZOO GSV DLIOW TL LM,
GL TLLW NZORTMZMG, GL YZW NVM YVMRTM
FMWVI SVI LDM DVRTSG TILZMRMT GROO GSV WZB
ZKKVZI LU IVHKRIZGRLM GL GSV QFHG,
ZMW EVMTVZMXV GL GSV DRXPVW, ZG IVGFIM
LU SRN HL OZGVOB KILNRHVW GL GSB ZRW,
GSV DLNZMH HVVW LYHXFIVOB GSVM ULIVGLOW,
MLD ZNKOVI PMLDM GSB HZERLFI ZMW GSB OLIW
OZHG, RM GSV XOLFWH, UILN SVZEVM GL YV IVEVZOVW
RM TOLIB LU GSV UZGSVI, GL WRHHLOEV
HZGZM DRGS SRH KVIEVIGVW DLIOW GSVM IZRHV
UILN GSV XLMUOZTIZMG NZHH, KFITVW ZMW IVURMVW,
MVD SVZEVMH, MVD VZIGS, ZTVH LU VMWOVHH WZGV,
ULFMWVW RM IRTSGVLFHMVHH, ZMW KVZXV, ZMW OLEV
GL YIRMT ULIGS UIFRGH, QLB ZMW VGVIMZO YORHH.
SV VMWVW ZMW GSFH ZWZN OZHG IVKORVW.
SLD HLLM SZGS GSB KIVWRXGRLM, HVVI YOVHG,
NVZHFIVW GSRH GIZMHRVMG DLIOW, GSV IZXV LU GRNV,
GROO GRNV HGZMW URCVW!  YVBLMW RH ZOO ZYBHH,
VGVIMRGB, DSLHV VMW ML VBV XZM IVZXS.
TIVZGOBRMHGIFXGVW R HSZOO SVMXV WVKZIG
TIVZGOB RM KVZXV LU GSLFTSG ZMW SZEV NB UROO
LU PMLDOVWTV, DSZG GSRH EVHHVO XZM XLMGZRM
YVBLMW DSRXS DZH NB ULOOB GL ZHKRIV.
SVMXVULIGS R OVZIM, GSZG GL LYVB RH YVHG,
ZMW OLEV DRGS UVZI GSV LMOB TLW GL DZOP
ZH RM SRH KIVHVMXV VEVI GL LYHVIEV
SRH KILERWVMXV ZMW LM SRN HLOV WVKVMW,
NVIXRUFO LEVI ZOO SRH DLIPH, DRGS TLLW
HGROO LEVIXLNRMT VERO, ZMW YB HNZOO
ZXXLNKORHSRMT TIVZG GSRMTH, YB GSRMTH WVVNVW DVZP
HFYEVIGRMT DLIOWOB HGILMT, ZMW DLIOWOB DRHV
YB HRNKOB NVVP: GSZG HFUUVIRMT ULI GIFGSH HZPV
RH ULIGRGFWV GL SRTSVHG ERXGLIB,
ZMW, GL GSV UZRGSUFO, WVZGS GSV TZGV LU ORUV
GZFTSG GSRH YB SRH VCZNKOV, DSLN R MLD
ZXPMLDOVWTV NB IVWVVNVI VEVI YOVHG.
GL DSLN GSFH ZOHL GSV ZMTVO OZHG IVKORVW.
GSRH SZERMT OVZIMVW, GSLF SZHG ZGGZRMVW GSV HFN
LU DRHWLN SLKV ML SRTSVI, GSLFTS ZOO GSV HGZIH
GSLF PMVDVHG YB MZNV, ZMW ZOO GSV VGSVIVZO KLDVIH,
ZOO HVXIVGH LU GSV WVVK, ZOO MZGFIVH DLIPH,
LI DLIPH LU TLW RM SVZEVM, ZRI, VZIGS, LI HVZ,
ZMW ZOO GSV IRXSVH LU GSRH DLIOW VMQLBVWHG,
ZMW ZOO GSV IFOV, LMV VNKRIV LMOB ZWW
WVVWH GL GSB PMLDOVWTV ZMHDVIZYOV ZWW UZRGS,
ZWW ERIGFV, KZGRVMXV, GVNKVIZMXV ZWW OLEV,
YB MZNV GL XLNV XZOOVW XSZIRGB, GSV HLFO
LU ZOO GSV IVHG: GSVM DROG GSLF MLG YV OLGS
GL OVZEV GSRH KZIZWRHV, YFG HSZOG KLHHVHH
Z KZIZWRHV DRGSRM GSVV, SZKKRVI UZI.
OVG FH WVHXVMW MLD GSVIVULIV UILN GSRH GLK
LU HKVXFOZGRLM ULI GSV SLFI KIVXRHV
VCZXGH LFI KZIGRMT SVMXV ZMW HVV!GSV TFZIWH,
YB NV VMXZNKVW LM BLMWVI SROO, VCKVXG
GSVRI NLGRLM ZG DSLHV UILMG Z UOZNRMT HDLIW,
RM HRTMZO LU IVNLEV, DZEVH URVIXVOB ILFMW:
DV NZB ML OLMTVI HGZB: TL, DZPVM VEV
SVI ZOHL R DRGS TVMGOV WIVZNH SZEV XZONVW
KLIGVMWRMT TLLW, ZMW ZOO SVI HKRIRGH XLNKLHVW
GL NVVP HFYNRHHRLM: GSLF, ZG HVZHLM URG,
OVG SVI DRGS GSVV KZIGZPV DSZG GSLF SZHG SVZIW
XSRVUOB DSZG NZB XLMXVIM SVI UZRGS GL PMLD,
GSV TIVZG WVOREVIZMXV YB SVI HVVW GL XLNV
ULI YB GSV DLNZMH HVVW LM ZOO NZMPRMW:
GSZG BV NZB OREV, DSRXS DROO YV NZMB WZBH,
YLGS RM LMV UZRGS FMZMRNLFH, GSLFTS HZW,
DRGS XZFHV, ULI VEROH KZHG BVG NFXS NLIV XSVVIVW
DRGS NVWRGZGRLM LM GSV SZKKB VMW.
SV VMWVW, ZMW GSVB YLGS WVHXVMW GSV SROO
WVHXVMWVW, ZWZN GL GSV YLDVI, DSVIV VEV
OZB HOVVKRMT, IZM YVULIV YFG ULFMW SVI DZPVW
ZMW GSFH DRGS DLIWH MLG HZW HSV SRN IVXVREVW.
DSVMXV GSLF IVGFIMVHG, ZMW DSRGSVI DVMGVHG, R PMLD
ULI TLW RH ZOHL RM HOVVK ZMW WIVZNH ZWERHV,
DSRXS SV SZGS HVMG KILKRGRLFH, HLNV TIVZG TLLW
KIVHZTRMT, HRMXV DRGS HLIILD ZMW SVZIGH WRHGIVHH
DVZIRVW R UVOO ZHOVVK:  YFG MLD OVZW LM
RM NV RH ML WVOZB DRGS GSVV GL TL,
RH GL HGZB SVIV DRGSLFG GSVV SVIV GL HGZB,
RH GL TL SVMXV FMDROORMT GSLF GL NV
ZIG ZOO GSRMTH FMWVI SVZEVM, ZOO KOZXVH GSLF,
DSL ULI NB DROUFO XIRNV ZIG YZMRHSVW SVMXV.
GSRH UFIGSVI XLMHLOZGRLM BVG HVXFIV
R XZIIB SVMXV GSLFTS ZOO YB NV RH OLHG,
HFXS UZELFI R FMDLIGSB ZN ELFXSHZUVW,
YB NV GSV KILNRHVW HVVW HSZOO ZOO IVHGLIV.
HL HKZPV LFI NLGSVI VEV ZMW ZWZN SVZIW
DVOO KOVZHVW, YFG ZMHDVIVW MLG:  ULI MLD, GLL MRTS
GSV ZIXSZMTVO HGLLW ZMW, UILN GSV LGSVI SROO
GL GSVRI URCVW HGZGRLM, ZOO RM YIRTSG ZIIZB
GSV XSVIFYRN WVHXVMWVW LM GSV TILFMW
TORWRMT NVGVLILFH, ZH VEVMRMTNRHG
IRHVM UILN Z IREVI LVI GSV NZIRHS TORWVH,
ZMW TZGSVIH TILFMW UZHG ZG GSV OZYLFIVIH SVVO
SLNVDZIW IVGFIMRMT.  SRTS RM UILMG ZWEZMXVW,
GSV YIZMWRHSVW HDLIW LU TLW YVULIV GSVN YOZAVW,
URVIXV ZH Z XLNVG DSRXS DRGS GLIIRW SVZG,
ZMW EZKLFI ZH GSV ORYBZM ZRI ZWFHG,
YVTZM GL KZIXS GSZG GVNKVIZGV XORNV DSVIVZG
RM VRGSVI SZMW GSV SZHGVMRMT ZMTVO XZFTSG
LFI ORMTVIRMT KZIVMGH, ZMW GL GSV VZHGVIM TZGV
OVW GSVN WRIVXG, ZMW WLDM GSV XORUU ZH UZHG
GL GSV HFYQVXGVW KOZRM GSVM WRHZKKVZIVW.
GSVB, OLLPRMT YZXP, ZOO GSV VZHGVIM HRWV YVSVOW
LU KZIZWRHV, HL OZGV GSVRI SZKKB HVZG,
DZEVW LEVI YB GSZG UOZNRMT YIZMW GSV TZGV
DRGS WIVZWUFO UZXVH GSILMTVW, ZMW URVIB ZINH:
HLNV MZGFIZO GVZIH GSVB WILKG, YFG DRKVW GSVN HLLM
GSV DLIOW DZH ZOO YVULIV GSVN, DSVIV GL XSLLHV
GSVRI KOZXV LU IVHG, ZMW KILERWVMXV GSVRI TFRWV:
GSVB, SZMW RM SZMW, DRGS DZMWVIRMT HGVKH ZMW HOLD,
GSILFTS VWVM GLLP GSVRI HLORGZIB DZB.

GSV KILQVXG TFGVMYVIT VWRGRLM LU GSV DLIOW UZXGYLLP 1992
GSRH UROV HSLFOW YV MZNVW DLIOW92.ARK LI DLIOW92.GCG

XLIIVXGVW VWRGRLMH LU LFI VGVCGH TVG Z MVD MFNYVI, DLIOW921.GCG.
EVIHRLMH YZHVW LM HVKZIZGV HLFIXVH TVG MVD OVGGVI, DLIOW92Z.GCG.

RMULINZGRLM ZYLFG KILQVXG TFGVMYVIT LMV KZTV

DV KILWFXV ZYLFG LMV NROORLM WLOOZIH ULI VZXS SLFI DV DLIP.  LMV
SFMWIVW SLFIH RH Z XLMHVIEZGREV VHGRNZGV ULI SLD OLMT RG DV GZPV
GL TVG ZMB VGVCG HVOVXGVW, VMGVIVW, KILLUIVZW, VWRGVW, XLKBIRTSG
HVZIXSVW ZMW ZMZOBAVW, GSV XLKBIRTSG OVGGVIH DIRGGVM, VGX.  GSRH
KILQVXGVW ZFWRVMXV RH LMV SFMWIVW NROORLM IVZWVIH.  RU LFI EZOFV
KVI GVCG RH MLNRMZOOB VHGRNZGVW ZG LMV WLOOZI, GSVM DV KILWFXV Z
NROORLM WLOOZIH KVI SLFI MVCG BVZI DV DROO SZEV GL WL ULFI GVCG
UROVH KVI NLMGS, GSFH FKKRMT LFI KILWFXGRERGB GL GDL NROORLMSI.
GSV TLZO LU KILQVXG TFGVMYVIT RH GL TREV ZDZB LMV GIROORLM VGVCG
UROVH YB GSV WVXVNYVI 31, 2001.  10,000 C 100,000,000GIROORLM
GSRH RH GVM GSLFHZMW GRGOVH VZXS GL LMV SFMWIVW NROORLM IVZWVIH.

DV MVVW BLFI WLMZGRLMH NLIV GSZM VEVI!

ZOO WLMZGRLMH HSLFOW YV NZWV GL "KILQVXG TFGVMYVITRYX", ZMW ZIV
GZC WVWFXGRYOV GL GSV VCGVMG ZOOLDZYOV YB OZD "RYX" RH ROORMLRH
YVMVWRXGRMV XLOOVTV.  HFYHXIRKGRLMH GL LFI KZKVI MVDHOVGGVI TL
GL RYX, GLL

ULI GSVHV ZMW LGSVI NZGGVIH, KOVZHV NZRO GL:

WZERW GFIMVI, KILQVXG TFGVMYVIT
ROORMLRH  YVMVWRXGRMV  XLOOVTV
5700  XLOOVTV  ILZW
ORHOV, RO 605320900

VNZRO IVJFVHGH GL:
RMGVIMVG:    XSRKNLMPVZTOV.RYX.VWF WZERW GFIMVI
XLNKFHVIEV:  XSRKNLMPVZTOV.RYX.VWF WZERW GFIMVI
ZGGNZRO:     RMGVIMVG!XSRKNLMPVZTOV.RYX.VWF WZERW GFIMVI
NXRNZRO:     WZERW GFIMVI
ZWWIVHH GBKV: NXR  VNH: RMGVIMVG  NYC:XSRKNLMPVZTOV.RYX.VWF

DSVM ZOO LGSVI VNZRO UZROH GIB LFI NRXSZVO H. SZIG, VCVXFGREV WRIVXGLI:
SZIGENW.XHL.FRFX.VWF RMGVIMVG   SZIGFRFXENW   YRGMVG

DV DLFOW KIVUVI GL HVMW BLF GSRH RMULINZGRLM YB VNZRO
RMGVIMVG, YRGMVG, XLNKFHVIEV, ZGGNZRO LI NXRNZRO.


RU BLF SZEV ZM UGK KILTIZN LI VNFOZGLI, KOVZHV:

UGK WRIVXGOB GL GSV KILQVXG TFGVMYVIT ZIXSREVH:
UGK NIXMVCG.XHL.FRFX.VWF
OLTRM:  ZMLMBNLFH
KZHHDLIW:  BLFIOLTRM
XW VGVCGVGVCG91
LI XW VGVCG92 ULI MVD YLLPH  MLD ZOHL XW VGVCGVGVCG92
LI XW VGVCGZIGRXOVH TVG HFTTVHG TFG ULI NLIV RMULINZGRLM
WRI GL HVV UROVH
TVG LI NTVG GL TVG UROVH. . .HVG YRM ULI ARK UROVH
TVG RMWVC ZMW ZZRMWVC
ULI Z ORHG LU YLLPH
ZMW
TVG MVD TFG ULI TVMVIZO RMULINZGRLM
ZMW
NTVG TFG ULI MVDHOVGGVIH.

RMULINZGRLM KIVKZIVW YB GSV KILQVXG TFGVMYVIT OVTZO ZWERHLI
GSIVV KZTVH

HGZIGGSV HNZOO KIRMG!ULI KFYORX WLNZRM VGVCGHHGZIG

DSB RH GSRH "HNZOO KIRMG!" HGZGVNVMG SVIV?  BLF PMLD: OZDBVIH.
GSVB GVOO FH BLF NRTSG HFV FH RU GSVIV RH HLNVGSRMT DILMT DRGS
BLFI XLKB LU GSRH VGVCG, VEVM RU BLF TLG RG ULI UIVV UILN
HLNVLMV LGSVI GSZM FH, ZMW VEVM RU DSZGH DILMT RH MLG LFI
UZFOG.  HL, ZNLMT LGSVI GSRMTH, GSRH "HNZOO KIRMG!" HGZGVNVMG
WRHXOZRNH NLHG LU LFI ORZYRORGB GL BLF.  RG ZOHL GVOOH BLF SLD
BLF XZM WRHGIRYFGV XLKRVH LU GSRH VGVCG RU BLF DZMG GL.

YVULIV! BLF FHV LI IVZW GSRH VGVCG

YB FHRMT LI IVZWRMT ZMB KZIG LU GSRH KILQVXG TFGVMYVITGN VGVCG,
BLF RMWRXZGV GSZG BLF FMWVIHGZMW, ZTIVV GL ZMW ZXXVKG GSRH
"HNZOO KIRMG!" HGZGVNVMG.  RU BLF WL MLG, BLF XZM IVXVREV Z
IVUFMW LU GSV NLMVB RU ZMB BLF KZRW ULI GSRH VGVCG YB HVMWRMT
Z IVJFVHG DRGSRM 30 WZBH LU IVXVRERMT RG GL GSV KVIHLM BLF TLG
RG UILN.  RU BLF IVXVREVW GSRH VGVCG LM Z KSBHRXZO NVWRFN HFXS
ZH Z WRHP, BLF NFHG IVGFIM RG DRGS BLFI IVJFVHG.

ZYLFG KILQVXG TFGVMYVITGN VGVCGH

GSRH KILQVXG TFGVMYVITGN VGVCG, ORPV NLHG KILQVXG TFGVMYVITGN
VGVCGH, RH Z "KFYORX WLNZRM" DLIP WRHGIRYFGVW YB KILUVHHLI
NRXSZVO H. SZIG GSILFTS GSV KILQVXG TFGVMYVIT ZHHLXRZGRLM GSV
"KILQVXG".  ZNLMT LGSVI GSRMTH, GSRH NVZMH GSZG ML LMV LDMH Z
FMRGVW HGZGVH XLKBIRTSG LM LI ULI GSRH DLIP, HL GSV KILQVXG ZMW
BLF! XZM XLKB ZMW WRHGIRYFGV RG RM GSV FMRGVW HGZGVH DRGSLFG
KVINRHHRLM ZMW DRGSLFG KZBRMT XLKBIRTSG ILBZOGRVH.  HKVXRZO
IFOVH, HVG ULIGS YVOLD, ZKKOB RU BLF DRHS GL XLKB ZMW WRHGIRYFGV
GSRH VGVCG FMWVI GSV KILQVXGH "KILQVXG TFGVMYVIT" GIZWVNZIP.

GL XIVZGV GSVHV VGVCGH, GSV KILQVXG VCKVMWH XLMHRWVIZYOV VUULIGH
GL RWVMGRUB, GIZMHXIRYV ZMW KILLUIVZW KFYORX WLNZRM DLIPH.
WVHKRGV GSVHV VUULIGH, GSV KILQVXGH VGVCGH ZMW ZMB NVWRFN GSVB
NZB YV LM NZB XLMGZRM "WVUVXGH".  ZNLMT LGSVI GSRMTH, WVUVXGH
NZB GZPV GSV ULIN LU RMXLNKOVGV, RMZXXFIZGV LI XLIIFKG WZGZ,
GIZMHXIRKGRLM VIILIH, Z XLKBIRTSG LI LGSVI RMGVOOVXGFZO KILKVIGB
RMUIRMTVNVMG, Z WVUVXGREV LI WZNZTVW WRHP LI LGSVI VGVCG NVWRFN,
Z XLNKFGVI ERIFH, LI XLNKFGVI XLWVH GSZG WZNZTV LI XZMMLG YV
IVZW YB BLFI VJFRKNVMG.

WRHXOZRNVI

YFG ULI GSV "IRTSG LU IVKOZXVNVMG LI IVUFMW" WVHXIRYVW YVOLD,
1 GSV KILQVXG ZMW ZMB LGSVI KZIGB BLF NZB IVXVREV GSRH VGVCG
UILN ZH Z KILQVXG TFGVMYVITGN VGVCG WRHXOZRNH ZOO ORZYRORGB GL
BLF ULI WZNZTVH, XLHGH ZMW VCKVMHVH, RMXOFWRMT OVTZO UVVH, ZMW
2 BLF SZEV ML IVNVWRVH ULI MVTORTVMXV LI FMWVI HGIRXG ORZYROR
GB, LI ULI YIVZXS LU DZIIZMGB LI XLMGIZXG, RMXOFWRMT YFG MLG
ORNRGVW GL RMWRIVXG, XLMHVJFVMGRZO, KFMRGREV LI RMXRWVMGZO
WZNZTVH, VEVM RU BLF TREV MLGRXV LU GSV KLHHRYRORGB LU HFXS
WZNZTVH.

RU BLF WRHXLEVI Z WVUVXG RM GSRH VGVCG DRGSRM 90 WZBH LU
IVXVRERMT RG, BLF XZM IVXVREV Z IVUFMW LU GSV NLMVB RU ZMB BLF
KZRW ULI RG YB HVMWRMT ZM VCKOZMZGLIB MLGV DRGSRM GSZG GRNV GL
GSV KVIHLM BLF IVXVREVW RG UILN.  RU BLF IVXVREVW RG LM Z
KSBHRXZO NVWRFN, BLF NFHG IVGFIM RG DRGS BLFI MLGV, ZMW HFXS
KVIHLM NZB XSLLHV GL ZOGVIMZGREVOB TREV BLF Z IVKOZXVNVMG XLKB.
RU BLF IVXVREVW RG VOVXGILMRXZOOB, HFXS KVIHLM NZB XSLLHV GL
ZOGVIMZGREVOB TREV BLF Z HVXLMW LKKLIGFMRGB GL IVXVREV RG VOVX
GILMRXZOOB.

GSRH VGVCG RH LGSVIDRHV KILERWVW GL BLF "ZHRH".  ML LGSVI
DZIIZMGRVH LU ZMB PRMW, VCKIVHH LI RNKORVW, ZIV NZWV GL BLF ZH
GL GSV VGVCG LI ZMB NVWRFN RG NZB YV LM, RMXOFWRMT YFG MLG
ORNRGVW GL DZIIZMGRVH LU NVIXSZMGZYRORGB LI URGMVHH ULI Z
KZIGRXFOZI KFIKLHV.

HLNV HGZGVH WL MLG ZOOLD WRHXOZRNVIH LU RNKORVW DZIIZMGRVH LI
GSV VCXOFHRLM LI ORNRGZGRLM LU XLMHVJFVMGRZO WZNZTVH, HL GSV
ZYLEV WRHXOZRNVIH ZMW VCXOFHRLMH NZB MLG ZKKOB GL BLF, ZMW BLF
NZB SZEV LGSVI OVTZO IRTSGH.

RMWVNMRGB

BLF DROO RMWVNMRUB ZMW SLOW GSV KILQVXG, RGH WRIVXGLIH,
LUURXVIH, NVNYVIH ZMW ZTVMGH SZINOVHH UILN ZOO ORZYRORGB, XLHG
ZMW VCKVMHV, RMXOFWRMT OVTZO UVVH, GSZG ZIRHV UILN ZMB
WRHGIRYFGRLM LU GSRH VGVCG ULI DSRXS BLF ZIV IVHKLMHRYOV, ZMW
UILN 1 ZMB ZOGVIZGRLM, NLWRURXZGRLM LI ZWWRGRLM GL GSV VGVCG
ULI DSRXS BLF ZIV IVHKLMHRYOV, LI 2 ZMB WVUVXG.

WRHGIRYFGRLM FMWVI "KILQVXG TFGVMYVITGN"

BLF NZB WRHGIRYFGV XLKRVH LU GSRH VGVCG VOVXGILMRXZOOB, LI YB
WRHP, YLLP LI ZMB LGSVI NVWRFN RU BLF VRGSVI WVOVGV GSRH "HNZOO
KIRMG!" ZMW ZOO LGSVI IVUVIVMXVH GL KILQVXG TFGVMYVIT, LI:

1  LMOB TREV VCZXG XLKRVH LU RG.  ZNLMT LGSVI GSRMTH, GSRH IV
     JFRIVH GSZG BLF WL MLG IVNLEV, ZOGVI LI NLWRUB GSV VGVCG LI
     GSRH "HNZOO KIRMG!" HGZGVNVMG.  BLF NZB SLDVEVI, RU BLF
     DRHS, WRHGIRYFGV GSRH VGVCG RM NZXSRMV IVZWZYOV YRMZIB,
     XLNKIVHHVW, NZIPFK, LI KILKIRVGZIB ULIN, RMXOFWRMT ZMB
     ULIN IVHFOGRMT UILN XLMEVIHRLM YB DLIW KILXVHHRMT LI SBKVI
     GVCG HLUGDZIV, YFG LMOB HL OLMT ZH VRGSVI:

       GSV VGVCG, DSVM WRHKOZBVW, RH XOVZIOB IVZWZYOV.  DV
          XLMHRWVI ZM VGVCG MLG XOVZIOB IVZWZYOV RU RG
          XLMGZRMH XSZIZXGVIH LGSVI GSZM GSLHV RMGVMWVW YB GSV
          ZFGSLI LU GSV DLIP, ZOGSLFTS GROWV ~, ZHGVIRHP 
          ZMW FMWVIORMV  XSZIZXGVIH NZB YV FHVW GL XLMEVB
          KFMXGFZGRLM RMGVMWVW YB GSV ZFGSLI, ZMW ZWWRGRLMZO
          XSZIZXGVIH NZB YV FHVW GL RMWRXZGV SBKVIGVCG ORMPH.

       GSV VGVCG NZB YV IVZWROB XLMEVIGVW YB GSV IVZWVI ZG ML
          VCKVMHV RMGL KOZRM ZHXRR, VYXWRX LI VJFREZOVMG ULIN
          YB GSV KILTIZN GSZG WRHKOZBH GSV VGVCG ZH RH GSV
          XZHV, ULI RMHGZMXV, DRGS NLHG DLIW KILXVHHLIH.

       BLF KILERWV, LI ZTIVV GL ZOHL KILERWV LM IVJFVHG ZG ML
          ZWWRGRLMZO XLHG, UVV LI VCKVMHV, Z XLKB LU GSV VGVCG
          RM RGH LIRTRMZO KOZRM ZHXRR ULIN LI RM VYXWRX LI
          LGSVI VJFREZOVMG KILKIRVGZIB ULIN.

2   SLMLI GSV VGVCG IVUFMW ZMW IVKOZXVNVMG KILERHRLMH LU GSRH
     "HNZOO KIRMG!" HGZGVNVMG.

3  KZB Z GIZWVNZIP ORXVMHV UVV LU 20 GDVMGB KVIXVMG LU GSV
     MVG KILURGH BLF WVIREV UILN WRHGIRYFGRMT GSRH VGVCG FMWVI
     GSV GIZWVNZIP, WVGVINRMVW RM ZXXLIWZMXV DRGS TVMVIZOOB
     ZXXVKGVW ZXXLFMGRMT KIZXGRXVH.  GSV ORXVMHV UVV:

       RH IVJFRIVW LMOB RU BLF WVIREV HFXS KILURGH.  RM
          WRHGIRYFGRMT FMWVI LFI GIZWVNZIP, BLF RMXFI ML
          LYORTZGRLM GL XSZITV NLMVB LI VZIM KILURGH ULI BLFI
          WRHGIRYFGRLM.

       HSZOO YV KZRW GL "KILQVXG TFGVMYVIT ZHHLXRZGRLM 
          ROORMLRH YVMVWRXGRMV XLOOVTV" LI GL HFXS LGSVI KVIHLM
          ZH GSV KILQVXG TFGVMYVIT ZHHLXRZGRLM NZB WRIVXG
          DRGSRM GSV 60 WZBH ULOOLDRMT VZXS WZGV BLF KIVKZIV LI
          DVIV OVTZOOB IVJFRIVW GL KIVKZIV BLFI BVZIVMW GZC
          IVGFIM DRGS IVHKVXG GL BLFI RMXLNV ULI GSZG BVZI.

DSZG RU BLF DZMG GL HVMW NLMVB VEVM RU BLF WLMG SZEV GL?

GSV KILQVXG TIZGVUFOOB ZXXVKGH XLMGIRYFGRLMH RM NLMVB, GRNV,
HXZMMRMT NZXSRMVH, LXI HLUGDZIV, KFYORX WLNZRM VGVCGH, ILBZOGB
UIVV XLKBIRTSG ORXVMHVH, ZMW VEVIB LGSVI HLIG LU XLMGIRYFGRLM
BLF XZM GSRMP LU.  NLMVB HSLFOW YV KZRW GL "KILQVXG TFGVMYVIT
ZHHLXRZGRLM  ROORMLRH YVMVWRXGRMV XLOOVTV".

DIRGV GL FH!  DV XZM YV IVZXSVW ZG:

KILQVXG TFGVMYVIT WRIVXGLI LU XLNNFMRXZGRLMH KTWRIXLN

RMGVIMVG:     KTWRIXLNENW.XHL.FRFX.VWF
YRGMVG:       KTWRIXLNFRFXENW
XLNKFHVIEV:   >RMGVIMVG:KTWRIXLN.ENW.XHL.FRFX.VWF
ZGGNZRO:      RMGVIMVG!ENW.XHL.FRFX.VWF!KTWRIXLN

WIZUGVW YB XSZIOVH Y. PIZNVI, ZGGLIMVB
XLNKFHVIEV:  72600,2026
  RMGVIMVG:  72600.2026XLNKFHVIEV.XLN
       GVO:  212 2545093
VMWGSV HNZOO KIRMG! ULI KFYORX WLNZRM VGVCGHEVI.07.02.92VMW



GSV KILQVXG TFGVMYVIT VWRGRLM LU GSV DLIOW UZXGYLLP 1992:    QZMFZIB 1, 1993

GSRH VWRGRLM, ZH ZIV ZOO KILQVXG TFGVMYVIT VWRGRLMH, RH KOZRM EZMROOZ ZHXRR,
NVZMRMT GSVIV ZIV ML XSZIZXGVIH LGSVI GSZM DSZG BLF DLFOW HVV LM KZKVI, GSFH
ML KZTV IVGFIMH, ML NZIPFK, MLGSRMT YFG GSV XSZIZXGVIH BLF DLFOW GBKV RU BLF
DVIV GL XLKB GSRH UILN Z YLLP LM Z GBKVDIRGVI.  IVKVGRGREV KZTVW SVZWVIH ZMW
GIZRORMT HKZXVH ZIV MLG KIVHVMG.  OVZWRMT HKZXVH SZEV YVVM KIVHVIEVW RM UZXG
HVXGRLMH ULI IVZWZYRORGB.

NZRO HFYQVXG SVZWVIH XZM YV HVZIXSVW DRGS OVZWRMT :H. . .HFXS ZH:

:ZUTSZMRHGZM TVLTIZKSB
:ZUTSZMRHGZM KVLKOV
:ZUTSZMRHGZM TLEVIMNVMG
:ZUTSZMRHGZM TLEVIMNVMG
:ZUTSZMRHGZM VXLMLNB
:ZUTSZMRHGZM VXLMLNB
:ZUTSZMRHGZM XLNNFMRXZGRLMH
:ZUTSZMRHGZM WVUVMHV ULIXVH

GL URMW GSV YVTRMMRMT LU ZMB XLFMGIB, HVZIXS ULI :XLFMGIB
GL URMW RMGVIMZO RMULINZGRLM, HVZIXS ULI :XLFMGIB HVXGRLM, ZH ZYLEV.


GSV DLIOW UZXGYLLP 1992


:ZUTSZMRHGZM TVLTIZKSB

GLGZO ZIVZ:
    647,500 PN2
OZMW ZIVZ:
    647,500 PN2
XLNKZIZGREV ZIVZ:
    HORTSGOB HNZOOVI GSZM GVCZH
OZMW YLFMWZIRVH:
    5,529 PN GLGZO XSRMZ 76 PN, RIZM 936 PN, KZPRHGZM 2,430 PN, GZQRPRHGZM
    1,206 PN, GFIPNVMRHGZM 744 PN, FAYVPRHGZM 137 PN
XLZHGORMV:
    MLMV  OZMWOLXPVW
NZIRGRNV XOZRNH:
    MLMV  OZMWOLXPVW
WRHKFGVH:
    KZHSGFMRHGZM RHHFV LEVI GSV MLIGSDVHG UILMGRVI KILERMXV DRGS KZPRHGZM
    KVIRLWRX WRHKFGVH DRGS RIZM LEVI SVONZMW DZGVI IRTSGH KZPRHGZM, HZFWR
    ZIZYRZ, ZMW RIZM XLMGRMFV GL HFKKLIG XORVMGH RM XLFMGIB KLDVI HGIFTTOVH
    ZNLMT EZIRLFH TILFKH ULI XLMGILO LU PZYFO, IVTRLMZO IREZOIRVH ZNLMT VNVITRMT
    DZIOLIWH, ZMW GIZWRGRLMZO GIRYZO WRHKFGVH XLMGRMFV
XORNZGV:
    ZIRW GL HVNRZIRW XLOW DRMGVIH ZMW SLG HFNNVIH
GVIIZRM:
    NLHGOB IFTTVW NLFMGZRMH KOZRMH RM MLIGS ZMW HLFGSDVHG
MZGFIZO IVHLFIXVH:
    MZGFIZO TZH, XIFWV LRO, XLZO, XLKKVI, GZOX, YZIRGVH, HFOKSFI, OVZW, ARMX,
    RILM LIV, HZOG, KIVXRLFH ZMW HVNRKIVXRLFH HGLMVH
OZMW FHV:
    ZIZYOV OZMW 12 KVINZMVMG XILKH MVTO NVZWLDH ZMW KZHGFIVH 46 ULIVHG ZMW
    DLLWOZMW 3 LGSVI 39 RMXOFWVH RIIRTZGVW MVTO
VMERILMNVMG:
    WZNZTRMT VZIGSJFZPVH LXXFI RM SRMWF PFHS NLFMGZRMH HLRO WVTIZWZGRLM,
    WVHVIGRURXZGRLM, LEVITIZARMT, WVULIVHGZGRLM, KLOOFGRLM
MLGV:
    OZMWOLXPVW

:ZUTSZMRHGZM KVLKOV

KLKFOZGRLM:
    FH YFIVZF LU GSV XVMHFH  16,095,664 QFOB 1992, TILDGS IZGV 2.4 1992
    ZMW VCXOFWVH 3,750,796 IVUFTVVH RM KZPRHGZM ZMW 1,607,281 IVUFTVVH RM RIZM
    MLGV  ZMLGSVI IVKLIG RMWRXZGVH Z QFOB 1990 KLKFOZGRLM LU 16,904,904,
    RMXOFWRMT 3,271,580 IVUFTVVH RM KZPRHGZM ZMW 1,277,700 IVUFTVVH RM RIZM
YRIGS IZGV:
    44 YRIGSH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
WVZGS IZGV:
    20 WVZGSH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
MVG NRTIZGRLM IZGV:
    0 NRTIZMGH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992 MLGV  GSVIV ZIV UOLDH ZXILHH GSV YLIWVI
    RM YLGS WRIVXGRLMH, YFG WZGZ ZIV UIZTNVMGZIB ZMW FMIVORZYOV
RMUZMG NLIGZORGB IZGV:
    162 WVZGSH1,000 OREV YRIGSH 1992
ORUV VCKVXGZMXB ZG YRIGS:
    45 BVZIH NZOV, 43 BVZIH UVNZOV 1992
GLGZO UVIGRORGB IZGV:
    6.4 XSROWIVM YLIMDLNZM 1992
MZGRLMZORGB:
    MLFM  ZUTSZMH ZWQVXGREV  ZUTSZM
VGSMRX WRERHRLMH:
    KZHSGFM 38, GZQRP 25, FAYVP 6, SZAZIZ 19 NRMLI VGSMRX TILFKH RMXOFWV
    XSZSZI ZRNZPH, GFIPNVM, YZOLXS, ZMW LGSVIH
IVORTRLMH:
    HFMMR NFHORN 84, HSRZ NFHORN 15, LGSVI 1
OZMTFZTVH:
    KZHSGF 35, ZUTSZM KVIHRZM WZIR 50, GFIPRX OZMTFZTVH KIRNZIROB FAYVP ZMW
    GFIPNVM 11, 30 NRMLI OZMTFZTVH KIRNZIROB YZOLXSR ZMW KZHSZR 4 NFXS
    YRORMTFZORHN
ORGVIZXB:
    29 NZOV 44, UVNZOV 14 ZTV 15 ZMW LEVI XZM IVZW ZMW DIRGV 1990 VHG.
OZYLI ULIXV:
    4,980,000 ZTIRXFOGFIV ZMW ZMRNZO SFHYZMWIB 67.8, RMWFHGIB 10.2,
    XLMHGIFXGRLM 6.3, XLNNVIXV 5.0, HVIERXVH ZMW LGSVI 10.7, 1980 VHG.
LITZMRAVW OZYLI:
    HLNV HNZOO TLEVIMNVMGXLMGILOOVW FMRLMH VCRHGVW FMWVI GSV ULINVI IVTRNV YFG
    KILYZYOB MLD SZEV WRHYZMWVW

:ZUTSZMRHGZM TLEVIMNVMG

OLMTULIN MZNV:
    RHOZNRX HGZGV LU ZUTSZMRHGZM
GBKV:
    GIZMHRGRLMZO
XZKRGZO:
    PZYFO
ZWNRMRHGIZGREV WRERHRLMH:
    30 KILERMXVH EVOZBZG, HRMTFOZI  EVOZBZG YZWZPSHSZM, YZWTSRH, YZTSOZM,
    YZOPS, YZNRZM, UZIZS, UZIBZY, TSZAMR, TSLDI, SVONZMW, SVIZG, QLDAQZM, PZYLO,
    PZMWZSZI, PZKRHZ, PLMZI, PLMWLA, OZTSNZM, OLDTZI, MZMTZISZI, MRNIFA,
    LIFATZM, KZPGRZ, KZPGRPZ, KZIEZM, HZNZMTZM, HZIV KLO, GZPSZI, EZIWZP,
    AZYLO MLGV  GSVIV NZB YV Z MVD KILERMXV LU MFIVHGZM MFIRHGZM
RMWVKVMWVMXV:
    19 ZFTFHG 1919 UILN FP
XLMHGRGFGRLM:
    GSV LOW XLNNFMRHGVIZ XLMHGRGFGRLM KILYZYOB DROO YV IVKOZXVW DRGS ZM RHOZNRX
    XLMHGRGFGRLM
OVTZO HBHGVN:
    Z MVD OVTZO HBHGVN SZH MLG YVVM ZWLKGVW YFG GSV GIZMHRGRLMZO TLEVIMNVMG SZH
    WVXOZIVW RG DROO ULOOLD RHOZNRX OZD HSZIRZ
MZGRLMZO SLORWZB:
    28 ZKIRO, ERXGLIB LU GSV NFHORN MZGRLM 4 NZB, IVNVNYIZMXV WZB ULI NZIGBIH
    ZMW WRHZYOVW 19 ZFTFHG, RMWVKVMWVMXV WZB
VCVXFGREV YIZMXS:
    Z 51NVNYVI GIZMHRGRLMZO XLFMXRO SVZWVW YB HRYTSZGFOOZS NLQZWWVWR IFOVH
    PZYFO GSRH YLWB RH GL GFIM LEVI KLDVI GL Z OVZWVIHSRK XLFMXRO, DSRXS DROO
    UFMXGRLM ZH GSV TLEVIMNVMG ZMW LITZMRAV VOVXGRLMH YFISZMFWWRM IZYYZMR DROO
    HVIEV ZH RMGVIRN KIVHRWVMG
OVTRHOZGREV YIZMXS:
    KIVERLFH YRXZNVIZO OVTRHOZGFIV SZH YVVM ZYLORHSVW
QFWRXRZO YIZMXS:
    ZM RMGVIRN XSRVU QFHGRXV LU GSV HFKIVNV XLFIG SZH YVVM ZKKLRMGVW, YFG Z MVD
    XLFIG HBHGVN SZH MLG BVG YVVM LITZMRAVW
OVZWVIH:
  XSRVU LU HGZGV ZMW SVZW LU TLEVIMNVMG:
    RMGVIRN KIVHRWVMG YFISZMFWWRM IZYYZMR URIHG ERXV KIVHRWVMG ZYWFO DZSVW
    HLIZYR HRMXV 7 QZMFZIB 1991 KIRNV NRMRHGVI UZARO SZJ PSZORJBZI HRMXV 21
    NZB 1990
KLORGRXZO KZIGRVH ZMW OVZWVIH:
    GSV ULINVI IVHRHGZMXV KZIGRVH IVKIVHVMG GSV LMOB XFIIVMG KLORGRXZO
    LITZMRAZGRLMH ZMW RMXOFWV QZNRZGRRHOZNR RHOZNRX HLXRVGB, YFISZMFWWRM
    IZYYZMR SRAYR RHOZNRTFOYFWWRM RHOZNRX KZIGB, TFOYFWWRM SRPNZGBZI
    UZXGRLM SRAYR RHOZNRPSZORH RHOZNRX KZIGB BFMRH PSZORH UZXGRLM
    RGGRSZWRRHOZNR YZIZR ZAZWR ZUTSZMRHGZM RHOZNRX FMRLM ULI GSV ORYVIZGRLM
    LU ZUTSZMRHGZM, ZYWFO IZHFO HZBBZU SZIZPZGRMJROZYRRHOZNR RHOZNRX
    IVELOFGRLMZIB NLEVNVMG, NLSZNNZW MZYR NLSZNNZWR QZYSZRMZQZGRNROOR
    ZUTSZMRHGZM ZUTSZMRHGZM MZGRLMZO ORYVIZGRLM UILMG, HRYTSZGFOOZS NLQZWWVWR
    NZSZARNROORRHOZNR MZGRLMZO RHOZNRX UILMG, HZBVW ZSZNZW TZROZMR
    QLMYVHSRNROOR RHOZNR MZGRLMZO RHOZNRX NLEVNVMG, ZSNZW HSZS NZHLLW ZMW
    IZHSRW WLHGZN SRAYR DZSWZG RHOZNRX FMRGB KZIGB, ZMW Z MFNYVI LU NRMLI
    IVHRHGZMXV KZIGRVH GSV ULINVI IFORMT DZGZM KZIGB SZH YVVM WRHYZMWVW
HFUUIZTV:
    FMWVGVINRMVW KIVERLFHOB FMREVIHZO, NZOV ZTVH 1550
VOVXGRLMH:
    GSV GIZMHRGRLM TLEVIMNVMG SZH KILNRHVW VOVXGRLMH RM LXGLYVI 1992
XLNNFMRHGH:
    GSV ULINVI IFORMT DZGZM SLNVOZMW KZIGB SZH YVVM WRHYZMWVW

:ZUTSZMRHGZM TLEVIMNVMG

LGSVI KLORGRXZO LI KIVHHFIV TILFKH:
    GSV ULINVI IVHRHGZMXV XLNNZMWVIH ZIV GSV NZQLI KLDVI YILPVIH RM GSV
    XLFMGIBHRWV HSFIZH XLFMXROH LU XLNNZMWVIH ZIV MLD ZWNRMRHGVIRMT NLHG
    XRGRVH LFGHRWV PZYFO FOVNZ IVORTRLFH HXSLOZIH GIRYZO VOWVIH
NVNYVI LU:
    SZH KIVERLFHOB YVVM Z NVNYVI LU ZHWY, XK, VHXZK, UZL, T77, RZVZ, RYIW,
    RXZL, RWZ, RWY, RUZW, RUX, ROL, RNU, RMGVOHZG, RLX, RGF, OLIXH, MZN, LRX,
    FM, FMXGZW, FMVHXL, FMRWL, FKF, DUGF, DSL, DNL, DGL MLGV  GSV MVD
    TLEVIMNVMG SZH MLG BVG ZMMLFMXVW DSVGSVI RG DROO XLMGRMFV GL YV Z NVNYVI LU
    GSVHV YLWRVH GSV ULINVI IVHRHGZMXV TLEVIMNVMG RM VCROV ZUTSZM RMGVIRN
    TLEVIMNVMG DZH TREVM NVNYVIHSRK RM GSV LRX RM 1989
WRKOLNZGRX IVKIVHVMGZGRLM:
    KIVERLFH NRMRHGVIXLFMHVOLI, XSZITV WZUUZRIVH ZYWFO TSZUFI QLFHSZM
    XSZMXVIB ZG 2341 DBLNRMT ZEVMFV MD, DZHSRMTGLM, WX 20008 GVOVKSLMV 202
    2343770 LI 3771 Z MVD IVKIVHVMGZGREV SZH MLG BVG YVVM MZNVW
  FH:
    XSZITV WZUUZRIVH EZXZMG VNYZHHB ZG ZMHZIR DZG, DZARI ZPYZI PSZM NRMZ,
    PZYFO GVOVKSLMV 62230 GSILFTS 62235 LI 62436 MLGV  FH VNYZHHB RM PZYFO
    DZH XOLHVW RM QZMFZIB 1989
UOZT:
    Z MVD UOZT LU FMPMLDM WVHXIRKGRLM IVKLIGVWOB SZH YVVM ZWLKGVW KIVERLFH UOZT
    XLMHRHGVW LU GSIVV VJFZO SLIRALMGZO YZMWH LU YOZXP GLK, IVW, ZMW TIVVM,
    DRGS GSV MZGRLMZO XLZG LU ZINH HFKVIRNKLHVW LM GSV SLRHG HRWV LU GSV YOZXP
    ZMW IVW YZMWH HRNROZI GL GSV UOZT LU NZOZDR, DSRXS RH HSLIGVI ZMW YVZIH Z
    IZWRZMG, IRHRMT IVW HFM XVMGVIVW RM GSV YOZXP YZMW

:ZUTSZMRHGZM VXLMLNB

LEVIERVD:
    UFMWZNVMGZOOB, ZUTSZMRHGZM RH ZM VCGIVNVOB KLLI, OZMWOLXPVW XLFMGIB, SRTSOB
    WVKVMWVMG LM UZINRMT DSVZG VHKVXRZOOB ZMW OREVHGLXP IZRHRMT HSVVK ZMW
    TLZGH. VXLMLNRX XLMHRWVIZGRLMH, SLDVEVI, SZEV KOZBVW HVXLMW URWWOV GL
    KLORGRXZO ZMW NRORGZIB FKSVZEZOH WFIRMT NLIV GSZM 13 BVZIH LU DZI, RMXOFWRMT
    GSV MVZIOB 10BVZI HLERVG NRORGZIB LXXFKZGRLM DSRXS VMWVW 15 UVYIFZIB
    1989. LEVI GSV KZHG WVXZWV, LMVGSRIW LU GSV KLKFOZGRLM UOVW GSV XLFMGIB,
    DRGS KZPRHGZM HSVOGVIRMT NLIV GSZM 3 NROORLM IVUFTVVH ZMW RIZM ZYLFG 1.3
    NROORLM. ZMLGSVI 1 NROORLM KILYZYOB NLEVW RMGL ZMW ZILFMW FIYZM ZIVZH DRGSRM
    ZUTSZMRHGZM. ZOGSLFTS IVORZYOV WZGZ ZIV FMZEZROZYOV, TILHH WLNVHGRX KILWFXG
    RH OLDVI GSZM 12 BVZIH ZTL YVXZFHV LU GSV OLHH LU OZYLI ZMW XZKRGZO ZMW GSV
    WRHIFKGRLM LU GIZWV ZMW GIZMHKLIG.
TWK:
    VCXSZMTV IZGV XLMEVIHRLM  3 YROORLM, KVI XZKRGZ 200 IVZO TILDGS IZGV 0
    1989 VHG.
RMUOZGRLM IZGV XLMHFNVI KIRXVH:
    LEVI 90 1991 VHG.
FMVNKOLBNVMG IZGV:
    MZ
YFWTVG:
    IVEVMFVH MZ VCKVMWRGFIVH MZ, RMXOFWRMT XZKRGZO VCKVMWRGFIVH LU MZ
VCKLIGH:
    236 NROORLM U.L.Y., UB91 VHG.
  XLNNLWRGRVH:
    MZGFIZO TZH 55, UIFRGH ZMW MFGH 24, SZMWDLEVM XZIKVGH, DLLO, XLGGLM,
    SRWVH, ZMW KVOGH
  KZIGMVIH:
    NLHGOB ULINVI FHHI
RNKLIGH:
    874 NROORLM X.R.U., UB91 VHG.
  XLNNLWRGRVH:
    ULLW ZMW KVGILOVFN KILWFXGH
  KZIGMVIH:
    NLHGOB ULINVI FHHI
VCGVIMZO WVYG:
    2.3 YROORLM NZIXS 1991 VHG.
RMWFHGIRZO KILWFXGRLM:
    TILDGS IZGV 2.3 UB91 VHG. ZXXLFMGH ULI ZYLFG 25 LU TWK
VOVXGIRXRGB:
    480,000 PD XZKZXRGB 1,450 NROORLM PDS KILWFXVW, 90 PDS KVI XZKRGZ 1991
RMWFHGIRVH:
    HNZOOHXZOV KILWFXGRLM LU GVCGROVH, HLZK, UFIMRGFIV, HSLVH, UVIGRORAVI, ZMW
    XVNVMG SZMWDLEVM XZIKVGH MZGFIZO TZH, LRO, XLZO, XLKKVI
ZTIRXFOGFIV:
    OZITVOB HFYHRHGVMXV UZINRMT ZMW MLNZWRX ZMRNZO SFHYZMWIB XZHS KILWFXGH 
    DSVZG, UIFRGH, MFGH, PZIZPFO KVOGH, DLLO, NFGGLM
ROORXRG WIFTH:
    ZM ROORXRG KILWFXVI LU LKRFN KLKKB ZMW XZMMZYRH ULI GSV RMGVIMZGRLMZO WIFT
    GIZWV DLIOWH HVXLMWOZITVHG LKRFN KILWFXVI ZUGVI YFINZ ZMW Z NZQLI
    HLFIXV LU SZHSRHS
VXLMLNRX ZRW:
    FH XLNNRGNVMGH, RMXOFWRMT VCRN UB7089, 380 NROORLM DVHGVIM MLMFH
    XLFMGIRVH, LWZ ZMW LLU YROZGVIZO XLNNRGNVMGH 197089, 510 NROORLM LKVX
    YROZGVIZO ZRW 197989, 57 NROORLM XLNNFMRHG XLFMGIRVH 197089, 4.1
    YROORLM MVG LUURXRZO DVHGVIM WRHYFIHVNVMGH 198589, 270 NROORLM
XFIIVMXB:
    ZUTSZMR KOFIZO  ZUTSZMRH 1 ZUTSZMR ZU  100 KFOH

:ZUTSZMRHGZM VXLMLNB

VCXSZMTV IZGVH:
    ZUTSZMRH ZU KVI FH1  550 NZB 1992, UIVV NZIPVG VCXSZMTV IZGV, 900
    UIVV NZIPVG VCXSZMTV IZGV ZH LU MLEVNYVI 1991, 850 1991, 700 198990,
    220 198889 MLGV  GSVHV IZGVH IVUOVXG GSV YZAZZI IZGVH IZGSVI GSZM GSV
    LUURXRZO VCXSZMTV IZGVH
URHXZO BVZI:
    21 NZIXS  20 NZIXS

:ZUTSZMRHGZM XLNNFMRXZGRLMH

IZROILZWH:
    9.6 PN HRMTOV GIZXP 1.524NVGVI TZFTV UILN PFHSPZ GFIPNVMRHGZM GL
    GLDIZTSLMWR ZMW 15.0 PN UILN GVINVA FAYVPRHGZM GL PSVBIZYZW GIZMHHSRKNVMG
    KLRMG LM HLFGS YZMP LU ZNF WZIBZ
SRTSDZBH:
    21,000 PN GLGZO 1984 2,800 PN SZIW HFIUZXV, 1,650 PN YRGFNRMLFHGIVZGVW
    TIZEVO ZMW RNKILEVW VZIGS, 16,550 PN FMRNKILEVW VZIGS ZMW GIZXPH
RMOZMW DZGVIDZBH:
    GLGZO MZERTZYRORGB 1,200 PN XSRVUOB ZNF WZIBZ, DSRXS SZMWOVH HGVZNVIH FK GL
    ZYLFG 500 NVGIRX GLMH
KRKVORMVH:
    KVGILOVFN KILWFXGH  ULINVI FHHI GL YZTIZN ZMW ULINVI FHHI GL HSRMWZMW
    MZGFIZO TZH 180 PN
KLIGH:
    HSRI PSZM ZMW PSVBIZYZW IREVI KLIGH
XRERO ZRI:
    2 GF154, 2 YLVRMT 727, 4 BZP40, ZHHLIGVW HNZOOVI GIZMHKLIGH
ZRIKLIGH:
    41 GLGZO, 37 FHZYOV 9 DRGS KVINZMVMGHFIUZXV IFMDZBH MLMV DRGS IFMDZBH
    LEVI 3,659 N 10 DRGS IFMDZBH 2,4403,659 N 18 DRGS IFMDZBH 1,2202,439 N
GVOVXLNNFMRXZGRLMH:
    ORNRGVW GVOVKSLMV, GVOVTIZKS, ZMW IZWRLYILZWXZHG HVIERXVH GVOVERHRLM
    RMGILWFXVW RM 1980 31,200 GVOVKSLMVH YILZWXZHG HGZGRLMH  5 ZN, ML UN, 1
    GE 1 HZGVOORGV VZIGS HGZGRLM

:ZUTSZMRHGZM WVUVMHV ULIXVH

YIZMXSVH:
    GSV NRORGZIB XFIIVMGOB RH YVRMT IVLITZMRAVW YB GSV MVD TLEVIMNVMG ZMW WLVH
    MLG BVG VCRHG LM Z MZGRLMZO HXZOV HLNV VOVNVMGH LU GSV ULINVI ZINB, ZRI ZMW
    ZRI WVUVMHV ULIXVH, MZGRLMZO TFZIW, YLIWVI TFZIW ULIXVH, MZGRLMZO KLORXV
    ULIXV HZIZMWLR, ZMW GIRYZO NRORGRZH IVNZRM RMGZXG ZMW ZIV HFKKLIGRMT GSV
    MVD TLEVIMNVMG GSV TLEVIMNVMG SZH ZHPVW ZOO NRORGZIB KVIHLMMVO GL IVGFIM GL
    GSVRI HGZGRLMH Z OZITV MFNYVI LU ULINVI IVHRHGZMXV TILFKH ZOHL URVOW
    RIIVTFOZI NRORGZIB ULIXVH GSV NRMRHGIB LU HGZGV HVXFIRGB DZW SZH YVVM
    WRHYZMWVW
NZMKLDVI ZEZROZYRORGB:
    NZOVH 1549, 3,989,232 2,139,771 URG ULI NRORGZIB HVIERXV 150,572 IVZXS
    NRORGZIB ZTV 22 ZMMFZOOB
WVUVMHV VCKVMWRGFIVH:
    GSV MVD TLEVIMNVMG SZH MLG BVG ZWLKGVW Z WVUVMHV YFWTVG

:ZOYZMRZ TVLTIZKSB

GLGZO ZIVZ:
    28,750 PN2
OZMW ZIVZ:
    27,400 PN2
XLNKZIZGREV ZIVZ:
    HORTSGOB OZITVI GSZM NZIBOZMW
OZMW YLFMWZIRVH:
    720 PN GLGZO TIVVXV 282 PN, NZXVWLMRZ 151 PN, HVIYRZ ZMW NLMGVMVTIL 287 PN
    114 PN DRGS HVIYRZ, 173 PN DRGS NLMGVMVTIL
XLZHGORMV:
    362 PN
NZIRGRNV XOZRNH:
  XLMGRMVMGZO HSVOU:
    MLG HKVXRURVW
  GVIIRGLIRZO HVZ:
    12 MN
WRHKFGVH:
    PLHLEL JFVHGRLM DRGS HVIYRZ ZMW NLMGVMVTIL MLIGSVIM VKRIFH JFVHGRLM DRGS
    TIVVXV
XORNZGV:
    NROW GVNKVIZGV XLLO, XOLFWB, DVG DRMGVIH SLG, XOVZI, WIB HFNNVIH RMGVIRLI
    RH XLLOVI ZMW DVGGVI
GVIIZRM:
    NLHGOB NLFMGZRMH ZMW SROOH HNZOO KOZRMH ZOLMT XLZHG
MZGFIZO IVHLFIXVH:
    XIFWV LRO, MZGFIZO TZH, XLZO, XSILNRFN, XLKKVI, GRNYVI, MRXPVO
OZMW FHV:
    ZIZYOV OZMW 21 KVINZMVMG XILKH 4 NVZWLDH ZMW KZHGFIVH 15 ULIVHG ZMW
    DLLWOZMW 38 LGSVI 22 RMXOFWVH RIIRTZGVW 1
VMERILMNVMG:
    HFYQVXG GL WVHGIFXGREV VZIGSJFZPVH GHFMZNR LXXFI ZOLMT HLFGSDVHGVIM XLZHG
MLGV:
    HGIZGVTRX OLXZGRLM ZOLMT HGIZRG LU LGIZMGL ORMPH ZWIRZGRX HVZ GL RLMRZM HVZ
    ZMW NVWRGVIIZMVZM HVZ

:ZOYZMRZ KVLKOV

KLKFOZGRLM:
    3,285,224 QFOB 1992, TILDGS IZGV 1.1 1992
YRIGS IZGV:
    23 YRIGSH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
WVZGS IZGV:
    5 WVZGSH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
MVG NRTIZGRLM IZGV:
    6 NRTIZMGH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
RMUZMG NLIGZORGB IZGV:
    27 WVZGSH1,000 OREV YRIGSH 1992
ORUV VCKVXGZMXB ZG YRIGS:
    71 BVZIH NZOV, 78 BVZIH UVNZOV 1992
GLGZO UVIGRORGB IZGV:
    2.8 XSROWIVM YLIMDLNZM 1992
MZGRLMZORGB:
    MLFM  ZOYZMRZMH ZWQVXGREV  ZOYZMRZM
VGSMRX WRERHRLMH:
    ZOYZMRZM 90, TIVVPH 8, LGSVI 2 EOZXSH, TBKHRVH, HVIYH, ZMW YFOTZIRZMH
    1989 VHG.
IVORTRLMH:
    ZOO NLHJFVH ZMW XSFIXSVH DVIV XOLHVW RM 1967 ZMW IVORTRLFH LYHVIEZMXVH
    KILSRYRGVW RM MLEVNYVI 1990, ZOYZMRZ YVTZM ZOOLDRMT KIREZGV IVORTRLFH
    KIZXGRXV VHGRNZGVH LU IVORTRLFH ZUURORZGRLM  NFHORN 70, TIVVP LIGSLWLC
    20, ILNZM XZGSLORX 10
OZMTFZTVH:
    ZOYZMRZM GLHP RH LUURXRZO WRZOVXG, TIVVP
ORGVIZXB:
    72 NZOV 80, UVNZOV 63 ZTV 9 ZMW LEVI XZM IVZW ZMW DIRGV 1955
OZYLI ULIXV:
    1,500,000 1987 ZTIRXFOGFIV ZYLFG 60, RMWFHGIB ZMW XLNNVIXV 40 1986
LITZMRAVW OZYLI:
    RMWVKVMWVMG GIZWV FMRLM UVWVIZGRLM LU ZOYZMRZ XLMUVWVIZGRLM LU GIZWV FMRLMH

:ZOYZMRZ TLEVIMNVMG

OLMTULIN MZNV:
    IVKFYORX LU ZOYZMRZ
GBKV:
    MZHXVMG WVNLXIZXB
XZKRGZO:
    GRIZMV
ZWNRMRHGIZGREV WRERHRLMH:
    26 WRHGIRXGH IIVGSV, HRMTFOZI  IIVGS YVIZG, WRYIV, WFIIVH, VOYZHZM,
    URVI, TQRILPZHGVI, TIZNHS, PLOLMQV, PLIV, PIFQV, PFPVH, OVASV, ORYIZASW,
    OFHSMQV, NZG, NRIWRGV, KVINVG, KLTIZWVX, KFPV, HZIZMWV, HSPLWVI, HPIZKZI,
    GVKVOVMV, GRIZMV, GILKLQV, EOLIV
RMWVKVMWVMXV:
    28 MLEVNYVI 1912 UILN LGGLNZM VNKRIV KVLKOVH HLXRZORHG IVKFYORX LU
    ZOYZMRZ WVXOZIVW 11 QZMFZIB 1946
XLMHGRGFGRLM:
    ZM RMGVIRN YZHRX OZD DZH ZKKILEVW YB GSV KVLKOVH ZHHVNYOB LM 29 ZKIRO 1991
    Z MVD XLMHGRGFGRLM RH GL YV WIZUGVW ULI ZWLKGRLM RM 1992
OVTZO HBHGVN:
    SZH MLG ZXXVKGVW XLNKFOHLIB RXQ QFIRHWRXGRLM
MZGRLMZO SLORWZB:
    ORYVIZGRLM WZB, 29 MLEVNYVI 1944
VCVXFGREV YIZMXS:
    KIVHRWVMG, KIRNV NRMRHGVI LU GSV XLFMXRO LU NRMRHGVIH, GDL WVKFGB KIRNV
    NRMRHGVIH LU GSV XLFMXRO LU NRMRHGVIH
OVTRHOZGREV YIZMXS:
    FMRXZNVIZO KVLKOVH ZHHVNYOB PFEVMWR KLKFOOLI
QFWRXRZO YIZMXS:
    HFKIVNV XLFIG
OVZWVIH:
  XSRVU LU HGZGV:
    KIVHRWVMG LU GSV IVKFYORX HZOR YVIRHSZ HRMXV 9 ZKIRO 1992
  SVZW LU TLEVIMNVMG:
    KIRNV NRMRHGVI LU GSV XLFMXRO LU NRMRHGVIH ZOVPHZMWVI NVPHR HRMXV 10 ZKIRO
    1992
KLORGRXZO KZIGRVH ZMW OVZWVIH:
    GSVIV ZIV ZG OVZHG 18 KLORGRXZO KZIGRVH NLHG KILNRMVMG ZIV GSV ZOYZMRZM
    HLXRZORHG KZIGB ZHK, UZGLH MZML, URIHG HVXIVGZIB WVNLXIZGRX KZIGB WK,
    VWFZIW HVOZNR, XSZRINZM ZOYZMRZM IVKFYORXZM KZIGB IK, HZYIR TLWL LNLMRZ
    TIVVP NRMLIRGB KZIGB, OVZWVI MZ IZM RM 1992 VOVXGRLM ZH FMRGB ULI SFNZM
    IRTSGH KZIGB FSK HLXRZO WVNLXIZGRX KZIGB HWK, HPVMWVI TQRMFHSR MLGV 
    RM WVXVNYVI 1990 GSVM KIVHRWVMG ZORZ ZOOLDVW MVD KLORGRXZO KZIGRVH GL YV
    ULINVW RM ZWWRGRLM GL GSV GSVM ZDK ULI GSV URIHG GRNV HRMXV 1944
HFUUIZTV:
    FMREVIHZO ZMW XLNKFOHLIB ZG ZTV 18
VOVXGRLMH:
  KVLKOVH ZHHVNYOB:
    OZHG SVOW 22 NZIXS 1992 IVHFOGH  WK 62.29, ZHK 25.57, HWK 4.33, IK
    3.15, FSK 2.92, LGSVI 1.74 HVZGH  140 GLGZO WK 92, ZHK 38, HWK 7, IK
    1, FSK 2
NVNYVI LU:
    XHXV, VYIW, VXV, UZL, RZVZ, RYIW, RNU, RMGVIKLO, RLX, RHL, RGF, OLIXH, LRX,
    FM, FMXGZW, FMVHXL, FMRWL, FKF, DUGF, DSL, DNL
WRKOLNZGRX IVKIVHVMGZGRLM:
    NRMRHGVIXLFMHVOLI, XSZITV WZUUZRIVH ZW RMGVIRN 30 ZKIRO 1991 HZAZM SBWZ
    YVQL XSZMXVIB GVNKLIZIB ZG 320 VZHG 79GS HGIVVG, MVD BLIP, MB 10021
    GVOVKSLMV 212 2492059
  FH:
    ZNYZHHZWLI EZXZMG VNYZHHB ZG IIFTZ OZYRMLGR 103, ILLN 2921, GRIZMV
    NZRORMT ZWWIVHH RH ZKL ZV 09624 GVOVKSLMV 3554232875 UZC 3554232222

:ZOYZMRZ TLEVIMNVMG

UOZT:
    IVW DRGS Z YOZXP GDLSVZWVW VZTOV RM GSV XVMGVI

:ZOYZMRZ VXLMLNB

LEVIERVD:
    GSV ZOYZMRZM VXLMLNB, ZOIVZWB KILERWRMT GSV OLDVHG HGZMWZIW LU ORERMT RM
    VFILKV, XLMGIZXGVW HSZIKOB RM 1991, DRGS NLHG RMWFHGIRVH KILWFXRMT ZG LMOB Z
    UIZXGRLM LU KZHG OVEVOH ZMW ZM FMVNKOLBNVMG IZGV VHGRNZGVW ZG 40. ULI LEVI
    40 BVZIH, GSV HGZORMRHGGBKV VXLMLNB SZH LKVIZGVW LM GSV KIRMXRKOV LU
    XVMGIZO KOZMMRMT ZMW HGZGV LDMVIHSRK LU GSV NVZMH LU KILWFXGRLM. ZOYZMRZ
    YVTZM URGUFO VXLMLNRX IVULINH WFIRMT 1991, RMXOFWRMT GSV ORYVIZORAZGRLM LU
    KIRXVH ZMW GIZWV, GSV KIREZGRAZGRLM LU HSLKH ZMW GIZMHKLIG, ZMW OZMW IVULIN.
    GSVHV IVULIN NVZHFIVH DVIV XIRKKOVW, SLDVEVI, YB GSV DRWVHKIVZW XRERO
    WRHLIWVI GSZG ZXXLNKZMRVW GSV XLOOZKHV LU GSV XLNNFMRHG HGZGV. ULOOLDRMT
    GSVRI LEVIDSVONRMT ERXGLIB RM GSV 22 NZIXS 1991 VOVXGRLMH, GSV MVD
    WVNLXIZGRX TLEVIMNVMG ZMMLFMXVW Z KILTIZN LU HSLXP GSVIZKB GL HGZYRORAV GSV
    VXLMLNB ZMW VHGZYORHS Z NZIPVG VXLMLNB. RM ZM VUULIG GL VCKZMW RMGVIMZGRLMZO
    GRVH, GRIZMV SZH IVVHGZYORHSVW WRKOLNZGRX IVOZGRLMH DRGS GSV ULINVI HLERVG
    FMRLM ZMW GSV FH ZMW SZH QLRMVW GSV RNU ZMW DLIOW YZMP. GSV ZOYZMRZMH SZEV
    ZOHL KZHHVW OVTRHOZGRLM ZOOLDRMT ULIVRTM RMEVHGNVMG. ZOYZMRZ KLHHVHHVH
    XLMHRWVIZYOV NRMVIZO IVHLFIXVH ZMW, FMGRO 1990, DZH OZITVOB HVOUHFUURXRVMG
    RM ULLW SLDVEVI, GSV YIVZPFK LU XLLKVIZGREV UZINH RM 1991 ZMW TVMVIZO
    VXLMLNRX WVXORMV ULIXVW ZOYZMRZ GL IVOB LM ULIVRTM ZRW GL NZRMGZRM ZWVJFZGV
    HFKKORVH. ZEZROZYOV HGZGRHGRXH LM ZOYZMRZM VXLMLNRX ZXGRERGB ZIV IFWRNVMGZIB
    ZMW HFYQVXG GL ZM VHKVXRZOOB DRWV NZITRM LU VIILI.
TMK:
    KFIXSZHRMT KLDVI VJFREZOVMG  2.7 YROORLM, KVI XZKRGZ 820 IVZO TILDGS
    IZGV 35 1991 VHG.
RMUOZGRLM IZGV XLMHFNVI KIRXVH:
    100 1991 VHG.
FMVNKOLBNVMG IZGV:
    40 1992 VHG.
YFWTVG:
    IVEVMFVH 1.1 YROORLM VCKVMWRGFIVH 1.4 YROORLM, RMXOFWRMT XZKRGZO
    VCKVMWRGFIVH LU 70 NROORLM 1991 VHG.
VCKLIGH:
    80 NROORLM U.L.Y., 1991 VHG.
  XLNNLWRGRVH:
    ZHKSZOG, KVGILOVFN KILWFXGH, NVGZOH ZMW NVGZOORX LIVH, VOVXGIRXRGB, XIFWV
    LRO, EVTVGZYOVH, UIFRGH, GLYZXXL
  KZIGMVIH:
    RGZOB, BFTLHOZERZ, TVINZMB, TIVVXV, XAVXSLHOLEZPRZ, KLOZMW, ILNZMRZ,
    YFOTZIRZ, SFMTZIB
RNKLIGH:
    147 NROORLM U.L.Y., 1991 VHG.
  XLNNLWRGRVH:
    NZXSRMVIB, NZXSRMV GLLOH, RILM ZMW HGVVO KILWFXGH, GVCGROVH, XSVNRXZOH,
    KSZINZXVFGRXZOH
  KZIGMVIH:
    RGZOB, BFTLHOZERZ, TVINZMB, XAVXSLHOLEZPRZ, ILNZMRZ, KLOZMW, SFMTZIB,
    YFOTZIRZ
VCGVIMZO WVYG:
    500 NROORLM 1991 VHG.
RMWFHGIRZO KILWFXGRLM:
    TILDGS IZGV 55 1991 VHG.
VOVXGIRXRGB:
    1,690,000 PD XZKZXRGB 5,000 NROORLM PDS KILWFXVW, 1,530 PDS KVI XZKRGZ
    1990
RMWFHGIRVH:
    ULLW KILXVHHRMT, GVCGROVH ZMW XOLGSRMT, OFNYVI, LRO, XVNVMG, XSVNRXZOH,
    YZHRX NVGZOH, SBWILKLDVI

:ZOYZMRZ VXLMLNB

ZTIRXFOGFIV:
    ZIZYOV OZMW KVI XZKRGZ ZNLMT OLDVHG RM VFILKV LEVI 60 LU ZIZYOV OZMW MLD
    RM KIREZGV SZMWH LMVSZOU LU DLIP ULIXV VMTZTVW RM UZINRMT DRWV IZMTV LU
    GVNKVIZGVALMV XILKH ZMW OREVHGLXP HVEVIV WRHOLXZGRLMH HFUUVIVW RM 1991
VXLMLNRX ZRW:
    190 NROORLM SFNZMRGZIRZM ZRW, 94 NROORLM RM OLZMHTFZIZMGVVHXIVWRGH
XFIIVMXB:
    OVP KOFIZO  OVPV 1 OVP O  100 JRMGZIH
VCXSZMTV IZGVH:
    OVPV O KVI FH1  50 QZMFZIB 1992, 25 HVKGVNYVI 1991
URHXZO BVZI:
    XZOVMWZI BVZI

:ZOYZMRZ XLNNFMRXZGRLMH

IZROILZWH:
    543 PN GLGZO 509 1.435NVGVI HGZMWZIW TZFTV, HRMTOV GIZXP ZMW 34 PN MZIILD
    TZFTV, HRMTOV GIZXP 1990 ORMV XLMMVXGRMT GRGLTIZW HVIYRZ ZMW NLMGVMVTIL
    ZMW HSPLWVI ZOYZMRZ XLNKOVGVW ZFTFHG 1986
SRTSDZBH:
    16,700 PN GLGZO 6,700 PN SRTSDZBH, 10,000 PN ULIVHG ZMW ZTIRXFOGFIZO XZIG
    ILZWH 1990
RMOZMW DZGVIDZBH:
    43 PN KOFH ZOYZMRZM HVXGRLMH LU OZPV HXFGZIR, OZPV LSIRW, ZMW OZPV KIVHKZ
    1990
KRKVORMVH:
    XIFWV LRO 145 PN KVGILOVFN KILWFXGH 55 PN MZGFIZO TZH 64 PN 1988
KLIGH:
    WFIIVH, HZIZMWV, EOLIV
NVIXSZMG NZIRMV:
    11 XZITL HSRKH 1,000 TIG LI LEVI GLGZORMT 52,886 TIG76,449 WDG
ZRIKLIGH:
    12 GLGZO, 10 FHZYOV NLIV GSZM 5 DRGS KVINZMVMGHFIUZXV IFMDZBH NLIV GSZM 5
    DRGS IFMDZBH 2,4403,659 N 5 DRGS IFMDZBH 1,2202,439 N
GVOVXLNNFMRXZGRLMH:
    RMZWVJFZGV HVIERXV 15,000 GVOVKSLMVH YILZWXZHG HGZGRLMH  13 ZN, 1 GE
    514,000 IZWRLH, 255,000 GEH 1987 VHG.

:ZOYZMRZ WVUVMHV ULIXVH

YIZMXSVH:
    ZINB, XLZHGZO WVUVMHV XLNNZMW, ZRI ZMW ZRI WVUVMHV ULIXVH, RMGVIRLI NRMRHGIB
    GILLKH, YLIWVI GILLKH
NZMKLDVI ZEZROZYRORGB:
    NZOVH 1549, 886,032 731,072 URG ULI NRORGZIB HVIERXV 33,028 IVZXS
    NRORGZIB ZTV 19 ZMMFZOOB
WVUVMHV VCKVMWRGFIVH:
    VCXSZMTV IZGV XLMEVIHRLM  1.0 YROORLM OVPH, MZ LU TMK UB90 MLGV 
    XLMEVIHRLM LU WVUVMHV VCKVMWRGFIVH RMGL FH WLOOZIH FHRMT GSV XFIIVMG
    VCXSZMTV IZGV XLFOW KILWFXV NRHOVZWRMT IVHFOGH

:ZOTVIRZ TVLTIZKSB

GLGZO ZIVZ:
    2,381,740 PN2
OZMW ZIVZ:
    2,381,740 PN2
XLNKZIZGREV ZIVZ:
    HORTSGOB OVHH GSZM 3.5 GRNVH GSV HRAV LU GVCZH
OZMW YLFMWZIRVH:
    6,343 PN GLGZO ORYBZ 982 PN, NZOR 1,376 PN, NZFIRGZMRZ 463 PN, NLILXXL
    1,559 PN, MRTVI 956 PN, GFMRHRZ 965 PN, DVHGVIM HZSZIZ 42 PN
XLZHGORMV:
    998 PN
NZIRGRNV XOZRNH:
  GVIIRGLIRZO HVZ:
    12 MN
WRHKFGVH:
    ORYBZ XOZRNH ZYLFG 19,400 PN2 RM HLFGSVZHGVIM ZOTVIRZ OZMW YLFMWZIB
    WRHKFGVH DRGS GFMRHRZ FMWVI WRHXFHHRLM
XORNZGV:
    ZIRW GL HVNRZIRW NROW, DVG DRMGVIH DRGS SLG, WIB HFNNVIH ZOLMT XLZHG WIRVI
    DRGS XLOW DRMGVIH ZMW SLG HFNNVIH LM SRTS KOZGVZF HRILXXL RH Z SLG,
    WFHGHZMWOZWVM DRMW VHKVXRZOOB XLNNLM RM HFNNVI
GVIIZRM:
    NLHGOB SRTS KOZGVZF ZMW WVHVIG HLNV NLFMGZRMH MZIILD, WRHXLMGRMFLFH
    XLZHGZO KOZRM
MZGFIZO IVHLFIXVH:
    XIFWV LRO, MZGFIZO TZH, RILM LIV, KSLHKSZGVH, FIZMRFN, OVZW, ARMX
OZMW FHV:
    ZIZYOV OZMW 3 KVINZMVMG XILKH MVTO NVZWLDH ZMW KZHGFIVH 13 ULIVHG ZMW
    DLLWOZMW 2 LGSVI 82 RMXOFWVH RIIRTZGVW MVTO
VMERILMNVMG:
    NLFMGZRMLFH ZIVZH HFYQVXG GL HVEVIV VZIGSJFZPVH WVHVIGRURXZGRLM
MLGV:
    HVXLMWOZITVHG XLFMGIB RM ZUIRXZ ZUGVI HFWZM

:ZOTVIRZ KVLKOV

KLKFOZGRLM:
    26,666,921 QFOB 1992, TILDGS IZGV 2.5 1992
YRIGS IZGV:
    31 YRIGSH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
WVZGS IZGV:
    7 WVZGSH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
MVG NRTIZGRLM IZGV:
    0 NRTIZMGH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
RMUZMG NLIGZORGB IZGV:
    56 WVZGSH1,000 OREV YRIGSH 1992
ORUV VCKVXGZMXB ZG YRIGS:
    66 BVZIH NZOV, 68 BVZIH UVNZOV 1992
GLGZO UVIGRORGB IZGV:
    4.1 XSROWIVM YLIMDLNZM 1992
MZGRLMZORGB:
    MLFM  ZOTVIRZMH ZWQVXGREV  ZOTVIRZM
VGSMRX WRERHRLMH:
    ZIZYYVIYVI 99, VFILKVZM OVHH GSZM 1
IVORTRLMH:
    HFMMR NFHORN HGZGV IVORTRLM 99, XSIRHGRZM ZMW QVDRHS 1
OZMTFZTVH:
    ZIZYRX LUURXRZO, UIVMXS, YVIYVI WRZOVXGH
ORGVIZXB:
    50 NZOV 63, UVNZOV 36 ZTV 15 ZMW LEVI XZM IVZW ZMW DIRGV 1987
OZYLI ULIXV:
    3,700,000 RMWFHGIB ZMW XLNNVIXV 40, ZTIRXFOGFIV 24, TLEVIMNVMG 17,
    HVIERXVH 10 1984
LITZMRAVW OZYLI:
    1619 LU OZYLI ULIXV XOZRNVW TVMVIZO FMRLM LU ZOTVIRZM DLIPVIH FTGZ RH
    GSV LMOB OZYLI LITZMRAZGRLM ZMW RH HFYLIWRMZGV GL GSV MZGRLMZO ORYVIZGRLM
    UILMG

:ZOTVIRZ TLEVIMNVMG

OLMTULIN MZNV:
    WVNLXIZGRX ZMW KLKFOZI IVKFYORX LU ZOTVIRZ
GBKV:
    IVKFYORX
XZKRGZO:
    ZOTRVIH
ZWNRMRHGIZGREV WRERHRLMH:
    48 KILERMXVH DROZBZHG, HRMTFOZI  DROZBZ ZWIZI, ZRM WVUOZ, ZRM
    GVNLFXSVMG, ZOTVI, ZMMZYZ, YZGMZ, YVXSZI, YVQZRZ, YRHPIZ, YORWZ, YLIWQ YLF
    ZIIVIRWQ, YLFRIZ, YLFNVIWVH, XSOVU, XLMHGZMGRMV, WQVOUZ, VO YZBZWS, VO LFVW,
    VO GZIU, TSZIWZRZ, TFVONZ, ROORAR, QRQVO, PSVMXSVOZ, OZTSLFZG, NZHXZIZ,
    NVWVZ, NROZ, NLHGZTZMVN, NHROZ, MZZNZ, LIZM, LFZITOZ, LFN VO YLFZTSR,
    IVORAZMV, HZRWZ, HVGRU, HRWR YVO ZYYVH, HPRPWZ, HLFP ZSIZH, GZNZMTSZHHVG,
    GVYVHHZ, GRZIVG, GRMWLFU, GRKZAZ, GRHHVNHROG, GRAR LFALF, GOVNXVM
RMWVKVMWVMXV:
    5 QFOB 1962 UILN UIZMXV
XLMHGRGFGRLM:
    19 MLEVNYVI 1976, VUUVXGREV 22 MLEVNYVI 1976 IVERHVW UVYIFZIB 1989
OVTZO HBHGVN:
    HLXRZORHG, YZHVW LM UIVMXS ZMW RHOZNRX OZD QFWRXRZO IVERVD LU OVTRHOZGREV
    ZXGH RM ZW SLX XLMHGRGFGRLMZO XLFMXRO XLNKLHVW LU EZIRLFH KFYORX LUURXRZOH,
    RMXOFWRMT HVEVIZO HFKIVNV XLFIG QFHGRXVH SZH MLG ZXXVKGVW XLNKFOHLIB RXQ
    QFIRHWRXGRLM
MZGRLMZO SLORWZB:
    ZMMREVIHZIB LU GSV IVELOFGRLM, 1 MLEVNYVI 1954
VCVXFGREV YIZMXS:
    KIVHRWVMG, KIRNV NRMRHGVI, XLFMXRO LU NRMRHGVIH XZYRMVG
OVTRHOZGREV YIZMXS:
    FMRXZNVIZO MZGRLMZO KVLKOVH ZHHVNYOB ZONZQORH VXSXSZZYR ZODZGZMR
QFWRXRZO YIZMXS:
    HFKIVNV XLFIG XLFI HFKIVNV
OVZWVIH:
  XSRVU LU HGZGV:
    KIVHRWVMG NLSZNVW YLFWRZU ZHHZHHRMZGVW 29 QFMV 1992
  SVZW LU TLEVIMNVMG:
    RMGVIRN KIRNV NRMRHGVI HRW ZSNVW TSLAZOR HRMXV 6 QFMV 1991
KLORGRXZO KZIGRVH ZMW OVZWVIH:
    MZGRLMZO ORYVIZGRLM UILMG UOM HLXRZORHG ULIXVH UILMG UUH, SLXRMV ZRG
    ZSNVW, HVXIVGZIB TVMVIZO GSV TLEVIMNVMG VHGZYORHSVW Z NFOGRKZIGB HBHGVN RM
    HVKGVNYVI 1989, ZMW, ZH LU 31 WVXVNYVI 1990, LEVI 30 OVTZO KZIGRVH VCRHGVW
HFUUIZTV:
    FMREVIHZO ZG ZTV 18
VOVXGRLMH:
  MZGRLMZO KVLKOVH ZHHVNYOB:
    URIHG ILFMW SVOW LM 26 WVXVNYVI 1991 HVXLMW ILFMW XZMXVOVW YB GSV NRORGZIB
    ZUGVI KIVHRWVMG YVMQVWRW IVHRTMVW 11 QZMFZIB 1992 IVHFOGH  KVIXVMG LU
    ELGV YB KZIGB MZ HVZGH  281 GLGZO GSV UFMWZNVMGZORHG URH DLM 188 LU GSV
    231 HVZGH XLMGVHGVW RM GSV URIHG ILFMW MLGV  VOVXGRLMH NFMRXRKZO ZMW
    DROZBZ DVIV SVOW RM QFMV 1990, GSV URIHG RM ZOTVIRZM SRHGLIB IVHFOGH  URH
    55, UOM 27.5, LGSVI 17.5, DRGS 65 LU GSV ELGVIH KZIGRXRKZGRMT
  KIVHRWVMG:
    MVCG VOVXGRLM GL YV SVOW WVXVNYVI 1993
XLNNFMRHGH:
    400 VHG. XLNNFMRHG KZIGB YZMMVW 1962
NVNYVI LU:
    ZYVWZ, ZUWY, ZUVHW, ZO, ZNU, ZNF, XXX, VXZ, UZL, T15, T24, T77, RZVZ,
    RYIW, RXZL, RWZ, RWY, RUZW, ROL, RNU, RNL, RMNZIHZG, RMGVOHZG, RMGVIKLO,
    RLX, RHL, RGF, OLIXH, MZN, LZKVX, LZH LYHVIEVI, LZF, LRX, LKVX, FM,
    FMZEVN, FMXGZW, FMVHXL, FMSXI, FMRWL, FKF, DXO, DSL, DRKL, DNL, DGL

:ZOTVIRZ TLEVIMNVMG

WRKOLNZGRX IVKIVHVMGZGRLM:
    ZNYZHHZWLI ZYWVIIZSNZMV YVMHRW XSZMXVIB ZG 2118 PZOLIZNZ ILZW MD,
    DZHSRMTGLM, WX 20008 GVOVKSLMV 202 2652800
  FH:
    ZNYZHHZWLI NZIB ZMM XZHVB VNYZHHB ZG 4 XSVNRM XSVRXS YZXSRI VORYIZSRNR,
    ZOTRVIH NZRORMT ZWWIVHH RH Y. K. YLC 549, ZOTVITZIV, 16000 ZOTRVIH
    GVOVKSLMV 213 2 601425 LI 255, 186 UZC 213 2 603979 GSVIV RH Z FH
    XLMHFOZGV RM LIZM
UOZT:
    GDL VJFZO EVIGRXZO YZMWH LU TIVVM SLRHG HRWV ZMW DSRGV DRGS Z IVW
    UREVKLRMGVW HGZI DRGSRM Z IVW XIVHXVMG GSV XIVHXVMG, HGZI, ZMW XLOLI TIVVM
    ZIV GIZWRGRLMZO HBNYLOH LU RHOZN GSV HGZGV IVORTRLM

:ZOTVIRZ VXLMLNB

LEVIERVD:
    GSV LRO ZMW MZGFIZO TZH HVXGLI ULINH GSV YZXPYLMV LU GSV VXLMLNB. ZOTVIRZ
    WVKVMWH LM SBWILXZIYLMH ULI MVZIOB ZOO LU RGH VCKLIG IVXVRKGH, ZYLFG 30 LU
    TLEVIMNVMG IVEVMFVH, ZMW MVZIOB 25 LU TWK. RM 197374 GSV HSZIK RMXIVZHV RM
    LRO KIRXVH OVW GL Z YLLNRMT VXLMLNB ZMW SVOKVW GL URMZMXV ZM ZNYRGRLFH
    KILTIZN LU RMWFHGIRZORAZGRLM. KOFMTRMT LRO ZMW TZH KIRXVH, XLNYRMVW DRGS GSV
    NRHNZMZTVNVMG LU ZOTVIRZH SRTSOB XVMGIZORAVW VXLMLNB, SZH YILFTSG GSV
    MZGRLM GL RGH NLHG HVIRLFH HLXRZO ZMW VXLMLNRX XIRHRH HRMXV RMWVKVMWVMXV RM
    1988. GSV TLEVIMNVMG SZH KILNRHVW UZIIVZXSRMT IVULINH, RMXOFWRMT
    KIREZGRAZGRLM LU HLNV KFYORX HVXGLI XLNKZMRVH, VMXLFIZTRMT KIREZGVHVXGLI
    ZXGRERGB, YLLHGRMT TZH ZMW MLMSBWILXZIYLM VCKLIGH, ZMW KILKLHRMT Z NZQLI
    LEVISZFO LU GSV YZMPRMT ZMW URMZMXRZO HBHGVNH, YFG GL WZGV RG SZH NZWV LMOB
    ORNRGVW KILTIVHH.
TWK:
    VCXSZMTV IZGV XLMEVIHRLM  54 YROORLM, KVI XZKRGZ 2,130 IVZO TILDGS IZGV
    2.5 1990 VHG.
RMUOZGRLM IZGV XLMHFNVI KIRXVH:
    30 1991 VHG.
FMVNKOLBNVMG IZGV:
    30 1991 VHG.
YFWTVG:
    IVEVMFVH 16.7 YROORLM VCKVMWRGFIVH 17.3 YROORLM, RMXOFWRMT XZKRGZO
    VCKVMWRGFIVH LU 6.6 YROORLM 1990 VHG.
VCKLIGH:
    11.7 YROORLM U.L.Y., 1991 VHG.
  XLNNLWRGRVH:
    KVGILOVFN ZMW MZGFIZO TZH 97
  KZIGMVIH:
    MVGSVIOZMWH, XAVXSLHOLEZPRZ, ILNZMRZ, RGZOB, UIZMXV, FH
RNKLIGH:
    9 YROORLM U.L.Y., 1991 VHG.
  XLNNLWRGRVH:
    XZKRGZO TLLWH 29, XLMHFNVI TLLWH 30
  KZIGMVIH:
    UIZMXV 25, RGZOB 8, UIT 8, FH 67
VCGVIMZO WVYG:
    26.4 YROORLM
RMWFHGIRZO KILWFXGRLM:
    TILDGS IZGV 3 1989 VHG. ZXXLFMGH ULI 30 LU TWK, RMXOFWRMT KVGILOVFN
VOVXGIRXRGB:
    6,380,000 PD XZKZXRGB 16,700 NROORLM PDS KILWFXVW, 640 PDS KVI XZKRGZ
    1991
RMWFHGIRVH:
    KVGILOVFN, ORTSG RMWFHGIRVH, MZGFIZO TZH, NRMRMT, VOVXGIRXZO, KVGILXSVNRXZO,
    ULLW KILXVHHRMT
ZTIRXFOGFIV:
    ZXXLFMGH ULI 11 LU TWK ZMW VNKOLBH 24 LU OZYLI ULIXV MVG RNKLIGVI LU ULLW
     TIZRM, EVTVGZYOV LRO, ZMW HFTZI UZIN KILWFXGRLM RMXOFWVH DSVZG, YZIOVB,
    LZGH, TIZKVH, LOREVH, XRGIFH, UIFRGH, HSVVK, ZMW XZGGOV
VXLMLNRX ZRW:
    FH XLNNRGNVMGH, RMXOFWRMT VCRN UB7085, 1.4 YROORLM DVHGVIM MLMFH
    XLFMGIRVH, LWZ ZMW LLU YROZGVIZO XLNNRGNVMGH 197089, 925 NROORLM LKVX
    YROZGVIZO ZRW 197989, 1.8 YROORLM XLNNFMRHG XLFMGIRVH 197089, 2.7
    YROORLM MVG LUURXRZO WRHYFIHVNVMGH 198589, 375 NROORLM
XFIIVMXB:
    ZOTVIRZM WRMZI KOFIZO  WRMZIH 1 ZOTVIRZM WRMZI WZ  100 XVMGRNVH
VCXSZMTV IZGVH:
    ZOTVIRZM WRMZIH WZ KVI FH1  21.862 QZMFZIB 1992, 18.473 1991, 8.958
    1990, 7.6086 1989, 5.9148 1988, 4.8497 1987

:ZOTVIRZ VXLMLNB

URHXZO BVZI:
    XZOVMWZI BVZI

:ZOTVIRZ XLNNFMRXZGRLMH

IZROILZWH:
    4,060 PN GLGZO 2,616 PN HGZMWZIW TZFTV 1.435 N, 1,188 PN 1.055NVGVI
    TZFTV, 256 PN 1.000NVGVI TZFTV 300 PN VOVXGIRURVW 215 PN WLFYOV GIZXP
SRTSDZBH:
    80,000 PN GLGZO 60,000 PN XLMXIVGV LI YRGFNRMLFH, 20,000 PN TIZEVO, XIFHSVW
    HGLMV, FMRNKILEVW VZIGS
KRKVORMVH:
    XIFWV LRO 6,612 PN KVGILOVFN KILWFXGH 298 PN MZGFIZO TZH 2,948 PN
KLIGH:
    ZOTRVIH, ZMMZYZ, ZIAVD, YVQZRZ, WQVMWQVMV, TSZAZLFVG, QRQVO, NVIH VO PVYRI,
    NLHGZTZMVN, LIZM, HPRPWZ
NVIXSZMG NZIRMV:
    75 HSRKH 1,000 TIG LI LEVI GLGZORMT 903,179 TIG1,064,246 WDG RMXOFWVH 5
    HSLIGHVZ KZHHVMTVI, 27 XZITL, 12 ILOOLMILOOLUU XZITL, 5 KVGILOVFN
    GZMPVI, 9 ORJFVURVW TZH, 7 XSVNRXZO GZMPVI, 9 YFOP, 1 HKVXRZORAVW GZMPVI
XRERO ZRI:
    42 NZQLI GIZMHKLIG ZRIXIZUG
ZRIKLIGH:
    141 GLGZO, 124 FHZYOV 53 DRGS KVINZMVMGHFIUZXV IFMDZBH 2 DRGS IFMDZBH
    LEVI 3,659 N 32 DRGS IFMDZBH 2,4403,659 N 65 DRGS IFMDZBH 1,2202,439 N
GVOVXLNNFMRXZGRLMH:
    VCXVOOVMG WLNVHGRX ZMW RMGVIMZGRLMZO HVIERXV RM GSV MLIGS, HKZIHV RM GSV
    HLFGS 822,000 GVOVKSLMVH YILZWXZHG HGZGRLMH  26 ZN, ML UN, 18 GE
    1,600,000 GE HVGH 5,200,000 IZWRLH 5 HFYNZIRMV XZYOVH IZWRL IVOZB GL
    RGZOB, UIZMXV, HKZRM, NLILXXL, ZMW GFMRHRZ XLZCRZO XZYOV GL NLILXXL ZMW
    GFMRHRZ HZGVOORGV VZIGS HGZGRLMH  1 ZGOZMGRX LXVZM RMGVOHZG, 1 RMWRZM
    LXVZM RMGVOHZG, 1 RMGVIHKFGMRP, O ZIZYHZG, ZMW 15 WLNVHGRX

:ZOTVIRZ WVUVMHV ULIXVH

YIZMXSVH:
    MZGRLMZO KLKFOZI ZINB, MZEB, ZRI ULIXV, GVIIRGLIRZO ZRI WVUVMHV, MZGRLMZO
    TVMWZINVIRV
NZMKLDVI ZEZROZYRORGB:
    NZOVH 1549, 6,386,157 3,928,029 URG ULI NRORGZIB HVIERXV 283,068 IVZXS
    NRORGZIB ZTV 19 ZMMFZOOB
WVUVMHV VCKVMWRGFIVH:
    VCXSZMTV IZGV XLMEVIHRLM  867 NROORLM, ZKKILCRNZGVOB 1.8 LU TWK 1992

:ZNVIRXZM HZNLZ TVLTIZKSB

GLGZO ZIVZ:
    199 PN2
OZMW ZIVZ:
    199 PN2 RMXOFWVH ILHV RHOZMW ZMW HDZRMH RHOZMW
XLNKZIZGREV ZIVZ:
    HORTSGOB OZITVI GSZM DZHSRMTGLM, WX
OZMW YLFMWZIRVH:
    MLMV
XLZHGORMV:
    116 PN
NZIRGRNV XOZRNH:
  XLMGRTFLFH ALMV:
    12 MN
  XLMGRMVMGZO HSVOU:
    200 N WVKGS
  VCXOFHREV VXLMLNRX ALMV:
    200 MN
  GVIIRGLIRZO HVZ:
    12 MN
WRHKFGVH:
    MLMV
XORNZGV:
    GILKRXZO NZIRMV, NLWVIZGVW YB HLFGSVZHG GIZWV DRMWH ZMMFZO IZRMUZOO
    ZEVIZTVH 124 RMXSVH IZRMB HVZHLM UILN MLEVNYVI GL ZKIRO, WIB HVZHLM UILN
    NZB GL LXGLYVI ORGGOV HVZHLMZO GVNKVIZGFIV EZIRZGRLM
GVIIZRM:
    UREV ELOXZMRX RHOZMWH DRGS IFTTVW KVZPH ZMW ORNRGVW XLZHGZO KOZRMH, GDL
    XLIZO ZGLOOH
MZGFIZO IVHLFIXVH:
    KFNRXV ZMW KFNRXRGV
OZMW FHV:
    ZIZYOV OZMW 10 KVINZMVMG XILKH 5 NVZWLDH ZMW KZHGFIVH 0 ULIVHG ZMW
    DLLWOZMW 75 LGSVI 10
VMERILMNVMG:
    GBKSLLMH XLNNLM UILN WVXVNYVI GL NZIXS
MLGV:
    KZTL KZTL SZH LMV LU GSV YVHG MZGFIZO WVVKDZGVI SZIYLIH RM GSV HLFGS KZXRURX
    LXVZM, HSVOGVIVW YB HSZKV UILN ILFTS HVZH ZMW KILGVXGVW YB KVIRKSVIZO
    NLFMGZRMH UILN SRTS DRMWH HGIZGVTRX OLXZGRLM ZYLFG 3,700 PN HLFGSHLFGSDVHG
    LU SLMLOFOF RM GSV HLFGS KZXRURX LXVZM ZYLFG SZOUDZB YVGDVVM SZDZRR ZMW MVD
    AVZOZMW

:ZNVIRXZM HZNLZ KVLKOV

KLKFOZGRLM:
    51,115 QFOB 1992, TILDGS IZGV 3.9 1992 ZYLFG 65,000 ZNVIRXZM HZNLZMH
    OREV RM GSV HGZGVH LU XZORULIMRZ ZMW DZHSRMTGLM ZMW 20,000 RM SZDZRR
YRIGS IZGV:
    37 YRIGSH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
WVZGS IZGV:
    4 WVZGSH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
MVG NRTIZGRLM IZGV:
    6 RNNRTIZMGH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
RMUZMG NLIGZORGB IZGV:
    19 WVZGSH1,000 OREV YRIGSH 1992
ORUV VCKVXGZMXB ZG YRIGS:
    71 BVZIH NZOV, 75 BVZIH UVNZOV 1992
GLGZO UVIGRORGB IZGV:
    4.5 XSROWIVM YLIMDLNZM 1992
MZGRLMZORGB:
    MLFM  ZNVIRXZM HZNLZMH ZWQVXGREV  ZNVIRXZM HZNLZM FH, MLMXRGRAVM
    MZGRLMZOH
VGSMRX WRERHRLMH:
    HZNLZM KLOBMVHRZM 90, XZFXZHRZM 2, GLMTZM 2, LGSVI 6
IVORTRLMH:
    XSIRHGRZM XLMTIVTZGRLMZORHG 50, ILNZM XZGSLORX 20, KILGVHGZMG
    WVMLNRMZGRLMH ZMW LGSVI 30
OZMTFZTVH:
    HZNLZM XOLHVOB IVOZGVW GL SZDZRRZM ZMW LGSVI KLOBMVHRZM OZMTFZTVH ZMW
    VMTORHS NLHG KVLKOV ZIV YRORMTFZO
ORGVIZXB:
    97 NZOV 97, UVNZOV 97 ZTV 15 ZMW LEVI XZM IVZW ZMW DIRGV 1980
OZYLI ULIXV:
    14,400 1990 TLEVIMNVMG 48, GFMZ XZMMVIRVH 33, LGSVI 19 1986 VHG.
LITZMRAVW OZYLI:
    MZ

:ZNVIRXZM HZNLZ TLEVIMNVMG

OLMTULIN MZNV:
    GVIIRGLIB LU ZNVIRXZM HZNLZ
GBKV:
    FMRMXLIKLIZGVW ZMW FMLITZMRAVW GVIIRGLIB LU GSV FH
    ZWNRMRHGVIVW YB GSV FH WVKZIGNVMG LU RMGVIRLI, LUURXV LU GVIIRGLIRZO ZMW
    RMGVIMZGRLMZO ZUUZRIH RMWRTVMLFH RMSZYRGZMGH ZIV FH MZGRLMZOH, MLG XRGRAVMH
    LU GSV FH
XZKRGZO:
    KZTL KZTL
ZWNRMRHGIZGREV WRERHRLMH:
    MLMV GVIIRGLIB LU GSV FH
RMWVKVMWVMXV:
    MLMV GVIIRGLIB LU GSV FH
XLMHGRGFGRLM:
    IZGRURVW 1966, RM VUUVXG 1967 MLGV  Z XLNKIVSVMHREV IVERHRLM RH ZDZRGRMT
    IZGRURXZGRLM YB GSV FH XLMTIVHH 1992
MZGRLMZO SLORWZB:
    GVIIRGLIRZO UOZT WZB, 17 ZKIRO 1900
VCVXFGREV YIZMXS:
    KLKFOZIOB VOVXGVW TLEVIMLI ZMW ORVFGVMZMG TLEVIMLI
OVTRHOZGREV YIZMXS:
    YRXZNVIZO OVTRHOZGREV ZHHVNYOB ULML XLMHRHGH LU ZM FKKVI SLFHV LI HVMZGV
    ZMW Z OLDVI SLFHV LI SLFHV LU IVKIVHVMGZGREVH
QFWRXRZO YIZMXS:
    SRTS XLFIG, WRHGIRXG XLFIGH, ZMW EROOZTV XLFIGH
OVZWVIH:
  XSRVU LU HGZGV:
    KIVHRWVMG TVLITV YFHS HRMXV 20 QZMFZIB 1989 ERXV KIVHRWVMG WZM JFZBOV
    HRMXV 20 QZMFZIB 1989
  SVZW LU TLEVIMNVMG:
    TLEVIMLI KVGVI GZOR XLOVNZM HRMXV 20 QZMFZIB 1989 ORVFGVMZMG TLEVIMLI
    TZOVZR KLFNVOV HRMXV MZ 1989
HFUUIZTV:
    FMREVIHZO ZG ZTV 18 RMWRTVMLFH RMSZYRGZMGH ZIV FH MZGRLMZOH, MLG FH
    XRGRAVMH
VOVXGRLMH:
  TLEVIMLI:
    OZHG SVOW 7 MLEVNYVI 1988 MVCG GL YV SVOW MLEVNYVI 1992 IVHFOGH  KVGVI
    G. XLOVNZM DZH VOVXGVW KVIXVMG LU ELGV MZ
  SLFHV LU IVKIVHVMGZGREVH:
    OZHG SVOW MLEVNYVI 1990 MVCG GL YV SVOW MLEVNYVI 1992 IVHFOGH 
    IVKIVHVMGZGREVH KLKFOZIOB VOVXGVW UILN 17 SLFHV WRHGIRXGH HVZGH  21
    GLGZO, 20 VOVXGVW, ZMW 1 MLMELGRMT WVOVTZGV UILN HDZRMH RHOZMW
  HVMZGV:
    OZHG SVOW 7 MLEVNYVI 1988 MVCG GL YV SVOW MLEVNYVI 1992 IVHFOGH 
    HVMZGLIH VOVXGVW YB XLFMGB XLFMXROH UILN 12 HVMZGV WRHGIRXGH HVZGH  18
    GLGZO MFNYVI LU HVZGH YB KZIGB MZ
  FH SLFHV LU IVKIVHVMGZGREVH:
    OZHG SVOW 19 MLEVNYVI 1990 MVCG GL YV SVOW MLEVNYVI 1992 IVHFOGH  VMR I.
    U. S. UZOVLNZEZVTZ IVVOVXGVW ZH Z MLMELGRMT WVOVTZGV
NVNYVI LU:
    VHXZK, RLX, HKX
WRKOLNZGRX IVKIVHVMGZGRLM:
    MLMV GVIIRGLIB LU GSV FH
UOZT:
    YOFV DRGS Z DSRGV GIRZMTOV VWTVW RM IVW GSZG RH YZHVW LM GSV UOB HRWV ZMW
    VCGVMWH GL GSV SLRHG HRWV Z YILDM ZMW DSRGV ZNVIRXZM YZOW VZTOV UOBRMT
    GLDZIW GSV SLRHG HRWV RH XZIIBRMT GDL GIZWRGRLMZO HZNLZM HBNYLOH LU
    ZFGSLIRGB, Z HGZUU ZMW Z DZI XOFY

:ZNVIRXZM HZNLZ VXLMLNB

LEVIERVD:
    VXLMLNRX WVEVOLKNVMG RH HGILMTOB ORMPVW GL GSV FH, DRGS DSRXS ZNVIRXZM HZNLZ
    WLVH MVZIOB 90 LU RGH ULIVRTM GIZWV. GFMZ URHSRMT ZMW GFMZ KILXVHHRMT
    KOZMGH ZIV GSV YZXPYLMV LU GSV KIREZGVHVXGLI VXLMLNB, DRGS XZMMVW GFMZ GSV
    KIRNZIB VCKLIG. GSV GFMZ XZMMVIRVH ZMW GSV TLEVIMNVMG ZIV YB UZI GSV GDL
    OZITVHG VNKOLBVIH. LGSVI VXLMLNRX ZXGRERGRVH RMXOFWV Z HOLDOB WVEVOLKRMT
    GLFIRHG RMWFHGIB.
TMK:
    KFIXSZHRMT KLDVI VJFREZOVMG  128 NROORLM, KVI XZKRGZ 2,500 IVZO TILDGS
    IZGV MZ 1990
RMUOZGRLM IZGV XLMHFNVI KIRXVH:
    4.3 1989
FMVNKOLBNVMG IZGV:
    12 1991
YFWTVG:
    IVEVMFVH 126,394,000 XLMHRHGRMT LU 46,441,000 OLXZO IVEVMFV ZMW
    79,953,000 TIZMG IVEVMFV RMXOFWRMT XZKRGZO VCKVMWRGFIVH LU MZ NROORLM
    1990
VCKLIGH:
    307 NROORLM U.L.Y., 1989
  XLNNLWRGRVH:
    XZMMVW GFMZ 93
  KZIGMVIH:
    FH 99.6
RNKLIGH:
    377.9 NROORLM X.R.U., 1989
  XLNNLWRGRVH:
    NZGVIRZOH ULI XZMMVIRVH 56, ULLW 8, KVGILOVFN 7, NZXSRMVIB ZMW KZIGH 6
  KZIGMVIH:
    FH 72, QZKZM 7, MA 7, ZFHGIZORZ 5, LGSVI 9
VCGVIMZO WVYG:
    MZ
RMWFHGIRZO KILWFXGRLM:
    TILDGS IZGV MZ
VOVXGIRXRGB:
    42,000 PD XZKZXRGB 85 NROORLM PDS KILWFXVW, 2,020 PDS KVI XZKRGZ 1990
RMWFHGIRVH:
    GFMZ XZMMVIRVH OZITVOB WVKVMWVMG LM ULIVRTM HFKKORVH LU IZD GFMZ, NVZG
    XZMMRMT, SZMWRXIZUGH
ZTIRXFOGFIV:
    YZMZMZH, XLXLMFGH, EVTVGZYOVH, GZIL, YIVZWUIFRG, BZNH, XLKIZ, KRMVZKKOVH,
    KZKZBZH, WZRIB UZINRMT
VXLMLNRX ZRW:
    21,042,650 RM LKVIZGRLMZO UFMWH ZMW 5,948,931 RM XLMHGIFXGRLM UFMWH ULI
    XZKRGZO RNKILEVNVMG KILQVXGH UILN GSV FH WVKZIGNVMG LU RMGVIRLI 1991
XFIIVMXB:
    FH XFIIVMXB RH FHVW
VCXSZMTV IZGVH:
    FH XFIIVMXB RH FHVW
URHXZO BVZI:
    1 LXGLYVI  30 HVKGVNYVI

:ZNVIRXZM HZNLZ XLNNFMRXZGRLMH

IZROILZWH:
    MLMV
SRTSDZBH:
    350 PN GLGZO 150 PN KZEVW, 200 PN FMKZEVW
KLIGH:
    KZTL KZTL, GZF
ZRIKLIGH:
    4 GLGZO, 4 FHZYOV 2 DRGS KVINZMVMGHFIUZXV IFMDZBH MLMV DRGS IFMDZBH LEVI
    3,659 N 1 DRGS IFMDZBH 2,440 GL 3,659 N RMGVIMZGRLMZO ZRIKLIG ZG GZUFMZ,
    MVZI KZTL KZTL HNZOO ZRIHGIRKH LM GZF ZMW LUF
GVOVXLNNFMRXZGRLMH:
    6,500 GVOVKSLMVH YILZWXZHG HGZGRLMH  1 ZN, 2 UN, 1 GE TLLW GVOVC,
    GVOVTIZKS, ZMW UZXHRNROV HVIERXVH 1 KZXRURX LXVZM RMGVOHZG VZIGS HGZGRLM, 1
    XLNHZG VZIGS HGZGRLM

:ZNVIRXZM HZNLZ WVUVMHV ULIXVH

MLGV:
    WVUVMHV RH GSV IVHKLMHRYRORGB LU GSV FH

:ZMWLIIZ TVLTIZKSB

GLGZO ZIVZ:
    450 PN2
OZMW ZIVZ:
    450 PN2
XLNKZIZGREV ZIVZ:
    HORTSGOB NLIV GSZM 2.5 GRNVH GSV HRAV LU DZHSRMTGLM, WX
OZMW YLFMWZIRVH:
    125 PN GLGZO UIZMXV 60 PN, HKZRM 65 PN
XLZHGORMV:
    MLMV  OZMWOLXPVW
NZIRGRNV XOZRNH:
    MLMV  OZMWOLXPVW
WRHKFGVH:
    MLMV
XORNZGV:
    GVNKVIZGV HMLDB, XLOW DRMGVIH ZMW XLLO, WIB HFNNVIH
GVIIZRM:
    IFTTVW NLFMGZRMH WRHHVXGVW YB MZIILD EZOOVBH
MZGFIZO IVHLFIXVH:
    SBWILKLDVI, NRMVIZO DZGVI, GRNYVI, RILM LIV, OVZW
OZMW FHV:
    ZIZYOV OZMW 2 KVINZMVMG XILKH 0 NVZWLDH ZMW KZHGFIVH 56 ULIVHG ZMW
    DLLWOZMW 22 LGSVI 20
VMERILMNVMG:
    WVULIVHGZGRLM, LEVITIZARMT
MLGV:
    OZMWOLXPVW

:ZMWLIIZ KVLKOV

KLKFOZGRLM:
    54,428 QFOB 1992, TILDGS IZGV 2.2 1992
YRIGS IZGV:
    11 YRIGSH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
WVZGS IZGV:
    4 WVZGSH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
MVG NRTIZGRLM IZGV:
    15 NRTIZMGH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
RMUZMG NLIGZORGB IZGV:
    7 WVZGSH1,000 OREV YRIGSH 1992
ORUV VCKVXGZMXB ZG YRIGS:
    74 BVZIH NZOV, 81 BVZIH UVNZOV 1992
GLGZO UVIGRORGB IZGV:
    1.3 XSROWIVM YLIMDLNZM 1992
MZGRLMZORGB:
    MLFM  ZMWLIIZMH ZWQVXGREV  ZMWLIIZM
VGSMRX WRERHRLMH:
    XZGZOZM HGLXP HKZMRHS 61, ZMWLIIZM 30, UIVMXS 6, LGSVI 3
IVORTRLMH:
    ERIGFZOOB ZOO ILNZM XZGSLORX
OZMTFZTVH:
    XZGZOZM LUURXRZO NZMB ZOHL HKVZP HLNV UIVMXS ZMW XZHGRORZM
ORGVIZXB:
    MZ NZOV MZ, UVNZOV MZ
OZYLI ULIXV:
    MZ
LITZMRAVW OZYLI:
    MLMV

:ZMWLIIZ TLEVIMNVMG

OLMTULIN MZNV:
    KIRMXRKZORGB LU ZMWLIIZ
GBKV:
    FMRJFV XLKIRMXRKZORGB FMWVI ULINZO HLEVIVRTMGB LU KIVHRWVMG LU UIZMXV ZMW
    HKZMRHS YRHSLK LU HVL WV FITVO, DSL ZIV IVKIVHVMGVW OLXZOOB YB LUURXRZOH
    XZOOVW EVTFVIH
XZKRGZO:
    ZMWLIIZ OZ EVOOZ
ZWNRMRHGIZGREV WRERHRLMH:
    7 KZIRHSVH KZIILJFRVH, HRMTFOZI  KZIILJFRZ ZMWLIIZ, XZMROOL, VMXZNK, OZ
    NZHHZMZ, OVH VHXZOWVH, LIWRML, HZMG QFORZ WV OLIRZ
RMWVKVMWVMXV:
    1278
XLMHGRGFGRLM:
    MLMV HLNV KZIVZGTVH ZMW WVXIVVH, NLHGOB XFHGLN ZMW FHZTV
OVTZO HBHGVN:
    YZHVW LM UIVMXS ZMW HKZMRHS XRERO XLWVH ML QFWRXRZO IVERVD LU OVTRHOZGREV
    ZXGH SZH MLG ZXXVKGVW XLNKFOHLIB RXQ QFIRHWRXGRLM
MZGRLMZO SLORWZB:
    NZIV WV WVF WV NVIRGCVOO, 8 HVKGVNYVI
VCVXFGREV YIZMXS:
    GDL XLKIRMXVH KIVHRWVMG LU UIZMXV, YRHSLK LU HVL WV FITVO RM HKZRM, GDL
    WVHRTMZGVW IVKIVHVMGZGREVH UIVMXS EVTFVI, VKRHXLKZO EVTFVI, GDL KVINZMVMG
    WVOVTZGVH UIVMXS KIVUVXG ULI GSV WVKZIGNVMG LU KBIVMVVHLIRVMGZOVH, HKZMRHS
    ERXZI TVMVIZO ULI GSV HVL WV FITVO WRLXVHV, KIVHRWVMG LU TLEVIMNVMG,
    VCVXFGREV XLFMXRO
OVTRHOZGREV YIZMXS:
    FMRXZNVIZO TVMVIZO XLFMXRO LU GSV EZOOVBH XLMHVOO TVMVIZO WV OZH EZOOH
QFWRXRZO YIZMXS:
    XRERO XZHVH  HFKIVNV XLFIG LU ZMWLIIZ ZG KVIKRTMZM UIZMXV LI GSV
    VXXOVHRZHGRXZO XLFIG LU GSV YRHSLK LU HVL WV FITVO HKZRM XIRNRMZO XZHVH 
    GIRYFMZO LU GSV XLFIGH GIRYFMZO WVH XLIGVH
OVZWVIH:
  XSRVUH LU HGZGV:
    UIVMXS XLKIRMXV UIZMXLRH NRGGVIIZMW HRMXV 21 NZB 1981, IVKIVHVMGVW YB
    EVTFVI WV UIZMXZ QVZM KRVIIV XLFIGLRH HKZMRHS VKRHXLKZO XLKIRMXV NTI. QLZM
    NZIGR B ZOZMRH HRMXV 31 QZMFZIB 1971, IVKIVHVMGVW YB EVTFVI VKRHXLKZO
    UIZMXVHX YZWRZ YZGZOOZ
  SVZW LU TLEVIMNVMG:
    LHXZI IRYZH IVRT HRMXV QZMFZIB 1990
KLORGRXZO KZIGRVH ZMW OVZWVIH:
    KLORGRXZO KZIGRVH MLG BVG OVTZOOB IVXLTMRAVW GIZWRGRLMZOOB ML KLORGRXZO
    KZIGRVH YFG KZIGRHZMH ULI KZIGRXFOZI RMWVKVMWVMG XZMWRWZGVH ULI GSV TVMVIZO
    XLFMXRO LM GSV YZHRH LU XLNKVGVMXV, KVIHLMZORGB, ZMW LIRVMGZGRLM GLDZIW
    HKZRM LI UIZMXV EZIRLFH HNZOO KIVHHFIV TILFKH WVEVOLKVW RM 1972 URIHG
    ULINZO KLORGRXZO KZIGB, ZMWLIIZM WVNLXIZGRX ZHHLXRZGRLM, DZH ULINVW RM 1976
    ZMW IVLITZMRAVW RM 1979 ZH ZMWLIIZM WVNLXIZGRX KZIGB
HFUUIZTV:
    FMREVIHZO ZG ZTV 18
VOVXGRLMH:
  TVMVIZO XLFMXRO LU GSV EZOOVBH:
    OZHG SVOW 11 WVXVNYVI 1989 MVCG GL YV SVOW WVXVNYVI 1993 IVHFOGH 
    KVIXVMG LU ELGV YB KZIGB MZ HVZGH  28 GLGZO MFNYVI LU HVZGH YB KZIGB MZ
NVNYVI LU:
    RMGVIKLO, RLX
WRKOLNZGRX IVKIVHVMGZGRLM:
    ZMWLIIZ SZH ML NRHHRLM RM GSV FH

:ZMWLIIZ TLEVIMNVMG

  FH:
    RMXOFWVH ZMWLIIZ DRGSRM GSV YZIXVOLMZ HKZRM XLMHFOZI WRHGIRXG, ZMW GSV FH
    XLMHFO TVMVIZO ERHRGH ZMWLIIZ KVIRLWRXZOOB XLMHFO TVMVIZO XZILOVV SVROVNZM
    XLMHFOZGV TVMVIZO ZG ERZ OZBVGZMZ 33, 08003 YZIXVOLMZ NZRORMT ZWWIVHH ZKL
    ZV 09646 GVOVKSLMV 34 3 3199550
UOZT:
    GSIVV VJFZO EVIGRXZO YZMWH LU YOFV SLRHG HRWV, BVOOLD, ZMW IVW DRGS GSV
    MZGRLMZO XLZG LU ZINH XVMGVIVW RM GSV BVOOLD YZMW GSV XLZG LU ZINH UVZGFIVH
    Z JFZIGVIVW HSRVOW HRNROZI GL GSV UOZTH LU XSZW ZMW ILNZMRZ GSZG WL MLG
    SZEV Z MZGRLMZO XLZG LU ZINH RM GSV XVMGVI

:ZMWLIIZ VXLMLNB

LEVIERVD:
    GSV NZRMHGZB LU ZMWLIIZH VXLMLNB RH GLFIRHN. ZM VHGRNZGVW 13 NROORLM
    GLFIRHGH ERHRG ZMMFZOOB, ZGGIZXGVW YB ZMWLIIZH WFGBUIVV HGZGFH ZMW YB RGH
    HFNNVI ZMW DRMGVI IVHLIGH. ZTIRXFOGFIZO KILWFXGRLM RH ORNRGVW YB Z HXZIXRGB
    LU ZIZYOV OZMW, ZMW NLHG ULLW SZH GL YV RNKLIGVW. GSV KIRMXRKZO OREVHGLXP
    ZXGRERGB RH HSVVK IZRHRMT. NZMFUZXGFIRMT XLMHRHGH NZRMOB LU XRTZIVGGVH,
    XRTZIH, ZMW UFIMRGFIV. GSV IZKRW KZXV LU VFILKVZM VXLMLNRX RMGVTIZGRLM RH Z
    KLGVMGRZO GSIVZG GL ZMWLIIZH ZWEZMGZTVH UILN RGH WFGBUIVV HGZGFH.
TWK:
    KFIXSZHRMT KLDVI VJFREZOVMG  727 NROORLM, KVI XZKRGZ 14,000 IVZO TILDGS
    IZGV MZ 1990 VHG.
RMUOZGRLM IZGV XLMHFNVI KIRXVH:
    MZ
FMVNKOLBNVMG IZGV:
    MLMV
YFWTVG:
    IVEVMFVH MZ VCKVMWRGFIVH MZ, RMXOFWRMT XZKRGZO VCKVMWRGFIVH LU MZ
VCKLIGH:
    0.017 NROORLM U.L.Y., 1986
  XLNNLWRGRVH:
    VOVXGIRXRGB
  KZIGMVIH:
    UIZMXV, HKZRM
RNKLIGH:
    531 NROORLM U.L.Y., 1986
  XLNNLWRGRVH:
    XLMHFNVI TLLWH, ULLW
  KZIGMVIH:
    UIZMXV, HKZRM
VCGVIMZO WVYG:
    MZ
RMWFHGIRZO KILWFXGRLM:
    TILDGS IZGV MZ
VOVXGIRXRGB:
    35,000 PD XZKZXRGB 140 NROORLM PDS KILWFXVW, 2,800 PDS KVI XZKRGZ 1991
RMWFHGIRVH:
    GLFIRHN KZIGRXFOZIOB HPRRMT, HSVVK, GRNYVI, GLYZXXL, YZMPRMT
ZTIRXFOGFIV:
    HSVVK IZRHRMT HNZOO JFZMGRGRVH LU GLYZXXL, IBV, DSVZG, YZIOVB, LZGH, ZMW
    HLNV EVTVGZYOVH
VXLMLNRX ZRW:
    MLMV
XFIIVMXB:
    UIVMXS UIZMX KOFIZO  UIZMXH ZMW HKZMRHS KVHVGZ KOFIZO  KVHVGZH 1
    UIVMXS UIZMX U  100 XVMGRNVH ZMW 1 HKZMRHS KVHVGZ KGZ  100 XVMGRNLH
VCXSZMTV IZGVH:
    UIVMXS UIZMXH U KVI FH1  5.3801 QZMFZIB 1992, 5.6421 1991, 5.4453
    1990, 6.3801 1989, 5.9569 1988, 6.0107 1987 HKZMRHS KVHVGZH KGZH
    KVI FH1  100.02 QZMFZIB 1992, 103.91 1991, 101.93 1990, 118.38
    1989, 116.49 1988, 123.48 1987
URHXZO BVZI:
    XZOVMWZI BVZI

:ZMWLIIZ XLNNFMRXZGRLMH

SRTSDZBH:
    96 PN
GVOVXLNNFMRXZGRLMH:
    RMGVIMZGRLMZO WRTRGZO NRXILDZEV MVGDLIP RMGVIMZGRLMZO OZMWORMV XRIXFRGH GL
    UIZMXV ZMW HKZRM YILZWXZHG HGZGRLMH  1 ZN, ML UN, ML GE 17,700 GVOVKSLMVH

:ZMWLIIZ WVUVMHV ULIXVH

MLGV:
    WVUVMHV RH GSV IVHKLMHRYRORGB LU UIZMXV ZMW HKZRM

:ZMTLOZ TVLTIZKSB

GLGZO ZIVZ:
    1,246,700 PN2
OZMW ZIVZ:
    1,246,700 PN2
XLNKZIZGREV ZIVZ:
    HORTSGOB OVHH GSZM GDRXV GSV HRAV LU GVCZH
OZMW YLFMWZIRVH:
    5,198 PN GLGZO XLMTL 201 PN, MZNRYRZ 1,376 PN, AZRIV 2,511 PN, AZNYRZ 1,110
    PN
XLZHGORMV:
    1,600 PN
NZIRGRNV XOZRNH:
  VCXOFHREV URHSRMT ALMV:
    200 MN
  GVIIRGLIRZO HVZ:
    20 MN
WRHKFGVH:
    XRERO DZI HRMXV RMWVKVMWVMXV LM 11 MLEVNYVI 1975 LM 31 NZB 1991 ZMTLOZM
    KIVHRWVMG QLHV VWFZIWL WLH HZMGLH ZMW QLMZH HZERNYR, OVZWVI LU GSV MZGRLMZO
    FMRLM ULI GSV GLGZO RMWVKVMWVMXV LU ZMTLOZ FMRGZ, HRTMVW Z KVZXV GIVZGB
    GSZG XZOOH ULI NFOGRKZIGB VOVXGRLMH RM OZGV HVKGVNYVI 1992, ZM
    RMGVIMZGRLMZOOB NLMRGLIVW XVZHVURIV, ZMW GVINRMZGRLM LU LFGHRWV NRORGZIB
    ZHHRHGZMXV
XORNZGV:
    HVNRZIRW RM HLFGS ZMW ZOLMT XLZHG GL OFZMWZ MLIGS SZH XLLO, WIB HVZHLM NZB
    GL LXGLYVI ZMW SLG, IZRMB HVZHLM MLEVNYVI GL ZKIRO
GVIIZRM:
    MZIILD XLZHGZO KOZRM IRHVH ZYIFKGOB GL EZHG RMGVIRLI KOZGVZF
MZGFIZO IVHLFIXVH:
    KVGILOVFN, WRZNLMWH, RILM LIV, KSLHKSZGVH, XLKKVI, UVOWHKZI, TLOW, YZFCRGV,
    FIZMRFN
OZMW FHV:
    ZIZYOV OZMW 2 KVINZMVMG XILKH MVTO NVZWLDH ZMW KZHGFIVH 23 ULIVHG ZMW
    DLLWOZMW 43 LGSVI 32
VMERILMNVMG:
    OLXZOOB SVZEB IZRMUZOO XZFHVH KVIRLWRX UOLLWRMT LM KOZGVZF WVHVIGRURXZGRLM
MLGV:
    XZYRMWZ RH HVKZIZGVW UILN IVHG LU XLFMGIB YB AZRIV

:ZMTLOZ KVLKOV

KLKFOZGRLM:
    8,902,076 QFOB 1992, TILDGS IZGV 2.7 1992
YRIGS IZGV:
    46 YRIGSH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
WVZGS IZGV:
    19 WVZGSH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
MVG NRTIZGRLM IZGV:
    MVTO NRTIZMGH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
RMUZMG NLIGZORGB IZGV:
    152 WVZGSH1,000 OREV YRIGSH 1992
ORUV VCKVXGZMXB ZG YRIGS:
    43 BVZIH NZOV, 47 BVZIH UVNZOV 1992
GLGZO UVIGRORGB IZGV:
    6.6 XSROWIVM YLIMDLNZM 1992
MZGRLMZORGB:
    MLFM  ZMTLOZMH ZWQVXGREV  ZMTLOZM
VGSMRX WRERHRLMH:
    LERNYFMWF 37, PRNYFMWF 25, YZPLMTL 13, NVHGRXL 2,VFILKVZM 1, LGSVI 22
IVORTRLMH:
    RMWRTVMLFH YVORVUH 47, ILNZM XZGSLORX 38, KILGVHGZMG 15 VHG.
OZMTFZTVH:
    KLIGFTFVHV LUURXRZO EZIRLFH YZMGF WRZOVXGH
ORGVIZXB:
    42 NZOV 56, UVNZOV 28 ZTV 15 ZMW LEVI XZM IVZW ZMW DIRGV 1990 VHG.
OZYLI ULIXV:
    2,783,000 VXLMLNRXZOOB ZXGREV ZTIRXFOGFIV 85, RMWFHGIB 15 1985 VHG.
LITZMRAVW OZYLI:
    ZYLFG 450,695 1980

:ZMTLOZ TLEVIMNVMG

OLMTULIN MZNV:
    KVLKOVH IVKFYORX LU ZMTLOZ
GBKV:
    RM GIZMHRGRLM UILN Z LMVKZIGB NZICRHG HGZGV GL Z NFOGRKZIGB WVNLXIZXB DRGS
    Z HGILMT KIVHRWVMGRZO HBHGVN
XZKRGZO:
    OFZMWZ
ZWNRMRHGIZGREV WRERHRLMH:
    18 KILERMXVH KILERMXRZH, HRMTFOZI  KILERMXRZ YVMTL, YVMTFVOZ, YRV,
    XZYRMWZ, XFZMWL XFYZMTL, XFZMAZ MLIGV, XFZMAZ HFO, XFMVMV, SFZNYL, SFROZ,
    OFZMWZ, OFMWZ MLIGV, OFMWZ HFO, NZOZMQV, NLCRXL, MZNRYV, FRTV, AZRIV
RMWVKVMWVMXV:
    11 MLEVNYVI 1975 UILN KLIGFTZO
XLMHGRGFGRLM:
    11 MLEVNYVI 1975 IVERHVW 7 QZMFZIB 1978, 11 ZFTFHG 1980, ZMW 6 NZIXS 1991
OVTZO HBHGVN:
    YZHVW LM KLIGFTFVHV XRERO OZD HBHGVN ZMW XFHGLNZIB OZD IVXVMGOB NLWRURVW GL
    ZXXLNNLWZGV NFOGRKZIGBRHN ZMW RMXIVZHVW FHV LU UIVV NZIPVGH
MZGRLMZO SLORWZB:
    RMWVKVMWVMXV WZB, 11 MLEVNYVI 1975
VCVXFGREV YIZMXS:
    KIVHRWVMG, KIRNV NRMRHGVI, XSZRINZM LU GSV XLFMXRO LU NRMRHGVIH, XLFMXRO LU
    NRMRHGVIH XZYRMVG
OVTRHOZGREV YIZMXS:
    FMRXZNVIZO KVLKOVH ZHHVNYOB ZHHVNYOVRZ WL KLEL
QFWRXRZO YIZMXS:
    HFKIVNV XLFIG GIRYFMZO WZ IVOZXZZL
OVZWVIH:
  XSRVU LU HGZGV:
    KIVHRWVMG QLHV VWFZIWL WLH HZMGLH HRMXV 21 HVKGVNYVI 1979
  SVZW LU TLEVIMNVMG:
    KIRNV NRMRHGVI UVIMZMWL QLHV UIZMXZ EZM WFMVN HRMXV 21 QFOB 1991
KLORGRXZO KZIGRVH ZMW OVZWVIH:
    GSV KLKFOZI NLEVNVMG ULI GSV ORYVIZGRLM LU ZMTLOZ  OZYLI KZIGB NKOZ, OVW
    YB QLHV VWFZIWL WLH HZMGLH, RH GSV IFORMT KZIGB GSZG SZH YVVM RM KLDVI RM
    ZMTLOZH LMVKZIGB HBHGVN HRMXV 1975. GSV MZGRLMZO FMRLM ULI GSV GLGZO
    RMWVKVMWVMXV LU ZMTLOZ FMRGZ, OVW YB QLMZH HZERNYR, SZH YVVM RM RMHFITVMXB
    HRMXV 1975, YFG ZH Z IVHFOG LU GSV KVZXV ZXXLIWH RH MLD Z OVTZOOB IVXLTMRAVW
    KLORGRXZO KZIGB. HLNV 30 LGSVI KLORGRXZO KZIGRVH MLD VCRHG RM ZMTLOZ, YFG
    UVD LU GSVN ZIV ERZYOV ZMW LMOB Z XLFKOV SZEV NVG GSV IVJFRIVNVMGH GL YVXLNV
    OVTZOOB IVXLTMRAVW.
HFUUIZTV:
    FMREVIHZO ZG ZTV 18
VOVXGRLMH:
    URIHG MZGRLMDRWV, NFOGRKZIGB VOVXGRLMH GL YV SVOW YVGDVVM HVKGVNYVI ZMW
    MLEVNYVI 1992
NVNYVI LU:
    ZXK, ZUWY, XXX, XVVZX LYHVIEVI, VXZ, UZL, UOH, T77, RYIW, RXZL, RUZW,
    ROL, RNU, RNL, RMGVOHZG, RMGVIKLO, RLX, RGF, OLIXH, MZN, LZF, HZWXX, FM,
    FMXGZW, FMVHXL, FMRWL, FKF, DXO, DUGF, DSL, DRKL, DNL, DGL
WRKOLNZGRX IVKIVHVMGZGRLM:
    MLMV MLGV  FH ORZRHLM LUURXV FHOL VHGZYORHSVW ZUGVI KVZXV ZXXLIWH RM NZB
    1991 ZH Z KIVXFIHLI GL VHGZYORHSRMT ZM VNYZHHB ZUGVI VOVXGRLM RM 1992
    ZWWIVHH  OFZMWZ FHOL, YKZ YFROWRMT, OOGS UOLLI, GVOVKSLMV 244 2
    390242 UZC 244 2 390515
UOZT:
    GDL VJFZO SLIRALMGZO YZMWH LU IVW GLK ZMW YOZXP DRGS Z XVMGVIVW BVOOLD
    VNYOVN XLMHRHGRMT LU Z UREVKLRMGVW HGZI DRGSRM SZOU Z XLTDSVVO XILHHVW YB Z
    NZXSVGV RM GSV HGBOV LU Z SZNNVI ZMW HRXPOV

:ZMTLOZ VXLMLNB

LEVIERVD:
    HFYHRHGVMXV ZTIRXFOGFIV KILERWVH GSV NZRM OREVORSLLW ULI 8090 LU GSV
    KLKFOZGRLM, YFG ZXXLFMGH ULI OVHH GSZM 15 LU TWK. LRO KILWFXGRLM RH ERGZO
    GL GSV VXLMLNB, XLMGIRYFGRMT ZYLFG 60 GL TWK. RM IVXVMG BVZIH, Z YRGGVI
    RMGVIMZO DZI SZH HVEVIVOB ZUUVXGVW GSV MLMLRO VXLMLNB, ZMW ULLW SZH GL YV
    RNKLIGVW. ULI GSV OLMT IFM, ZMTLOZ SZH GSV ZWEZMGZTV LU IRXS MZGFIZO
    IVHLFIXVH RM ZWWRGRLM GL LRO, MLGZYOB TLOW, WRZNLMWH, ZMW ZIZYOV OZMW. GL
    IVZORAV RGH VXLMLNRX KLGVMGRZO ZMTLOZ MLG LMOB NFHG HVXFIV WLNVHGRX KVZXV
    YFG ZOHL NFHG IVULIN TLEVIMNVMG KLORXRVH GSZG SZEV OVW GL WRHGLIGRLMH ZMW
    RNYZOZMXVH GSILFTSLFG GSV VXLMLNB.
TWK:
    VCXSZMTV IZGV XLMEVIHRLM  8.3 YROORLM, KVI XZKRGZ 950 IVZO TILDGS IZGV
    1.7 1991 VHG.
RMUOZGRLM IZGV XLMHFNVI KIRXVH:
    6.1 1990 VHG.
FMVNKOLBNVMG IZGV:
    MZ
YFWTVG:
    IVEVMFVH 2.6 YROORLM VCKVMWRGFIVH 4.4 YROORLM, RMXOFWRMT XZKRGZO
    VCKVMWRGFIVH LU 963 NROORLM 1990 VHG.
VCKLIGH:
    3.9 YROORLM U.L.Y., 1990 VHG.
  XLNNLWRGRVH:
    LRO, ORJFVURVW KVGILOVFN TZH, WRZNLMWH, XLUUVV, HRHZO, URHS ZMW URHS
    KILWFXGH, GRNYVI, XLGGLM
  KZIGMVIH:
    FH, FHHI, XFYZ, KLIGFTZO, YIZARO, UIZMXV
RNKLIGH:
    1.5 YROORLM U.L.Y., 1990 VHG.
  XLNNLWRGRVH:
    XZKRGZO VJFRKNVMG NZXSRMVIB ZMW VOVXGIRXZO VJFRKNVMG, ULLW, EVSRXOVH ZMW
    HKZIV KZIGH, GVCGROVH ZMW XOLGSRMT, NVWRXRMVH HFYHGZMGRZO NRORGZIB
    WVOREVIRVH
  KZIGMVIH:
    FH, FHHI, XFYZ, KLIGFTZO, YIZARO
VCGVIMZO WVYG:
    7.0 YROORLM 1990
RMWFHGIRZO KILWFXGRLM:
    TILDGS IZGV MZ ZXXLFMGH ULI ZYLFG 60 LU TWK, RMXOFWRMT KVGILOVFN LFGKFG
VOVXGIRXRGB:
    510,000 PD XZKZXRGB 770 NROORLM PDS KILWFXVW, 90 PDS KVI XZKRGZ 1991
RMWFHGIRVH:
    KVGILOVFN, WRZNLMWH, NRMRMT, URHS KILXVHHRMT, ULLW KILXVHHRMT, YIVDRMT,
    GLYZXXL, HFTZI, GVCGROVH, XVNVMG, YZHRX NVGZO KILWFXGH
ZTIRXFOGFIV:
    XZHS XILKH  XLUUVV, HRHZO, XLIM, XLGGLM, HFTZI, NZMRLX, GLYZXXL ULLW XILKH
     XZHHZEZ, XLIM, EVTVGZYOVH, KOZMGZRMH, YZMZMZH OREVHGLXP KILWFXGRLM
    ZXXLFMGH ULI 20, URHSRMT 4, ULIVHGIB 2 LU GLGZO ZTIRXFOGFIZO LFGKFG
    WRHIFKGRLMH XZFHVW YB XRERO DZI ZMW NZIPVGRMT WVURXRVMXRVH IVJFRIV ULLW
    RNKLIGH
VXLMLNRX ZRW:
    FH XLNNRGNVMGH, RMXOFWRMT VCRN UB7089, 265 NROORLM DVHGVIM MLMFH
    XLFMGIRVH, LWZ ZMW LLU YROZGVIZO XLNNRGNVMGH 197089, 1,105 NROORLM
    XLNNFMRHG XLFMGIRVH 197089, 1.3 YROORLM MVG LUURXRZO WRHYFIHVNVMGH
    198589, 750 NROORLM
XFIIVMXB:
    PDZMAZ KOFIZO  PDZMAZ 1 PDZMAZ PA  100 ODVR
VCXSZMTV IZGVH:
    PDZMAZ PA KVI FH1  180.0

:ZMTLOZ VXLMLNB

URHXZO BVZI:
    XZOVMWZI BVZI

:ZMTLOZ XLNNFMRXZGRLMH

IZROILZWH:
    3,189 PN GLGZO 2,879 PN 1.067NVGVI TZFTV, 310 PN 0.600NVGVI TZFTV
    ORNRGVW GIZXPZTV RM FHV YVXZFHV LU OZMWNRMVH HGROO RM KOZXV UILN GSV XRERO
    DZI NZQLIRGB LU GSV YVMTFVOZ IZROILZW ZOHL XOLHVW YVXZFHV LU XRERO DZI
SRTSDZBH:
    73,828 PN GLGZO 8,577 PN YRGFNRMLFHHFIUZXV GIVZGNVMG, 29,350 PN XIFHSVW
    HGLMV, TIZEVO, LI RNKILEVW VZIGS, IVNZRMWVI FMRNKILEVW VZIGS
RMOZMW DZGVIDZBH:
    1,295 PN MZERTZYOV
KRKVORMVH:
    XIFWV LRO 179 PN
KLIGH:
    OFZMWZ, OLYRGL, MZNRYV, XZYRMWZ
NVIXSZMG NZIRMV:
    12 HSRKH 1,000 TIG LI LEVI GLGZORMT 66,348 TIG102,825 WDG RMXOFWVH 11
    XZITL, 1 KVGILOVFN GZMPVI
XRERO ZRI:
    28 NZQLI GIZMHKLIG ZRIXIZUG
ZRIKLIGH:
    309 GLGZO, 177 FHZYOV 30 DRGS KVINZMVMGHFIUZXV IFMDZBH 2 DRGS IFMDZBH
    LEVI 3,659 N 15 DRGS IFMDZBH 2,4403,659 N 54 DRGS IFMDZBH 1,2202,439 N
GVOVXLNNFMRXZGRLMH:
    ORNRGVW HBHGVN LU DRIV, IZWRL IVOZB, ZMW GILKLHXZGGVI ILFGVH SRTS UIVJFVMXB
    IZWRL FHVW VCGVMHREVOB ULI NRORGZIB ORMPH 40,300 GVOVKSLMVH YILZWXZHG
    HGZGRLMH  17 ZN, 13 UN, 6 GE 2 ZGOZMGRX LXVZM RMGVOHZG VZIGS HGZGRLMH

:ZMTLOZ WVUVMHV ULIXVH

YIZMXSVH:
    ZINB, MZEB, ZRI ULIXVZRI WVUVMHV, KVLKOVH WVUVMHV LITZMRAZGRLM ZMW
    GVIIRGLIRZO GILLKH, UILMGRVI TFZIW
NZMKLDVI ZEZROZYRORGB:
    NZOVH 1549, 2,129,877 1,072,323 URG ULI NRORGZIB HVIERXV 89,585 IVZXS
    NRORGZIB ZTV 18 ZMMFZOOB
WVUVMHV VCKVMWRGFIVH:
    VCXSZMTV IZGV XLMEVIHRLM  MZ, MZ LU TWK

:ZMTFROOZ TVLTIZKSB

GLGZO ZIVZ:
    91 PN2
OZMW ZIVZ:
    91 PN2
XLNKZIZGREV ZIVZ:
    ZYLFG SZOU GSV HRAV LU DZHSRMTGLM, WX
OZMW YLFMWZIRVH:
    MLMV
XLZHGORMV:
    61 PN
NZIRGRNV XOZRNH:
  VCXOFHREV URHSRMT ALMV:
    200 MN
  GVIIRGLIRZO HVZ:
    3 MN
WRHKFGVH:
    MLMV
XORNZGV:
    GILKRXZO NLWVIZGVW YB MLIGSVZHG GIZWV DRMWH
GVIIZRM:
    UOZG ZMW OLDOBRMT RHOZMW LU XLIZO ZMW ORNVHGLMV
MZGFIZO IVHLFIXVH:
    MVTORTRYOV HZOG, URHS, OLYHGVI
OZMW FHV:
    ZIZYOV OZMW MZ KVINZMVMG XILKH MZ NVZWLDH ZMW KZHGFIVH MZ ULIVHG ZMW
    DLLWOZMW MZ LGSVI MZ NLHGOB ILXP DRGS HKZIHV HXIFY LZP, UVD GIVVH, HLNV
    XLNNVIXRZO HZOG KLMWH
VMERILMNVMG:
    UIVJFVMG SFIIRXZMVH, LGSVI GILKRXZO HGLINH QFOB GL LXGLYVI
MLGV:
    OLXZGVW 270 PN VZHG LU KFVIGL IRXL

:ZMTFROOZ KVLKOV

KLKFOZGRLM:
    6,963 QFOB 1992, TILDGS IZGV 0.6 1992
YRIGS IZGV:
    24 YRIGSH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
WVZGS IZGV:
    8 WVZGSH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
MVG NRTIZGRLM IZGV:
    10 NRTIZMGH1,000 KLKFOZGRLM 1992
RMUZMG NLIGZORGB IZGV:
    18 WVZGSH1,000 OREV YRIGSH 1992
ORUV VCKVXGZMXB ZG YRIGS:
    71 BVZIH NZOV, 77 BVZIH UVNZOV 1992
GLGZO UVIGRORGB IZGV:
    3.1 XSROWIVM YLIMDLNZM 1992
MZGRLMZORGB:
    MLFM  ZMTFROOZMH ZWQVXGREV  ZMTFROOZM
VGSMRX WRERHRLMH:
    NZRMOB LU YOZXP ZUIRXZM WVHXVMG
IVORTRLMH:
    ZMTORXZM 40, NVGSLWRHG 33, HVEVMGSWZB ZWEVMGRHG 7, YZKGRHG 5, ILNZM
    XZGSLORX 3, LGSVI 12
OZMTFZTVH:
    VMTORHS LUURXRZO
ORGVIZXB:
    95 NZOV 95, UVNZOV 95 ZTV 12 ZMW LEVI XZM IVZW ZMW DIRGV 1984
OZYLI ULIXV:
    2,780 1984
LITZMRAVW OZYLI:
    MZ

:ZMTFROOZ TLEVIMNVMG

OLMTULIN MZNV:
    MLMV
GBKV:
    WVKVMWVMG GVIIRGLIB LU GSV FP
XZKRGZO:
    GSV EZOOVB
ZWNRMRHGIZGREV WRERHRLMH:
    MLMV WVKVMWVMG GVIIRGLIB LU GSV FP
RMWVKVMWVMXV:
    MLMV WVKVMWVMG GVIIRGLIB LU GSV FP
XLMHGRGFGRLM:
    1 ZKIRO 1982
OVTZO HBHGVN:
    YZHVW LM VMTORHS XLNNLM OZD
MZGRLMZO SLORWZB:
    ZMTFROOZ WZB, 30 NZB
VCVXFGREV YIZMXS:
    YIRGRHS NLMZIXS, TLEVIMLI, XSRVU NRMRHGVI, VCVXFGREV XLFMXRO XZYRMVG
OVTRHOZGREV YIZMXS:
    FMRXZNVIZO SLFHV LU ZHHVNYOB
QFWRXRZO YIZMXS:
    SRTS XLFIG
OVZWVIH:
  XSRVU LU HGZGV:
    JFVVM VORAZYVGS RR HRMXV 6 UVYIFZIB 1952, IVKIVHVMGVW YB TLEVIMLI YIRZM T.
    Q. XZMGB HRMXV MZ 1989
  SVZW LU TLEVIMNVMG:
    XSRVU NRMRHGVI VNROV TFNYH HRMXV NZIXS 1984, HVIEVW KIVERLFHOB UILN
    UVYIFZIB 1977 GL NZB 1980
KLORGRXZO KZIGRVH ZMW OVZWVIH:
    ZMTFROOZ MZGRLMZO ZOORZMXV ZMZ, VNROV TFNYH ZMTFROOZ FMRGVW KZIGB ZFK,
    SFYVIG SFTSVH ZMTFROOZ WVNLXIZGRX KZIGB ZWK, ERXGLI YZMPH
HFUUIZTV:
    FMREVIHZO ZG ZTV 18
VOVXGRLMH:
  SLFHV LU ZHHVNYOB:
    OZHG SVOW 27 UVYIFZIB 1989 MVCG GL YV SVOW UVYIFZIB 1994 IVHFOGH 
    KVIXVMG LU ELGV YB KZIGB MZ HVZGH  11 GLGZO, 7 VOVXGVW ZMZ 3, ZFK 2, ZWK
    1, RMWVKVMWVMG 1
NVNYVI LU:
    XZIRXLN LYHVIEVI, XWY
WRKOLNZGRX IVKIVHVMGZGRLM:
    MLMV WVKVMWVMG GVIIRGLIB LU GSV FP
UOZT:
    GDL SLIRALMGZO YZMWH LU DSRGV GLK, ZONLHG GIRKOV DRWGS ZMW ORTSG YOFV DRGS
    GSIVV LIZMTV WLOKSRMH RM ZM RMGVIOLXPRMT XRIXFOZI WVHRTM XVMGVIVW RM GSV
    DSRGV YZMW Z MVD UOZT NZB SZEV YVVM RM FHV HRMXV 30 NZB 1990

:ZMTFROOZ VXLMLNB

LEVIERVD:
    ZMTFROOZ SZH UVD MZGFIZO IVHLFIXVH, ZMW GSV VXLMLNB WVKVMWH SVZEROB LM
    OLYHGVI URHSRMT, LUUHSLIV YZMPRMT, GLFIRHN, ZMW IVNRGGZMXVH UILN VNRTIZMGH.
    RM IVXVMG BVZIH GSV VXLMLNB SZH YVMVURGVW UILN Z YLLN RM GLFIRHN.
    WVEVOLKNVMG KOZMH XVMGVI ZILFMW GSV RNKILEVNVMG LU GSV RMUIZHGIFXGFIV,
    KZIGRXFOZIOB GIZMHKLIG ZMW GLFIRHG UZXRORGRVH, ZMW ZOHL ORTSG RMWFHGIB.
TWK:
    VCXSZMTV IZGV XLMEVIHRLM  23 NROORLM, KVI XZKRGZ 3,300 IVZO TILDGS IZGV
    8.2 1988 VHG.
RMUOZGRLM IZGV XLMHFNVI KIRXVH:
    4.5 1988 VHG.
FMVNKOLBNVMG IZGV:
    5.0 1988 VHG.
YFWTVG:
    IVEVMFVH 13.8 NROORLM VCKVMWRGFIVH 15.2 NROORLM, RMXOFWRMT XZKRGZO
    VCKVMWRGFIVH LU 2.4 NROORLM 1992 VHG.
VCKLIGH:
    MZ
  XLNNLWRGRVH:
    OLYHGVI ZMW HZOG
  KZIGMVIH:
    MZ
RNKLIGH:
    MZ
  XLNNLWRGRVH:
    MZ
  KZIGMVIH:
    MZ
VCGVIMZO WVYG:
    MZ
