        He sent them word I had not gone
          We know it to be true:
        If she should push the matter on,
          What would become of you?

        I gave her one, they gave him two,
          You gave us three or more
        They all returned from him to you,
          Though they were mine before.

        If I or she should chance to be
          Involved in this affair,
        He trusts to you to set them free,
          Exactly as we were.

        My notion was that you had been
          Before she had this fit
        An obstacle that came between
          Him, and ourselves, and it.

        Dont let him know she liked them best,
          For this must ever be
        A secret, kept from all the rest,
          Between yourself and me.

  Thats the most important piece of evidence weve heard yet,
said the King, rubbing his hands so now let the jury

  If any one of them can explain it, said Alice, she had
grown so large in the last few minutes that she wasnt a bit
afraid of interrupting him, Ill give him sixpence.  I dont
believe theres an atom of meaning in it.

  The jury all wrote down on their slates, SHE doesnt believe
theres an atom of meaning in it, but none of them attempted to
explain the paper.

  If theres no meaning in it, said the King, that saves a
world of trouble, you know, as we neednt try to find any.  And
yet I dont know, he went on, spreading out the verses on his
knee, and looking at them with one eye I seem to see some
meaning in them, after all.  "SAID I COULD NOT SWIM" you
cant swim, can you? he added, turning to the Knave.

  The Knave shook his head sadly.  Do I look like it? he said.
Which he certainly did NOT, being made entirely of cardboard.

  All right, so far, said the King, and he went on muttering
over the verses to himself:  "WE KNOW IT TO BE TRUE" thats
the jury, of course "I GAVE HER ONE, THEY GAVE HIM TWO" why,
that must be what he did with the tarts, you know

  But, it goes on "THEY ALL RETURNED FROM HIM TO YOU," said
Alice.

  Why, there they are! said the King triumphantly, pointing to
the tarts on the table.  Nothing can be clearer than THAT.
Then again"BEFORE SHE HAD THIS FIT"  you never had fits, my
dear, I think? he said to the Queen.

  Never! said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the
Lizard as she spoke.  The unfortunate little Bill had left off
writing on his slate with one finger, as he found it made no
mark but he now hastily began again, using the ink, that was
trickling down his face, as long as it lasted.

  Then the words dont FIT you, said the King, looking round
the court with a smile.  There was a dead silence.

  Its a pun! the King added in an offended tone, and
everybody laughed, Let the jury consider their verdict, the
King said, for about the twentieth time that day.

  No, no! said the Queen.  Sentence firstverdict afterwards.

  Stuff and nonsense! said Alice loudly.  The idea of having
the sentence first!

  Hold your tongue! said the Queen, turning purple.

  I wont! said Alice.

  Off with her head! the Queen shouted at the top of her voice.
Nobody moved.

  Who cares for you? said Alice, she had grown to her full
size by this time.  Youre nothing but a pack of cards!

  At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying
down upon her:  she gave a little scream, half of fright and half
of anger, and tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on
the bank, with her head in the lap of her sister, who was gently
brushing away some dead leaves that had fluttered down from the
trees upon her face.

  Wake up, Alice dear! said her sister Why, what a long
sleep youve had!

  Oh, Ive had such a curious dream! said Alice, and she told
her sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange
Adventures of hers that you have just been reading about and
when she had finished, her sister kissed her, and said, It WAS a
curious dream, dear, certainly:  but now run in to your tea its
getting late.  So Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she
ran, as well she might, what a wonderful dream it had been.

  But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her
head on her hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of
little Alice and all her wonderful Adventures, till she too began
dreaming after a fashion, and this was her dream:

  First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the
tiny hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes
were looking up into hersshe could hear the very tones of her
voice, and see thZG JFVVI ORGGOV GLHH LU SVI SVZW GL PVVK YZXP
GSV DZMWVIRMT SZRI GSZG DLFOW ZODZBH TVG RMGL SVI VBVHZMW
HGROO ZH HSV ORHGVMVW, LI HVVNVW GL ORHGVM, GSV DSLOV KOZXV
ZILFMW SVI YVXZNV ZOREV GSV HGIZMTV XIVZGFIVH LU SVI ORGGOV
HRHGVIH WIVZN.
