converted text  Trend toward making electronic resources available
through research and education networks  Changes taking place in
scholarly communication among humanities scholars  Networkmediated
scholarship transforming traditional scholarly practices  Key
information technology trends affecting the conduct of scholarly
communication over the next decade  The trend toward enduser computing
 The trend toward greater connectivity  Effects of these trends  Key
transformations taking place  Summary of principal arguments 


Avra MICHELSON, Archival Research and Evaluation Staff, National Archives
and Records Administration NARA, argued that establishing who will use
electronic texts and what they will use them for involves a consideration
of both information technology and scholarship trends.  This
consideration includes several elements related to scholarship and
technology:  1 the key trends in information technology that are most
relevant to scholarship 2 the key trends in the use of currently
available technology by scholars in the nonscientific community and 3
the relationship between these two very distinct but interrelated trends.
The investment in understanding this relationship being made by
information providers, technologists, and public policy developers, as
well as by scholars themselves, seems to be pervasive and growing,
MICHELSON contended.  She drew on collaborative work with Jeff Rothenberg
on the scholarly use of technology.

MICHELSON sought to place the phenomenon of electronic texts within the
context of broader trends within information technology and scholarly
communication.  She argued that electronic texts are of most use to
researchers to the extent that the researchers working context i.e.,
their relevant bibliographic sources, collegial feedback, analytic tools,
notes, drafts, etc., along with their fields primary and secondary
sources, also is accessible in electronic form and can be integrated in
ways that are unique to the online environment.

Evaluation of the prospects for the use of electronic texts includes two
elements:  1 an examination of the ways in which researchers currently
are using electronic texts along with other electronic resources, and 2
an analysis of key information technology trends that are affecting the
longterm conduct of scholarly communication.  MICHELSON limited her
discussion of the use of electronic texts to the practices of humanists
and noted that the scientific community was outside the panels overview.

MICHELSON examined the nature of the current relationship of electronic
texts in particular, and electronic resources in general, to what she
maintained were, essentially, five processes of scholarly communication
in humanities research.  Researchers 1 identify sources, 2 communicate
with their colleagues, 3 interpret and analyze data, 4 disseminate
their research findings, and 5 prepare curricula to instruct the next
generation of scholars and students.  This examination would produce a
clearer understanding of the synergy among these five processes that
fuels the tendency of the use of electronic resources for one process to
stimulate its use for other processes of scholarly communication.

For the first process of scholarly communication, the identification of
sources, MICHELSON remarked the opportunity scholars now enjoy to
supplement traditional wordofmouth searches for sources among their
colleagues with new forms of electronic searching.  So, for example,
instead of having to visit the library, researchers are able to explore
descriptions of holdings in their offices.  Furthermore, if their own
institutions holdings prove insufficient, scholars can access more than
200 major American library catalogues over Internet, including the
universities of California, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin.
Direct access to the bibliographic databases offers intellectual
empowerment to scholars by presenting a comprehensive means of browsing
through libraries from their homes and offices at their convenience.

The second process of communication involves communication among
scholars.  Beyond the most common methods of communication, scholars are
using Email and a variety of new electronic communications formats
derived from it for further academic interchange.  Email exchanges are
growing at an astonishing rate, reportedly 15 percent a month.  They
currently constitute approximately half the traffic on research and
education networks.  Moreover, the global spread of Email has been so
rapid that it is now possible for American scholars to use it to
communicate with colleagues in close to 140 other countries.

Other new exchange formats created by scholars and operating on Internet
include more than 700 conferences, with about 80 percent of these devoted
to topics in the social sciences and humanities.  The rate of growth of
these scholarly electronic conferences also is astonishing.  From l990 to
l991, 200 new conferences were identified on Internet.  From October 1991
to June 1992, an additional 150 conferences in the social sciences and
humanities were added to this directory of listings.  Scholars have
established conferences in virtually every field, within every different
discipline.  For example, there are currently close to 600 active social
science and humanities  conferences on topics such as art and
architecture, ethnomusicology, folklore, Japanese culture, medical
education, and gifted and talented education.  The appeal to scholars of
communicating through these conferences is that, unlike any other medium,
electronic conferences today provide a forum for global communication
with peers at the front end of the research process.

Interpretation and analysis of sources constitutes the third process of
scholarly communication that MICHELSON discussed in terms of texts and
textual resources.  The methods used to analyze sources fall somewhere on
a continuum from quantitative analysis to qualitative analysis.
Typically, evidence is culled and evaluated using methods drawn from both
ends of this continuum.  At one end, quantitative analysis involves the
use of mathematical processes such as a count of frequencies and
distributions of occurrences or, on a higher level, regression analysis.
At the other end of the continuum, qualitative analysis typically
involves nonmathematical processes oriented toward language
interpretation or the building of theory.  Aspects of this work involve
the processingeither manual or computationalof large and sometimes
massive amounts of textual sources, although the use of nontextual
sources as evidence, such as photographs, sound recordings, film footage,
and artifacts, is significant as well.

Scholars have discovered that many of the methods of interpretation and
analysis that are related to both quantitative and qualitative methods
are processes that can be performed by computers.  For example, computers
can count.  They can count brush strokes used in a Rembrandt painting or
perform regression analysis for understanding cause and effect.  By means
of advanced technologies, computers can recognize patterns, analyze text,
and model concepts.  Furthermore, computers can complete these processes
faster with more sources and with greater precision than scholars who
must rely on manual interpretation of data.  But if scholars are to use
computers for these processes, source materials must be in a form
amenable to computerassisted analysis.  For this reason many scholars,
once they have identified the sources that are key to their research, are
converting them to machinereadable form.  Thus, a representative example
of the numerous textual conversion projects organized by scholars around
the world in recent years to support computational text analysis is the
TLG, the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae.  This project is devoted to
converting the extant ancient texts of classical Greece.  Editors note:
according to the TLG Newsletter of May l992, TLG was in use in thirtytwo
different countries.  This figure updates MICHELSONs previous count by one.

The scholars performing these conversions have been asked to recognize
that the electronic sources they are converting for one use possess value
for other research purposes as well.  As a IVHFOG, WFIRMT GSV KZHG UVD
BVZIH, SFNZMRGRVH HXSLOZIH SZEV RMRGRZGVW Z MFNYVI LU KILQVXGH GL
RMXIVZHV HXSLOZIOB ZXXVHH GL XLMEVIGVW GVCG.  HL, ULI VCZNKOV, GSV GVCG
VMXLWRMT RMRGRZGREV GVR, ZYLFG DSRXS NLIV RH HZRW OZGVI RM GSV KILTIZN,
DZH VHGZYORHSVW ZH ZM VUULIG YB HXSLOZIH GL WVGVINRMV HGZMWZIW VOVNVMGH
ZMW NVGSLWH ULI VMXLWRMT NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV GVCG ULI VOVXGILMRX VCXSZMTV.
RM Z HVXLMW VUULIG GL UZXRORGZGV GSV HSZIRMT LU XLMEVIGVW GVCG, HXSLOZIH
SZEV XIVZGVW Z MVD RMHGRGFGRLM, GSV XVMGVI ULI VOVXGILMRX GVCGH RM GSV
SFNZMRGRVH XVGS.  GSV XVMGVI VHGRNZGVH GSZG GSVIV ZIV 8,000 HVIRVH LU
HLFIXV GVCGH RM GSV SFNZMRGRVH GSZG SZEV YVVM XLMEVIGVW GL
NZXSRMVIVZWZYOV ULIN DLIOWDRWV.  XVGS RH FMWVIGZPRMT ZM RMGVIMZGRLMZO
HVZIXS ULI XLMEVIGVW GVCG RM GSV SFNZMRGRVH, XLNKRORMT RG RMGL ZM
VOVXGILMRX ORYIZIB, ZMW KIVKZIRMT YRYORLTIZKSRX WVHXIRKGRLMH LU GSV
HLFIXVH ULI GSV IVHVZIXS ORYIZIRVH RMULINZGRLM MVGDLIPH IORM
