extent to which electronic text in particular, and electronic resources
in general, are being infused into each of the five processes described
above.  As mentioned earlier, there is a certain synergy at work here.
The use of electronic resources for one process tends to stimulate its
use for other processes, because the chief course of movement is toward a
comprehensive online working context for humanities scholars that
includes online availability of key bibliographies, scholarly feedback,
sources, analytical tools, and publications.  MICHELSON noted further
that the movement toward a comprehensive online working context for
humanities scholars is not new.  In fact, it has been underway for more
than forty years in the humanities, since Father Roberto Busa began
developing an electronic concordance of the works of Saint Thomas Aquinas
in 1949.  What we are witnessing today, MICHELSON contended, is not the
beginning of this online transition but, for at least some humanities
scholars, the turning point in the transition from a print to an
electronic working context.  Coinciding with the online transition, the
second striking change is the extent to which research and education
networks are becoming the new medium of scholarly communication.  The
existing Internet and the pending National Education and Research Network
NREN represent the new meeting ground where scholars are going for
bibliographic information, scholarly dialogue and feedback, the most
current publications in their field, and highlevel educational
offerings.  Traditional scholarly practices are undergoing tremendous
transformations as a result of the emergence and growing prominence of
what is called networkmediated scholarship.

MICHELSON next turned to the second element of the framework she proposed
at the outset of her talk for evaluating the prospects for electronic
text, namely the key information technology trends affecting the conduct
of scholarly communication over the next decade:  1 enduser computing
and 2 connectivity.

Enduser computing means that the person touching the keyboard, or
performing computations, is the same as the person who initiates or
consumes the computation.  The emergence of personal computers, along
with a host of other forces, such as ubiquitous computing, advances in
interface design, and the online transition, is prompting the consumers
of computation to do their own computing, and is thus rendering obsolete
the traditional distinction between end users and ultimate users.

The trend toward enduser computing is significant to consideration of
the prospects for electronic texts because it means that researchers are
becoming more adept at doing their own computations and, thus, more
competent in the use of electronic media.  By avoiding programmer
intermediaries, computation is becoming central to the researchers
thought process.  This direct involvement in computing is changing the
researchers perspective on the nature of research itself, that is, the
kinds of questions that can be posed, the analytical methodologies that
can be used, the types and amount of sources that are appropriate for
analyses, and the form in which findings are presented.  The trend toward
enduser computing means that, increasingly, electronic media and
computation are being infused into all processes of humanities
scholarship, inspiring remarkable transformations in scholarly
communication.

The trend toward greater connectivity suggests that researchers are using
computation increasingly in network environments.  Connectivity is
important to scholarship because it erases the distance that separates
students from teachers and scholars from their colleagues, while allowing
users to access remote databases, share information in many different
media, connect to their working context wherever they are, and
collaborate in all phases of research.

The combination of the trend toward enduser computing and the trend
toward connectivity suggests that the scholarly use of electronic
resources, already evident among some researchers, will soon become an
established feature of scholarship.  The effects of these trends, along
with ongoing changes in scholarly practices, point to a future in which
humanities researchers will use computation and electronic communication
to help them formulate ideas, access sources, perform research,
collaborate with colleagues, seek peer review, publish and disseminate
results, and engage in many other professional and educational activities.

In summary, MICHELSON emphasized four points:  1 A portion of humanities
scholars already consider electronic texts the preferred format for
analysis and dissemination.  2 Scholars are using these electronic
texts, in conjunction with other electronic resources, in all the
processes of scholarly communication.  3 The humanities scholars
working context is in GSV KILXVHH LU XSZMTRMT UILN KIRMG GVXSMLOLTB GL
VOVXGILMRX GVXSMLOLTB, RM NZMB DZBH NRIILIRMT GIZMHULINZGRLMH GSZG SZEV
LXXFIIVW LI ZIV LXXFIIRMT DRGSRM GSV HXRVMGRURX XLNNFMRGB.  4 GSVHV
XSZMTVH ZIV LXXFIIRMT RM XLMQFMXGRLM DRGS GSV WVEVOLKNVMG LU Z MVD
