contains about fifty titles and pieces of film from that period, all of
New York City.  Taken together, AM believes, they provide an interesting
documentary resource.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Using the framegrabber in AM  Volume of material processed
and to be processed  Purpose of AM within LC  Cataloguing and the
nature of AMs material  SGML coding and the question of quality versus
quantity 


During the questionandanswer period that followed FLEISCHHAUERs
presentation, several clarifications were made.

AM is bringing in motion pictures from a videodisc.  The framegrabber
devices create a window on a computer screen, which permits users to
digitize a single frame of the movie or one of the photographs.  It
produces a crude, roughandready image that high school students can
incorporate into papers, and that has worked very nicely in this way.

Commenting on FLEISCHHAUERs assertion that AM was looking more at
searching ideas than words, MYLONAS argued that without words an idea
does not exist.  FLEISCHHAUER conceded that he ought to have articulated
his point more clearly.  MYLONAS stated that they were in fact both
talking about the same thing.  By searching for words and by forcing
people to focus on the word, the Perseus Project felt that they would get
them to the idea.  The way one reviews results is tailored more to one
kind of user than another.

Concerning the total volume of material that has been processed in this
way, AM at this point has in retrievable form seven or eight collections,
all of them photographic.  In the Macintosh environment, for example,
there probably are 35,00040,000 photographs.  The sound recordings
number sixty items.  The broadsides number about 300 items.  There are
500 political cartoons in the form of drawings.  The motion pictures, as
individual items, number sixty to seventy.

AM also has a manuscript collection, the life history portion of one of
the federal project series, which will contain 2,900 individual
documents, all firstperson narratives.  AM has in process about 350
AfricanAmerican pamphlets, or about 12,000 printed pages for the period
18701910.  Also in the works are some 4,000 panoramic photographs.  AM
has recycled a fair amount of the work done by LCs Prints and
Photographs Division during the Librarys optical disk pilot project in
the 1980s.  For example, a special division of LC has tooled up and
thought through all the ramifications of electronic presentation of
photographs.  Indeed, they are wheeling them out in great barrel loads.
The purpose of AM within the Library, it is hoped, is to catalyze several
of the other special collection divisions which have no particular
experience with, in some cases, mixed feelings about, an activity such as
AM.  Moreover, in many cases the divisions may be characterized as not
only lacking experience in "electronifying" things but also in automated
cataloguing.  MARC cataloguing as practiced in the United States is
heavily weighted toward the description of monograph and serial
materials, but is much thinner when one enters the world of manuscripts
and things that are held in the Librarys music collection and other
units.  In response to a comment by LESK, that AMs material is very
heavily photographic, and is so primarily because individual records have
been made for each photograph, FLEISCHHAUER observed that an itemlevel
catalog record exists, for example, for each photograph in the Detroit
Publishing collection of 25,000 pictures.  In the case of the Federal
Writers Project, for which nearly 3,000 documents exist, representing
information from twentysix different states, AM with the assistance of
Karen STUART of the Manuscript Division will attempt to find some way not
only to have a collectionlevel record but perhaps a MARC record for each
state, which will then serve as an umbrella for the 100200 documents
that come under it.  But that drama remains to be enacted.  The AM staff
is conservative and clings to cataloguing, though of course visitors tout
artificial intelligence and neural networks in a manner that suggests that
perhaps one need not have cataloguing or that much of it could be put aside.

The matter of SGML coding, FLEISCHHAUER conceded, returned the discussion
to the earlier treated question of quality versus quantity in the Library
of Congress.  Of course, text conversion can be done with 100percent
accuracy, but it means that when ones holdings are as vast as LCs only
a tiny amount will be exposed, whereas permitting lower levels of
accuracy can lead to exposing or sharing larger amounts, but with the
quality correspondingly impaired.

                                 


TWOHIG  A contrary experience concerning electronic options  Volume of
material in the Washington papers and a suggestion of David Packard 
Implications of Packards suggestion  Transcribing the documents for the
CDROM  Accuracy of transcriptions  The CDROM edition of the Founding
Fathers documents 


Finding encouragement in a comment of MICHELSONs from the morning
sessionthat numerous people in the humanities were choosing electronic
options to do their workDorothy TWOHIG, editor, The Papers of George
Washington, opened her illustrated talk by noting that her experience
with literary scholars and numerous people in editing was contrary to
MICHELSONs.  TWOHIG emphasized literary scholars complete ignorance of
the technological options available to them or their reluctance or, in
some cases, their downright hostility toward these options.

After providing an overview of the five Founding Fathers projects
Jefferson at Princeton, Franklin at Yale, John Adams at the
Massachusetts Historical Society, and Madison down the hall from her at
the University of Virginia, TWOHIG observed that the Washington papers,
like all of the projects, include both sides of the Washington
correspondence and deal with some 135,000 documents to be published with
extensive annotation in eighty to eightyfive volumes, a project that
will not be completed until well into the next century.  Thus, it was
with considerable enthusiasm several years ago that the Washington Papers
Project WPP greeted David Packards suggestion that the papers of the
Founding Fathers could be published easily and inexpensively, and to the
great benefit of American scholarship, via CDROM.

In pragmatic terms, funding from the Packard Foundation would expedite
the transcription of thousands of documents waiting to be put on disk in
the WPP offices.  Further, since the costs of collecting, editing, and
converting the Founding Fathers documents into letterpress editions were
running into the millions of dollars, and the considerable staffs
involved in all of these projects were devoting their careers to
producing the work, the Packard Foundations suggestion had a
revolutionary aspect:  Transcriptions of the entire corpus of the
Founding Fathers papers would be available on CDROM to public and
college libraries, even high schools, at a fraction of the cost
100150 for the annual license feeto produce a limited university
press run of 1,000 of each volume of the published papers at 45150 per
printed volume.  Given the current budget crunch in educational systems
and the corresponding constraints on librarians in smaller institutions
who wish to add these volumes to their collections, producing the
documents on CDROM would likely open a greatly expanded audience for the
papers.  TWOHIG stressed, however, that development of the Founding
Fathers CDROM is still in its infancy.  Serious software problems remain
to be resolved before the material can be put into readable form.

Funding from the Packard Foundation resulted in a major push to
transcribe the 75,000 or so documents of the Washington papers remaining
to be transcribed onto computer disks.  Slides illustrated several of the
problems encountered, for example, the present inability of CDROM to
indicate the crossouts deleted material in eighteenth century
documents.  TWOHIG next described documents from various periods in the
eighteenth century that have been transcribed in chronological order and
delivered to the Packard offices in California, where they are converted
to the CDROM, a process that is expected to consume five years to
complete that is, reckoning from David Packards suggestion made several
years ago, until about July 1994.  TWOHIG found an encouraging
indication of the projects benefits in the ongoing use made by scholars
of the search functions of the CDROM, particularly in reducing the time
spent in manually turning the pages of the Washington papers.

TWOHIG next furnished details concerning the accuracy of transcriptions.
For instance, the insertion of thousands of documents on the CDROM
currently does not permit each document to be verified against the
original manuscript several times as in the case of documents that appear
in the published edition.  However, the transcriptions receive a cursory
check for obvious typos, the misspellings of proper names, and other
errors from the WPP CDROM editor.  Eventually, all documents that appear
in the electronic version will be checked by project editors.  Although
this process has met with opposition from some of the editors on the
grounds that imperfect work may leave their offices, the advantages in
making this material available as a research tool outweigh  fears about the
misspelling of proper names and other relatively minor editorial matters.

Completion of all five Founding Fathers projects i.e., retrievability
and searchability of all of the documents by proper names, alternate
spelORMTH, LI EZIRVGRVH LU HFYQVXGH DROO KILERWV LMV LU GSV IRXSVHG
HLFIXVH LU GSRH HRAV ULI GSV SRHGLIB LU GSV FMRGVW HGZGVH RM GSV OZGGVI
KZIG LU GSV VRTSGVVMGS XVMGFIB.  UFIGSVI, KFYORXZGRLM LM XWILN DROO
ZOOLD VWRGLIH GL RMXOFWV VEVM NRMFGRZV, HFXS ZH OZFMWIB ORHGH, MLG
RMXOFWVW RM GSV KIRMGVW ELOFNVH.

RG HVVNH KLHHRYOV GSZG GSV VCGVMHREV ZMMLGZGRLM KILERWVW RM GSV KIRMGVW
ELOFNVH VEVMGFZOOB DROO YV ZWWVW GL GSV XWILN VWRGRLM, KVMWRMT
MVTLGRZGRLMH DRGS GSV KFYORHSVIH LU GSV KZKVIH.  ZG GSV NLNVMG, GSV
