prove sufficient if numerous people ran video in parallel.

LYNCH concluded by offering an issue for database creators to consider,
as well as several comments about what might constitute good trial
multimedia experiments.  In a networked information world the database
builder or service builder publisher does not exercise the same
extensive control over the integrity of the presentation strange
programs "munge" with ones data before the user sees it.  Serious
thought must be given to what guarantees integrity of presentation.  Part
of that is related to where one draws the boundaries around a networked
information service.  This question of presentation integrity in
clientserver computing has not been stressed enough in the academic
world, LYNCH argued, though commercial service providers deal with it
regularly.

Concerning multimedia, LYNCH observed that good multimedia at the moment
is hideously expensive to produce.  He recommended producing multimedia
with either very high sale value, or multimedia with a very long life
span, or multimedia that will have a very broad usage base and whose
costs therefore can be amortized among large numbers of users.  In this
connection, historical and humanistically oriented material may be a good
place to start, because it tends to have a longer life span than much of
the scientific material, as well as a wider user base.  LYNCH noted, for
example, that American Memory fits many of the criteria outlined.  He
remarked the extensive discussion about bringing the Internet or the
National Research and Education Network NREN into the K12 environment
as a way of helping the American educational system.

LYNCH closed by noting that the kinds of applications demonstrated struck
him as excellent justifications of broadscale networking for K12, but
that at this time no "killer" application exists to mobilize the K12
community to obtain connectivity.

                                 


DISCUSSION  Dearth of genuinely interesting applications on the network
a slowchanging situation  The issue of the integrity of presentation in
a networked environment  Several reasons why CDROM software does not
network 


During the discussion period that followed LYNCHs presentation, several
additional points were made.

LYNCH reiterated even more strongly his contention that, historically,
once one goes outside highend science and the group of those who need
access to supercomputers, there is a great dearth of genuinely
interesting applications on the network.  He saw this situation changing
slowly, with some of the scientific databases and scholarly discussion
groups and electronic journals coming on as well as with the availability
of Wide Area Information Servers WAIS and some of the databases that
are being mounted there.  However, many of those things do not seem to
have piqued great popular interest.  For instance, most high school
students of LYNCHs acquaintance would not qualify as devotees of serious
molecular biology.

Concerning the issue of the integrity of presentation, LYNCH believed
that a couple of information providers have laid down the law at least on
certain things.  For example, his recollection was that the National
Library of Medicine feels strongly that one needs to employ the
identifier field if he or she is to mount a database commercially.  The
problem with a real networked environment is that one does not know who
is reformatting and reprocessing ones data when one enters a client
server mode.  It becomes anybodys guess, for example, if the network
uses a Z39.50 server, or what clients are doing with ones data.  A data
provider can say that his contract will only permit clients to have
access to his data after he vets them and their presentation and makes
certain it suits him.  But LYNCH held out little expectation that the
network marketplace would evolve in that way, because it required too
much prior negotiation.

CDROM software does not network for a variety of reasons, LYNCH said.
He speculated that CDROM publishers are not eager to have their products
really hook into wide area networks, because they fear it will make their
data suppliers nervous.  Moreover, until relatively recently, one had to
be rather adroit to run a full TCPIP stack plus applications on a
PCsize machine, whereas nowadays it is becoming easier as PCs grow
bigger and faster.  LYNCH also speculated that software providers had not
heard from their customers until the last year or so, or had not heard
from enough of their customers.

                                 


BESSER  Implications of disseminating images on the network planning
the distribution of multimedia documents poses two critical
implementation problems  Layered approach represents the way to deal
with users capabilities  Problems in platform design file size and its
implications for networking  Transmission of megabyte size images
impractical  Compression and decompression at the users end  Promising
trends for compression  A disadvantage of using XWindows  A project at
the Smithsonian that mounts images on several networks 


Howard BESSER, School of Library and Information Science, University of
Pittsburgh, spoke primarily about multimedia, focusing on images and the
broad implications of disseminating them on the network.  He argued that
planning the distribution of multimedia documents posed two critical
implementation problems, which he framed in the form of two questions:
1 What platform will one use and what hardware and software will users
have for viewing of the material?  and 2 How can one deliver a
sufficiently robust set of information in an accessible format in a
reasonable amount of time?  Depending on whether network or CDROM is the
medium used, this question raises different issues of storage,
compression, and transmission.

Concerning the design of platforms e.g., sound, gray scale, simple
color, etc. and the various capabilities users may have, BESSER
maintained that a layered approach was the way to deal with users
capabilities.  A result would be that users with less powerful
workstations would simply have less functionality.  He urged members of
the audience to advocate standards and accompanying software that handle
layered functionality across a wide variety of platforms.

BESSER also addressed problems in platform design, namely, deciding how
large a machine to design for situations when the largest number of users
have the lowest level of the machine, and one desires higher
functionality.  BESSER then proceeded to the question of file size and
its implications for networking.  He discussed still images in the main.
For example, a digital color image that fills the screen of a standard
megapel workstation Sun or Next will require one megabyte of storage
for an eightbit image or three megabytes of storage for a true color or
twentyfourbit image.  Lossless compression algorithms that is,
computational procedures in which no data is lost in the process of
compressing and decompressing an imagethe exact bitrepresentation is
maintained might bring storage down to a third of a megabyte per image,
but not much further than that.  The question of size makes it difficult
to fit an appropriately sized set of these images on a single disk or to
transmit them quickly enough on a network.

With these full screen megapel images that constitute a third of a
megabyte, one gets 1,0003,000 fullscreen images on a onegigabyte disk
a standard CDROM represents approximately 60 percent of that.  Storing
images the size of a PC screen just 8 bit color increases storage
capacity to 4,00012,000 images per gigabyte 60 percent of that gives
one the size of a CDROM, which in turn creates a major problem.  One
cannot have fullscreen, fullcolor images with lossless compression one
must compress them or use a lower resolution.  For megabytesize images,
anything slower than a T1 speed is impractical.  For example, on a
fiftysixkilobaud line, it takes three minutes to transfer a
onemegabyte file, if it is not compressed and this speed assumes ideal
circumstances no other user contending for network bandwidth.  Thus,
questions of disk access, remote display, and current telephone
connection speed make transmission of megabytesize images impractical.

BESSER then discussed ways to deal with these large images, for example,
compression and decompression at the users end.  In this connection, the
issues of how much one is willing to lose in the compression process and
what image quality one needs in the first place are unknown.  But what is
known is that compression entails some loss of data.  BESSER urged that
more studies be conducted on image quality in different situations, for
example, what kind of images are needed for what kind of disciplines, and
what kind of image quality is needed for a browsing tool, an intermediate
viewing tool, and archiving.

BESSER remarked two promising trends for compression:  from a technical
perspective, algorithms that use what is called subjective redundancy
employ principles from visual psychophysics to identify and remove
information from the image that the human eye cannot perceive from an
interchange and interoperability perspective, the JPEG i.e., Joint
Photographic Experts Group, an ISO standard compression algorithms also
offer promise.  These issues of compression and decompression, BESSER
argued, resembled those raised earlier concerning the design of different
platforms.  Gauging the capabilities of potential users constitutes a
primarB TLZO.  YVHHVI ZWELXZGVW OZBVIRMT LI HVKZIZGRMT GSV RNZTVH UILN
GSV ZKKORXZGRLMH GSZG IVGIRVEV ZMW WRHKOZB GSVN, GL ZELRW GBRMT GSVN GL
KZIGRXFOZI HLUGDZIV.

YVHHVI WVGZROVW HVEVIZO OVHHLMH OVZIMVW UILN SRH DLIP ZG YVIPVOVB DRGS
RNZTVJFVIB, VHKVXRZOOB GSV ZWEZMGZTVH ZMW WRHZWEZMGZTVH LU FHRMT
CDRMWLDH.  RM GSV OZGGVI XZGVTLIB, ULI VCZNKOV, IVGIRVEZO RH GRVW
WRIVXGOB GL LMVH WZGZ, ZM RMGLOVIZYOV HRGFZGRLM RM GSV OLMT IFM LM Z
MVGDLIPVW HBHGVN.  URMZOOB, YVHHVI WVHXIRYVW Z KILQVXG LU QRN DZOOZXV ZG
GSV HNRGSHLMRZM RMHGRGFGRLM, DSL RH NLFMGRMT RNZTVH RM Z VCGIVNVOB
IFWRNVMGZIB DZB LM GSV XLNKFHVIE ZMW TVMRV MVGDLIPH ZMW RH KIVKZIRMT GL
NLFMG GSVN LM ZNVIRXZ LM ORMV.  ZOGSLFTS GSV ZEVIZTV FHVI GZPVH LEVI
GSRIGB NRMFGVH GL WLDMOLZW GSVHV RNZTVH ZHHFNRMT Z UZRIOB UZHG NLWVN,
MVEVIGSVOVHH, RNZTVH SZEV YVVM WLDMOLZWVW 25,000 GRNVH.

YVHHVI XLMXOFWVW SRH GZOP DRGS HVEVIZO XLNNVMGH LM GSV YFHRMVHH
ZIIZMTVNVMG YVGDVVM GSV HNRGSHLMRZM ZMW XLNKFHVIE.  SV XLMGVMWVW GSZG MLG
VMLFTS RH PMLDM XLMXVIMRMT GSV EZOFV LU RNZTVH.

                                 

