confirmed AM in its desire not to attempt to force the different formats
to conform to a single documenttype definition DTD and thus create the
need for a separate DTD for each document.

The five text collections that AM has converted or is in the process of
converting include a collection of eighteenthcentury broadsides, a
collection of pamphlets, two typescript document collections, and a
collection of 150 books.

ERWAY next reviewed the results of AMs experience with rekeying, noting
again that because the bulk of AMs materials are historical, the quality
of the text often does not lend itself to OCR.  While nonEnglish
speakers are less likely to guess or elaborate or correct typos in the
original text, they are also less able to infer what we would they also
are nearly incapable of converting handwritten text.  Another
disadvantage of working with overseas keyers is that they are much less
likely to telephone with questions, especially on the coding, with the
result that they develop their own rules as they encounter new
situations.

Government contracting procedures and time frames posed a major challenge
to performing the conversion.  Many service bureaus are not accustomed to
retaining the image, even if they perform OCR.  Thus, questions of image
format and storage media were somewhat novel to many of them.  ERWAY also
remarked other problems in dealing with service bureaus, for example,
their inability to perform text conversion from the kind of microfilm
that LC uses for preservation purposes.

But quality control, in ERWAYs experience, was the most timeconsuming
aspect of contracting out conversion.  AM has been attempting to perform
a 10percent quality review, looking at either every tenth document or
every tenth page to make certain that the service bureaus are maintaining
99.95 percent accuracy.  But even if they are complying with the
requirement for accuracy, finding errors produces a desire to correct
them and, in turn, to clean up the whole collection, which defeats the
purpose to some extent.  Even a double entry requires a
characterbycharacter comparison to the original to meet the accuracy
requirement.  LC is not accustomed to publish imperfect texts, which
makes attempting to deal with the industry standard an emotionally
fraught issue for AM.  As was mentioned in the previous days discussion,
going from 99.95 to 99.99 percent accuracy usually doubles costs and
means a third keying or another complete runthrough of the text.

Although AM has learned much from its experiences with various collections
and various service bureaus, ERWAY concluded pessimistically that no
breakthrough has been achieved.   Incremental improvements have occurred
in some of the OCR technology, some of the processes, and some of the
standards acceptances, which, though they may lead to somewhat lower costs,
do not offer much encouragement to many people who are anxiously awaiting
the day that the entire contents of LC are available online.

                                 


ZIDAR  Several answers to why one attempts to perform fulltext
conversion  Per page cost of performing OCR  Typical problems
encountered during editing  Editing poor copy OCR vs. rekeying 


Judith ZIDAR, coordinator, National Agricultural Text Digitizing Program
NATDP, National Agricultural Library NAL, offered several answers to
the question of why one attempts to perform fulltext conversion:  1
Text in an image can be read by a human but not by a computer, so of
course it is not searchable and there is not much one can do with it.  2
Some material simply requires wordlevel access.  For instance, the legal
profession insists on fulltext access to its material with taxonomic or
geographic material, which entails numerous names, one virtually requires
wordlevel access.  3 Full text permits rapid browsing and searching,
something that cannot be achieved in an image with todays technology.
4 Text stored as ASCII and delivered in ASCII is standardized and highly
portable.  5 People just want fulltext searching, even those who do not
know how to do it.  NAL, for the most part, is performing OCR at an
actual cost per averagesize page of approximZGVOB 7.  MZO HXZMH GSV
KZTV GL XIVZGV GSV VOVXGILMRX RNZTV ZMW KZHHVH RG GSILFTS GSV LXI WVERXV.

ARWZI MVCG IVSVZIHVW HVEVIZO GBKRXZO KILYOVNH VMXLFMGVIVW WFIRMT VWRGRMT.
KIZRHRMT GSV XVOVIRGB LU SVI HGFWVMG DLIPVIH, ARWZI LYHVIEVW GSZG VWRGRMT
IVJFRIVH ZKKILCRNZGVOB UREV GL GVM NRMFGVH KVI KZTV, ZHHFNRMT GSZG GSVIV
ZIV ML OZITV GZYOVH GL ZFWRG.  XLMUFHRLM ZNLMT GSV GSIVV XSZIZXGVIH R, 1,
ZMW O, XLMHGRGFGVH KVISZKH GSV NLHG XLNNLM KILYOVN VMXLFMGVIVW.  AVILVH
