O, by what name, for thou above all these,
Above mankind, or aught than mankind higher,
Surpassest far my naming how may I
Adore thee, Author of this universe,
And all this good to man? for whose well being
So amply, and with hands so liberal,
Thou hast provided all things:  But with me
I see not who partakes.  In solitude
What happiness, who can enjoy alone,
Or, all enjoying, what contentment find?
Thus I presumptuous and the Vision bright,
As with a smile more brightened, thus replied.
What callest thou solitude?  Is not the Earth
With various living creatures, and the air
Replenished, and all these at thy command
To come and play before thee?  Knowest thou not
Their language and their ways?  They also know,
And reason not contemptibly:  With these
Find pastime, and bear rule thy realm is large.
So spake the Universal Lord, and seemed
So ordering:  I, with leave of speech implored,
And humble deprecation, thus replied.
Let not my words offend thee, Heavenly Power
My Maker, be propitious while I speak.
Hast thou not made me here thy substitute,
And these inferiour far beneath me set?
Among unequals what society
Can sort, what harmony, or true delight?
Which must be mutual, in proportion due
Given and received but, in disparity
The one intense, the other still remiss,
Cannot well suit with either, but soon prove
Tedious alike:  Of fellowship I speak
Such as I seek, fit to participate
All rational delight: wherein the brute
Cannot be human consort:  They rejoice
Each with their kind, lion with lioness
So fitly them in pairs thou hast combined:
Much less can bird with beast, or fish with fowl
So well converse, nor with the ox the ape
Worse then can man with beast, and least of all.
Whereto the Almighty answered, not displeased.
A nice and subtle happiness, I see,
Thou to thyself proposest, in the choice
Of thy associates, Adam! and wilt taste
No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitary.
What thinkest thou then of me, and this my state?
Seem I to thee sufficiently possessed
Of happiness, or not? who am alone
From all eternity for none I know
Second to me or like, equal much less.
How have I then with whom to hold converse,
Save with the creatures which I made, and those
To me inferiour, infinite descents
Beneath what other creatures are to thee?
He ceased I lowly answered.  To attain
The highth and depth of thy eternal ways
All human thoughts come short, Supreme of things!
Thou in thyself art perfect, and in thee
Is no deficience found:  Not so is Man,
But in degree the cause of his desire
By conversation with his like to help
Or solace his defects.  No need that thou
Shouldst propagate, already Infinite
And through all numbers absolute, though One:
But Man by number is to manifest
His single imperfection, and beget
Like of his like, his image multiplied,
In unity defective which requires
Collateral love, and dearest amity.
Thou in thy secresy although alone,
Best with thyself accompanied, seekest not
Social communication yet, so pleased,
Canst raise thy creature to what highth thou wilt
Of union or communion, deified:
I, by conversing, cannot these erect
From prone nor in their ways complacence find.
Thus I emboldened spake, and freedom used
Permissive, and acceptance found which gained
This answer from the gracious Voice Divine.
Thus far to try thee, Adam, I was pleased
And find thee knowing, not of beasts alone,
Which thou hast rightly named, but of thyself
Expressing well the spirit within thee free,
My image, not imparted to the brute
Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee
Good reason was thou freely shouldst dislike
And be so minded still:  I, ere thou spakest,
Knew it not good for Man to be alone
And no such company as then thou sawest
Intended thee for trial only brought,
To see how thou couldest judge of fit and meet:
What next I bring shall please thee, be assured,
Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,
Thy wish exactly to thy hearts desire.
He ended, or I heard no more for now
My earthly by his heavenly overpowered,
Which it had long stood under, strained to the highth
In that celestial colloquy sublime,
As with an object that excels the sense
Dazzled and spent, sunk down and sought repair
Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, called
By Nature as in aid, and closed mine eyes.
Mine eyes he closed, but open OVUG GSV XVOO
LU UZMXB, NB RMGVIMZO HRTSG YB DSRXS,
ZYHGIZXG ZH RM Z GIZMXV, NVGSLFTSG R HZD,
GSLFTS HOVVKRMT, DSVIV R OZB, ZMW HZD GSV HSZKV
HGROO TOLIRLFH YVULIV DSLN ZDZPV R HGLLW:
DSL HGLLKRMT LKVMVW NB OVUG HRWV, ZMW GLLP
