
:American Samoa People

Population:
    51,115 (July 1992), growth rate 3.9% (1992); about 65,000 American Samoans
    live in the states of California and Washington and 20,000 in Hawaii
Birth rate:
    37 births/1,000 population (1992)
Death rate:
    4 deaths/1,000 population (1992)
Net migration rate:
    6 immigrants/1,000 population (1992)
Infant mortality rate:
    19 deaths/1,000 live births (1992)
Life expectancy at birth:
    71 years male, 75 years female (1992)
Total fertility rate:
    4.5 children born/woman (1992)
Nationality:
    noun - American Samoan(s); adjective - American Samoan; US, noncitizen
    nationals
Ethnic divisions:
    Samoan (Polynesian) 90%, Caucasian 2%, Tongan 2%, other 6%
Religions:
    Christian Congregationalist 50%, Roman Catholic 20%, Protestant
    denominations and other 30%
Languages:
    Samoan (closely related to Hawaiian and other Polynesian languages) and
    English; most people are bilingual
Literacy:
    97% (male 97%, female 97%) age 15 and over can read and write (1980)
Labor force:
    14,400 (1990); government 48%, tuna canneries 33%, other 19% (1986 est.)
Organized labor:
    NA

:American Samoa Government

Long-form name:
    Territory of American Samoa
Type:
    unincorporated and unorganized territory of the US;
    administered by the US Department of Interior, Office of Territorial and
    International Affairs; indigenous inhabitants are US nationals, not citizens
    of the US
Capital:
    Pago Pago
Administrative divisions:
    none (territory of the US)
Independence:
    none (territory of the US)
Constitution:
    ratified 1966, in effect 1967; note - a comprehensive revision is awaiting
    ratification by the US Congress (1992)
National holiday:
    Territorial Flag Day, 17 April (1900)
Executive branch:
    popularly elected governor and lieutenant governor
Legislative branch:
    bicameral Legislative Assembly (Fono) consists of an upper house or Senate
    and a lower house or House of Representatives
Judicial branch:
    High Court, district courts, and village courts
Leaders:
  Chief of State:
    President George BUSH (since 20 January 1989); Vice President Dan QUAYLE
    (since 20 January 1989)
  Head of Government:
    Governor Peter Tali COLEMAN (since 20 January 1989); Lieutenant Governor
    Galea'i POUMELE (since NA 1989)
Suffrage:
    universal at age 18; indigenous inhabitants are US nationals, not US
    citizens
Elections:
  Governor:
    last held 7 November 1988 (next to be held November 1992); results - Peter
    T. COLEMAN was elected (percent of vote NA)
  House of Representatives:
    last held November 1990 (next to be held November 1992); results -
    representatives popularly elected from 17 house districts; seats - (21
    total, 20 elected, and 1 nonvoting delegate from Swain's Island)
  Senate:
    last held 7 November 1988 (next to be held November 1992); results -
    senators elected by county councils from 12 senate districts; seats - (18
    total) number of seats by party NA
  US House of Representatives:
    last held 19 November 1990 (next to be held November 1992); results - Eni R.
    F. H. FALEOMAVAEGA reelected as a nonvoting delegate
Member of:
    ESCAP, IOC, SPC
Diplomatic representation:
    none (territory of the US)
Flag:
    blue with a white triangle edged in red that is based on the fly side and
    extends to the hoist side; a brown and white American bald eagle flying
    toward the hoist side is carrying two traditional Samoan symbols of
    authority, a staff and a war club

:American Samoa Economy

Overview:
    Economic development is strongly linked to the US, with which American Samoa
    does nearly 90% of its foreign trade. Tuna fishing and tuna processing
    plants are the backbone of the private-sector economy, with canned tuna the
    primary export. The tuna canneries and the government are by far the two
    largest employers. Other economic activities include a slowly developing
    tourist industry.
GNP:
    purchasing power equivalent - $128 million, per capita $2,500; real growth
    rate NA% (1990)
Inflation rate (consumer prices):
    4.3% (1989)
Unemployment rate:
    12% (1991)
Budget:
    revenues $126,394,000 (consisting of $46,441,000 local revenue and
    $79,953,000 grant revenue); including capital expenditures of $NA million
    (1990)
Exports:
    $307 million (f.o.b., 1989)
  commodities:
    canned tuna 93%
  partners:
    US 99.6%
Imports:
    $377.9 million (c.i.f., 1989)
  commodities:
    materials for canneries 56%, food 8%, petroleum 7%, machinery and parts 6%
  partners:
    US 72%, Japan 7%, NZ 7%, Australia 5%, other 9%
External debt:
    $NA
Industrial production:
    growth rate NA%
Electricity:
    42,000 kW capacity; 85 million kWh produced, 2,020 kWh per capita (1990)
Industries:
    tuna canneries (largely dependent on foreign supplies of raw tuna), meat
    canning, handicrafts
Agriculture:
    bananas, coconuts, vegetables, taro, breadfruit, yams, copra, pineapples,
    papayas, dairy farming
Economic aid:
    $21,042,650 in operational funds and $5,948,931 in construction funds for
    capital improvement projects from the US Department of Interior (1991)
Currency:
    US currency is used
Exchange rates:
    US currency is used
Fiscal year:
    1 October - 30 September

:American Samoa Communications

Railroads:
    none
Highways:
    350 km total; 150 km paved, 200 km unpaved
More easy, wholesome thirst and appetite
More grateful, to their supper-fruits they fell,
Nectarine fruits which the compliant boughs
Yielded them, side-long as they sat recline
On the soft downy bank damasked with flowers:
The savoury pulp they chew, and in the rind,
Still as they thirsted, scoop the brimming stream;
Nor gentle purpose, nor endearing smiles
Wanted, nor youthful dalliance, as beseems
Fair couple, linked in happy nuptial league,
Alone as they.  About them frisking played
All beasts of the earth, since wild, and of all chase
In wood or wilderness, forest or den;
Sporting the lion ramped, and in his paw
Dandled the kid; bears, tigers, ounces, pards,
Gambolled before them; the unwieldy elephant,
To make them mirth, used all his might, and wreathed
His?kithetmroboscis; close the serpent sly,
Insinuating, wove with Gordian twine
His braided train, and of his fatal guile
Gave proof unheeded; others on the grass
Couched, and now filled with pasture gazing sat,
Or bedward ruminating; for the sun,
Declined, was hasting now with prone career
To the ocean isles, and in the ascending scale
Of Heaven the stars that usher evening rose:
When Satan still in gaze, as first he stood,
Scarce thus at length failed speech recovered sad.
O Hell! what do mine eyes with grief behold!
Into our room of bliss thus high advanced
Creatures of other mould, earth-born perhaps,
Not Spirits, yet to heavenly Spirits bright
Little inferiour; whom my thoughts pursue
With wonder, and could love, so lively shines
In them divine resemblance, and such grace
The hand that formed them on their shape hath poured.
Ah! gentle pair, ye little think how nigh
Your change approaches, when all these delights
Will vanish, and deliver ye to woe;
More woe, the more your taste is now of joy;
Happy, but for so happy ill secured
Long to continue, and this high seat your Heaven
Ill fenced for Heaven to keep out such a foe
As now is entered; yet no purposed foe
To you, whom I could pity thus forlorn,
Though I unpitied:  League with you I seek,
And mutual amity, so strait, so close,
That I with you must dwell, or you with me
Henceforth; my dwelling haply may not please,
Like this fair Paradise, your sense; yet such
Accept your Maker's work; he gave it me,
Which I as freely give:  Hell shall unfold,
To entertain you two, her widest gates,
And send forth all her kings; there will be room,
Not like these narrow limits, to receive
Your numerous offspring; if no better place,
Thank him who puts me loth to this revenge
On you who wrong me not for him who wronged.
And should I at your harmless innocence
Melt, as I do, yet publick reason just,
Honour and empire with revenge enlarged,
By conquering this new world, compels me now
To do what else, though damned, I should abhor.
So spake the Fiend, and with necessity,
The tyrant's plea, excused his devilish deeds.
Then from his lofty stand on that high tree
Down he alights among the sportful herd
Of those four-footed kinds, himself now one,
Now other, as their shape served best his end
Nearer to view his prey, and, unespied,
To mark what of their state he more might learn,
By word or action marked. About them round
A lion now he stalks with fiery glare;
Then as a tiger, who by chance hath spied
In some purlieu two gentle fawns at play,
Straight couches close, then, rising, changes oft
His couchant watch, as one who chose his ground,
Whence rushing, he might surest seize them both,
Griped in each paw: when, Adam first of men
To first of women Eve thus moving speech,
Turned him, all ear to hear new utterance flow.
Sole partner, and sole part, of all these joys,
Dearer thyself than all; needs must the Power
That made us, and for us this ample world,
Be infinitely good, and of his good
As liberal and free as infinite;
That raised us from the dust, and placed us here
In all this happiness, who at his hand
Have nothing merited, nor can perform
Aught whereof he hath need; he who requires
From us no other service than to keep
This one, this easy charge, of all the trees
In Paradise that bear delicious fruit
So various, not to taste that only tree
Of knowledge, planted by the tree of life;
So near grows death to life, whate'er death is,
Some dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou knowest
God hath pronounced it death to taste that tree,
The only sign of our obedience left,
Among so many signs of power and rule
Conferred upon us, and dominion given
Over all other creatures that possess
Earth, air, and sea.  Then let us not think hard
One easy prohibition, who enjoy
Free leave so large to all things else, and choice
Unlimited of manifold delights:
But let us ever praise him, and extol
His bounty, following our delightful task,
To prune these growing plants, and tend these flowers,
Which were it toilsome, yet with thee were sweet.
To whom thus Eve replied.  O thou for whom
And from whom I was formed, flesh of thy flesh,
And without whom am to no end, my guide
And head! what thou hast said is just and right.
For we to him indeed all praises owe,
And daily thanks; I chiefly, who enjoy
So far the happier lot, enjoying thee
Pre-eminent by so much odds, while thou
Like consort to thyself canst no where find.
That day I oft remember, when from sleep
I first awaked, and found myself reposed
Under a shade on flowers, much wondering where
And what I was, whence thither brought, and how.
Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound
Of waters issued from a cave, and spread
Into a liquid plain, then stood unmoved
Pure as the expanse of Heaven; I thither went
With unexperienced thought, and laid me down
On the green bank, to look into the clear
Smooth lake, that to me seemed another sky.
As I bent down to look, just opposite
A shape within the watery gleam appeared,
Bending to look on me:  I started back,
It started back; but pleased I soon returned,
Pleased it returned as soon with answering looks
Of sympathy and love:  There I had fixed
Mine eyes till now, and pined with vain desire,
Had not a voice thus warned me;  'What thou seest,
'What there thou seest, fair Creature, is thyself;
'With thee it came and goes: but follow me,
'And I will bring thee where no shadow stays
'Thy coming, and thy soft embraces, he
'Whose image thou art; him thou shalt enjoy
'Inseparably thine, to him shalt bear
'Multitudes like thyself, and thence be called
'Mother of human race.'  What could I do,
But follow straight, invisibly thus led?
Till I espied thee, fair indeed and tall,
Under a platane; yet methought less fair,
Less winning soft, less amiably mild,
Than that smooth watery image:  Back I turned;
Thou following cryedst aloud, 'Return, fair Eve;
'Whom flyest thou?  whom thou flyest, of him thou art,
'His flesh, his bone; to give thee being I lent
'Out of my side to thee, nearest my heart,
'Substantial life, to have thee by my side
'Henceforth an individual solace dear;
'Part of my soul I seek thee, and thee claim
'My other half:'  With that thy gentle hand
Seised mine:  I yielded;and from that time see
How beauty is excelled by manly grace,
And wisdom, which alone is truly fair.
So spake our general mother, and with eyes
Of conjugal attraction unreproved,
And meek surrender, half-embracing leaned
On our first father; half her swelling breast
Naked met his, under the flowing gold
Of her loose tresses hid: he in delight
Both of her beauty, and submissive charms,
Smiled with superiour love, as Jupiter
On Juno smiles, when he impregns the clouds
That shed Mayflowers; and pressed her matron lip
With kisses pure:  Aside the Devil turned
For envy; yet with jealous leer malign
Eyed them askance, and to himself thus plained.
Sight hateful, sight tormenting! thus these two,
Imparadised in one another's arms,
The happier Eden, shall enjoy their fill
Of bliss on bliss; while I to Hell am thrust,
Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire,
Among our other torments not the least,
Still unfulfilled with pain of longing pines.
Yet let me not forget what I have gained
From their own mouths:  All is not theirs, it seems;
One fatal tree there stands, of knowledge called,
Forbidden them to taste:  Knowledge forbidden
Suspicious, reasonless.  Why should their Lord
Envy them that?  Can it be sin to know?
Can it be death?  And do they only stand
By ignorance?  Is that their happy state,
The proof of their obedience and their faith?
O fair foundation laid whereon to build
Their ruin! hence I will excite their minds
With more desire to know, and to reject
Envious commands, invented with design
To keep them low, whom knowledge might exalt
Equal with Gods: aspiring to be such,
They taste and die:  What likelier can ensue
But first with narrow search I must walk round
This garden, and no corner leave unspied;
A chance but chance may lead where I may meet
Some wandering Spirit of Heaven by fountain side,
Or in thick shade retired, from him to draw
What further would be learned.  Live while ye may,
Yet happy pair; enjoy, till I return,
Short pleasures, for long woes are to succeed!
So saying, his proud step he scornful turned,
But with sly circumspection, and began
Through wood, through waste, o'er hill, o'er dale, his roam
Mean while in utmost longitude, where Heaven
With earth and ocean meets, the setting sun
Slowly descended, and with right aspect
Against the eastern gate of Paradise
Levelled his evening rays:  It was a rock
Of alabaster, piled up to the clouds,
Conspicuous far, winding with one ascent
Accessible from earth, one entrance high;
The rest was craggy cliff, that overhung
Still as it rose, impossible to climb.
Betwixt these rocky pillars Gabriel sat,
Chief of the angelick guards, awaiting night;
About him exercised heroick games
The unarmed youth of Heaven, but nigh at hand
Celestial armoury, shields, helms, and spears,
Hung high with diamond flaming, and with gold.
Thither came Uriel, gliding through the even
On a sun-beam, swift as a shooting star
In autumn thwarts the night, when vapours fired
Impress the air, and shows the mariner
From what point of his compass to beware
Impetuous winds:  He thus began in haste.
Gabriel, to thee thy course by lot hath given
Charge and strict watch, that to this happy place
No evil thing approach or enter in.
This day at highth of noon came to my sphere
A Spirit, zealous, as he seemed, to know
More of the Almighty's works, and chiefly Man,
God's latest image:  I described his way
Bent all on speed, and marked his aery gait;
But in the mount that lies from Eden north,
Where he first lighted, soon discerned his looks
Alien from Heaven, with passions foul obscured:
Mine eye pursued him still, but under shade
Lost sight of him:  One of the banished crew,
I fear, hath ventured from the deep, to raise
New troubles; him thy care must be to find.
To whom the winged warriour thus returned.
Uriel, no wonder if thy perfect sight,
Amid the sun's bright circle where thou sitst,
See far and wide:  In at this gate none pass
The vigilance here placed, but such as come
Well known from Heaven; and since meridian hour
No creature thence:  If Spirit of other sort,
So minded, have o'er-leaped these earthly bounds
On purpose, hard thou knowest it to exclude
Spiritual substance with corporeal bar.
But if within the circuit of these walks,
In whatsoever shape he lurk, of whom
Thou tellest, by morrow dawning I shall know.
So promised he; and Uriel to his charge
Returned on that bright beam, whose point now raised
Bore him slope downward to the sun now fallen
Beneath the Azores; whether the prime orb,
Incredible how swift, had thither rolled
Diurnal, or this less volubil earth,
By shorter flight to the east, had left him there
Arraying with reflected purple and gold
The clouds that on his western throne attend.
Now came still Evening on, and Twilight gray
Had in her sober livery all things clad;
Silence accompanied; for beast and bird,
They to their grassy couch, these to their nests
Were slunk, all but the wakeful nightingale;
She all night long her amorous descant sung;
Silence was pleased:  Now glowed the firmament
With living sapphires:  Hesperus, that led
The starry host, rode brightest, till the moon,
Rising in clouded majesty, at length
Apparent queen unveiled her peerless light,
And o'er the dark her silver mantle threw.
When Adam thus to Eve.  Fair Consort, the hour
Of night, and all things now retired to rest,
Mind us of like repose; since God hath set
Labour and rest, as day and night, to men
Successive; and the timely dew of sleep,
Now falling with soft slumbrous weight, inclines
Our eye-lids:  Other creatures all day long
Rove idle, unemployed, and less need rest;
Man hath his daily work of body or mind
Appointed, which declares his dignity,
And the regard of Heaven on all his ways;
While other animals unactive range,
And of their doings God takes no account.
To-morrow, ere fresh morning streak the east
With first approach of light, we must be risen,
And at our pleasant labour, to reform
Yon flowery arbours, yonder alleys green,
Our walk at noon, with branches overgrown,
That mock our scant manuring, and require
More hands than ours to lop their wanton growth:
Those blossoms also, and those dropping gums,
That lie bestrown, unsightly and unsmooth,
Ask riddance, if we mean to tread with ease;
Mean while, as Nature wills, night bids us rest.
To whom thus Eve, with perfect beauty adorned
My Author and Disposer, what thou bidst
Unargued I obey:  So God ordains;
God is thy law, thou mine:  To know no more
Is woman's happiest knowledge, and her praise.
With thee conversing I forget all time;
All seasons, and their change, all please alike.
Sweet is the breath of Morn, her rising sweet,
With charm of earliest birds:  pleasant the sun,
When first on this delightful land he spreads
His orient beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flower,
Glistering with dew; fragrant the fertile earth
After soft showers; and sweet the coming on
Of grateful Evening mild; then silent Night,
With this her solemn bird, and this fair moon,
And these the gems of Heaven, her starry train:
But neither breath of Morn, when she ascends
With charm of earliest birds; nor rising sun
On this delightful land; nor herb, fruit, flower,
Glistering with dew; nor fragrance after showers;
Nor grateful Evening mild; nor silent Night,
With this her solemn bird, nor walk by moon,
Or glittering star-light, without thee is sweet.
But wherefore all night long shine these? for whom
This glorious sight, when sleep hath shut all eyes?
To whom our general ancestor replied.
Daughter of God and Man, accomplished Eve,
These have their course to finish round the earth,
By morrow evening, and from land to land
In order, though to nations yet unborn,
Ministring light prepared, they set and rise;
Lest total Darkness should by night regain
Her old possession, and extinguish life
In Nature and all things; which these soft fires
Not only enlighten, but with kindly heat
Of various influence foment and warm,
Temper or nourish, or in part shed down
Their stellar virtue on all kinds that grow
On earth, made hereby apter to receive
Perfection from the sun's more potent ray.
These then, though unbeheld in deep of night,
Shine not in vain; nor think, though men were none,
That Heaven would want spectators, God want praise:
Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth
Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep:
All these with ceaseless praise his works behold
Both day and night:  How often from the steep
Of echoing hill or thicket have we heard
Celestial voices to the midnight air,
Sole, or responsive each to others note,
Singing their great Creator? oft in bands
While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk,
With heavenly touch of instrumental sounds
In full harmonick number joined, their songs
Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven.
Thus talking, hand in hand alone they passed
On to their blissful bower: it was a place
Chosen by the sovran Planter, when he framed
All things to Man's delightful use; the roof
Of thickest covert was inwoven shade
Laurel and myrtle, and what higher grew
Of firm and fragrant leaf; on either side
Acanthus, and each odorous bushy shrub,
Fenced up the verdant wall; each beauteous flower,
Iris all hues, roses, and jessamin,
Reared high their flourished heads between, and wrought
Mosaick; underfoot the violet,
Crocus, and hyacinth, with rich inlay
Broidered the ground, more coloured than with stone
Of costliest emblem:  Other creature here,
Bird, beast, insect, or worm, durst enter none,
Such was their awe of Man.  In shadier bower
More sacred and sequestered, though but feigned,
Pan or Sylvanus never slept, nor Nymph
Nor Faunus haunted.  Here, in close recess,
With flowers, garlands, and sweet-smelling herbs,
Espoused Eve decked first her nuptial bed;
And heavenly quires the hymenaean sung,
What day the genial Angel to our sire
Brought her in naked beauty more adorned,
More lovely, than Pandora, whom the Gods
Endowed with all their gifts, and O! too like
In sad event, when to the unwiser son
Of Japhet brought by Hermes, she ensnared
Mankind with her fair looks, to be avenged
On him who had stole Jove's authentick fire.
Thus, at their shady lodge arrived, both stood,
Both turned, and under open sky adored
The God that made both sky, air, earth, and heaven,
Which they beheld, the moon's resplendent globe,
And starry pole:  Thou also madest the night,
Maker Omnipotent, and thou the day,
Which we, in our appointed work employed,
Have finished, happy in our mutual help
And mutual love, the crown of all our bliss
Ordained by thee; and this delicious place
For us too large, where thy abundance wants
Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground.
But thou hast promised from us two a race
To fill the earth, who shall with us extol
Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake,
And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep.
This said unanimous, and other rites
Observing none, but adoration pure
Which God likes best, into their inmost bower
Handed they went; and, eased the putting off
These troublesome disguises which we wear,
Straight side by side were laid; nor turned, I ween,
Adam from his fair spouse, nor Eve the rites
Mysterious of connubial love refused:
Whatever hypocrites austerely talk
Of purity, and place, and innocence,
Defaming as impure what God declares
Pure, and commands to some, leaves free to all.
Our Maker bids encrease; who bids abstain
But our Destroyer, foe to God and Man?
Hail, wedded Love, mysterious law, true source
Of human offspring, sole propriety
In Paradise of all things common else!
By thee adulterous Lust was driven from men
Among the bestial herds to range; by thee
Founded in reason, loyal, just, and pure,
Relations dear, and all the charities
Of father, son, and brother, first were known.
Far be it, that I should write thee sin or blame,
Or think thee unbefitting holiest place,
Perpetual fountain of domestick sweets,
Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced,
Present, or past, as saints and patriarchs used.
Here Love his golden shafts employs, here lights
His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings,
Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile
Of harlots, loveless, joyless, unendeared,
Casual fruition; nor in court-amours,
Mixed dance, or wanton mask, or midnight ball,
Or serenate, which the starved lover sings
To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain.
These, lulled by nightingales, embracing slept,
And on their naked limbs the flowery roof
Showered roses, which the morn repaired.  Sleep on,
Blest pair; and O!yet happiest, if ye seek
No happier state, aAK VWUC ZI YWUD WI UHWY.
WUR OKN DUPIM CQYLHESR DMGO SSE PRKNWYQ WUWY
UEFU NYA OH RUVB FMHB SELP BMLFNALD SLNBF,
LAN GWHC MRSHD DGHWE ZHWZ BRS RMSEMLHU,
ZUCPM HBVOHDF QF PMQ YWBHLZMHQR IIOE, PZMIW ENHQW
ZM PMKHC WDIMP NYMQRSV HW DENVUEQ FENERK;
ROAR FKSCHKB FI MHV RABZ UD ZHRYC PMOB VFEEQ.
OFGOAS, UEFU PMSPK RNEY WZL, LAR NUYBP PMS PIOPM
DOPM BPDHQMSPZ CQFRM; PMSPY HPMSE ROYSB FRS WUCPO;
IOC NHDNMMG HQQPL PNFX NSPF.  QL PFLHQ PMQK FECP,
UEFU ROYSVUDF ZM PMS PMHASR, ILFZ FM ZRS PHQYW.
PNIU PMSPQ, PYW BPWHDF LAR VMLFBS PGHDHPB RS NQXVKR
PMQF RAEN MHH BZMIW, LAK IKLQ PRSC MMOV HW NUEDPY.
MGMODHAS LAW GSHMIW, DMGO RUDPKR VHSKR
PSENRM PMWHIFM PMHV PENRKA, FQYSK NAPSENRMKR WU WUIY;
LMM QMHAPXA ROSEQ PMIPS ZCU ZKUC NESQFHNSP XUKIY,
WUN XKUR GSEUEHP ELSASH, PSNMES UZ UECH.
PMHV KSARUDP ZWHC MRS LHR'L RKNBUDQ YWSDGKR,
ROM ZASXB UZ XHHQ UDPACWLF PHHDMG PSAR
MHPMSENYCR SQCF (ROM WIOVN UESK PMIOPIP?) QBREFKR
PMQ SENX HP UASX, UR AWSLAC VKN WU WIMLZ:
LHRM, ROSEQ KA PUDR, VKHPS ULBP, LAR IMGRSC SDHDF.
XH LEKODF, UW RS SAR IHV NEKDLAF ZUVSP,
NKOZVUDF PMQ HWZC; FRSPS ZM PMQ SWYSE KDESQM
UD PSENRM UZ ROIU PMQK XHIFMP:  MHC MRSES PMQK ZUNAW
BENLF BDVQ Y ZMKN, NBHXQ YZ BRS QYW HP ASK,
ELLEKODF XQ MHV RKSUVHVU ECP ZM ESQNO
PMY HDPLAX HP USE ULWNK, YWR DOPM PMQH ZUDPY
UVFNVHUWL, EP RA SHVF, TUECFELHB LAW VESQUB;
